TITLE: Critical Philosophy of Innovation and the Innovator
ISBN: 9781786301475
FILES: 17


===== FILE 2/17: toc.xhtml =====

Table of Contents
Cover
Foreword
Acknowledgements
Introduction
I.1. Critical philosophy of innovation and the innovator
I.2. (Re)thinking innovation through philosophy
1 The Need to (Re)think Innovation
1.1. The innovation context: how far to innovate?
1.2. The innovation discipline
1.3. Attempting to expose innovation, the importance of philosophy
1.4. Philosophy as therapy
1.5. Towards a thoughtful innovator
2 The Non-standard Philosophy for Thinking Innovation
2.1. Questioning philosophy
2.2. What is non-standard philosophy?
2.3. Using non-standard philosophy as a tool to (re)think innovation
2.4. (Re)thinking innovation, a non-standard innovation?
2.5. “Invent philosophy!”, let’s invent innovation
3 A Phenomenology of Innovation
3.1. Passing through phenomenology
3.2. What is phenomenology?
3.3. Husserlian phenomenology to think innovation?
3.4. Phenomenology as praxis
3.5. Being aware of innovations
4 Spiritual Exercises to (Re)think the Innovator
4.1. The need for spiritual exercises
4.2. Urgency of the spiritual exercises
4.3. The spiritual innovator of the 21st Century
Conclusion
C.1. The latest news on innovation in contemporary space
C.2. Philosophy, the ultimate assistance for innovation
C.3. Three philosophies for two paths
C.4. (Re)thinking innovation through teaching
C.5. (Re)thinking innovation beyond the West
References
Index of Names
Index of Notions
End User License Agreement
Guide
Cover
Table of Contents
Begin Reading

===== FILE 3/17: f01.xhtml =====

Innovation and Responsibility Set

coordinated by

Bernard Reber and Robert Gianni

Volume 6

Critical Philosophy of Innovation and the Innovator

Xavier Pavie

===== FILE 4/17: f02.xhtml =====

First published 2020 in Great Britain and the United States by ISTE Ltd and John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or private study, or criticism or review, as permitted under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, this publication may only be reproduced, stored or transmitted, in any form or by any means, with the prior permission in writing of the publishers, or in the case of reprographic reproduction in accordance with the terms and licenses issued by the CLA. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside these terms should be sent to the publishers at the undermentioned address:

ISTE Ltd
27-37 St George’s Road
London SW19 4EU
UK

www.iste.co.uk

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
111 River Street
Hoboken, NJ 07030
USA

www.wiley.com

© ISTE Ltd 2020

The rights of Xavier Pavie to be identified as the author of this work have been asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.

Library of Congress Control Number: 2020934198

British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data

A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library

ISBN 978-1-78630-147-5

===== FILE 5/17: f03.xhtml =====

Foreword

The author of this book is very familiar with the mysteries of what is probably too easily called (and therefore without careful consideration) “innovation”. Teaching management and innovation management after having practiced them1, he is also a philosopher. He was one of the first to speak of responsible innovation in 2009. However, unlike the overwhelming majority of his colleagues in the same discipline who are committed to thinking innovation, particularly to making it more responsible, Xavier Pavie has turned to ancient philosophy. He convincingly reminds us that many philosophical questions, problems and ways of solving them (but more broadly questions of meaning), are the heirs of the period of ostentation of thought in which the philosopher embraced all knowledge. Certainly, with the social division of labor, philosophy itself has become a highly specialized set of debates that evolve without confrontation or cooperation. Yet, as Deleuze or Laruelle, less known and presented here, said, philosophy advances by thinking about problems found outside itself. A lack of interest in the topic is a recent trend, probably arising from specialization.

Ancient thought is also welcome in this book since its main target is the innovator. The author therefore addresses their individual responsibility. Greek philosophers paid particular attention to the search for a good life, which was marked out and perhaps even achieved through exercises described as spiritual. Pavie has also had the pleasure of knowing a major French philosopher, a professor at the Collège de France, who has brought the philosophical spiritual exercises up to date, Pierre Hadot. Contemporaries like Michel Foucault drew from this source and acknowledged their debt to Hadot. Even if many philosophers today are not concerned about consistency, even relative consistency, to be found between what they experience and write, this was inconceivable in antiquity, when one entered philosophy as one enters religion. This tradition of spiritual exercises continues to inspire certain contemporary philosophers.

Xavier Pavie is convinced that it is necessary to rethink, better even, to deconstruct, the teaching of innovation by helping those who will be its primary actors to question themselves, their deep motivations, their practices, to take the risk, not only to innovate, but to resist when necessary the pursuit of certain productions and to always remain alert. However, it must be recognized that innovation processes are efficient and able to integrate new injunctions such as those of responsibility. However, without the flexibility of individual behavioral change, a form of responsiveness, it is naïve to think that only institutional environments, when they promote responsibility, carry this burden on their own as if by magic. Moreover, the problem of choosing the institutions best able to promote this individual responsibility is an issue at the very heart of responsible innovation and its own contradictions.

The philosophy of spiritual exercises has a therapeutic virtue, as Wittgenstein also defended it, anxious to avoid poorly posed problems. This was also the case with Socrates’ questions, who tested his interlocutors and led them to acknowledge their ignorance. Nothing is more dangerous than what is believed to be certain and uncertain. Socrates generated amongst people a sufficient discord to question their knowledge and sometimes even whole parts of their understanding of life. We can talk here about conversion. Is this too obvious? Is it not involved in the requirement of deliberation, often required in discourses on democratic innovations and where it is asked to bow before the force of the best argument? Is conversion not a period of authentic inter-individual dialogue?

Pavie goes so far as to hypothesize that the innovator’s ego is composed of a multitude of individuals grappling not only with his/her own competing desires, but also with the desires and interests of those who expect innovation to succeed, shareholders, future users and sometimes the first opponents. Conversion is therefore not irrelevant when it comes to orienting oneself in this field of competing desires and knowing how to resist an organization of society totally oriented towards innovation, rarely discussed and indicating the North as the only direction that is worth marching in.

This taste for questioning is not unlike the writing strategy of Jim Dratwa’s book (2019) in the same “Innovation and Responsibility” series. Indeed, everyone must take their responsibilities, distinguish between what depends on them and what does not, as Pavie points out, echoing the Stoic adage. In a period that paradoxically combined hyper-responsibility, carried by a few people or increasingly demanding standards, and a dilution of responsibilities, differentiated commitment, in the first person, being essential.

The author’s approach is not only to develop innovation and simply call for a new innovator, more philosophical or ethical, who would not question innovation itself in an ontological way. An Academic Director in Singapore and of the iMagination center he created, Pavie is even more radical. Relying on a philosophy, Husserlian phenomenology, which itself is the successor to the Cartesian disruption, he invites us to think innovation in a new way, independent of its ultraliberal and capitalist excesses, turned towards profit alone, while also thinking about the common good. He therefore intends to purge innovation in order to think according to innovation and stop thinking innovation itself. One of his theories is that innovation is paradoxically lagging behind, impeded in its conservative and consensual patterns.

Phenomenology is a valuable resource since it is a new discipline that presents itself as the descriptive study of all the phenomena that are available to the subject’s experience. Phenomenology invites us to return to this experience supported by a method of description. Valuing intentionality, it seeks not only to be aware of actions, but to think the very way of thinking about them. This contribution echoes previous works by Gianni (2016), Pellé and Reber (2016), Lenoir (2019), and Maesschalck (2017), defending in different ways a second-order reflexivity, both essential for the contextual interpretation of norms and for confrontation in the event of disagreements. However, this reflexivity is a condition of responsibility, of its effectiveness, so that it is not an ever-larger list of purely formal and declarative evidence required throughout projects.

These derivatives form a complex philosophy, because this philosophy thinks of experience, and are nevertheless made very accessible and relevant to the world of innovation, which is far located from it. Phenomenology and innovation seek to find frames of reference that are no longer dominant and therefore perspectives that others’ shoes, or they seek to propose new and original solutions that are not simply a repetition of common and usual practices. It also involves turning some of the evidence around and triggering the emergence of new desires. In this way, Pavie seeks to know if these desires are compatible with what the philosopher of responsibility for a technical civilization, Hans Jonas, described as authentically human, sustainable in an ecosystem where caring for oneself and others emerges as an imperative; in competition with the mere consideration of short-term benefits and for the benefit of an elitist group. He then questions innovation in the light of previous proposals and the comparative consequences, in terms of the objects offered, the services offered and the changes in organizations. This may involve looking at previous solutions in a holistic way, considering what can replace a product, its alternatives, the benefits of new solutions, the difficulties encountered and the organizational issues.

The last philosophical resource from which Xavier Pavie draws to radically question innovation is less well-known while remaining close to the phenomenological topic. The resource is François Laruelle, with whom he is close. The latter sometimes speaks of non-philosophy, sometimes of non-standard philosophy. Pavie corresponds to this philosophy as a non-standard innovation, which contrasts with confidential innovation, full of secrets, unshared developments and hidden enrichment. He prefers a thought that suspends innovation when necessary, and therefore defends a position of non-standard innovation rather than anti-innovation. Indeed, anti-innovators would only reinforce the power of the criticized innovation by condemning its shortcomings when it is its use, its devotion and not its essence that need to be reviewed. To innovate in a non-standard way is then to learn to question the “why” of our action, for the benefit of “what” and by “whom”. On this subject, the author is serious. According to him, innovation has generally been defined by Westerners and often illustrated with examples from major North American successes, such as the successes of Silicon Valley in the United States. However, according to him, this is a “formidable demonstration of irresponsibility: exploitation of the weakest for production, rare earths for high-tech products, private data, not to mention that rarely the products placed on the market (are) recyclable.”

Pansera and Owen’s (2018) and Blagovesta Nikolova’s (2019) books are consistent with this kind of concern; the former looks at other cultural areas that offer more sober and alternative innovations, and the latter takes seriously the economic and financial constraints on innovation in search of responsibility.

Xavier Pavie is well aware of the difficulties. Paradoxically, the innovator is rather fearful. Opening up may reveal gaps or hesitations in his system, which he spends his time strengthening and barricading with rigidity. Proposals of the “open innovation” type are attractive as long as they are not vitiated by unilateral use, but on the contrary open to the environment and particularly to others.

Removing oneself from the disruptors of the environment and multiplying perceptions are useful keys, but the author understands that what he is calling for requires from the innovator a position that is completely out of the ordinary. To succeed in freeing oneself from disturbances requires a form of meditation, a condition for a return to oneself. According to him, succeeding in building a flexible inner citadel for a better evaluation of innovation is probably essential for (re)thinking innovation as well as possible.

Pavie takes advantage of the comparison with Confucian thought where self-improvement allows one to change, transform oneself and learn to change one’s mind according to circumstances. For Confucius, this adjustment was a sign of appreciation of the speed at which the world is changing. The latter also thought that laws were not necessarily indicated to ensure harmony in a state (Lenoir 2019).

Xavier Pavie’s proposal is bold. It is marked by challenges and resistance. However, it leaves room for doubts and questions. The challenge is imposing since the innovative thinker is often “his slave who makes sure to stretch it further to find new forms and uses in order to make it even more powerful.” Perhaps this time, by convening philosophy in this way, innovation can be truly (re)thought.

Bernard REBER

1 His latest book (Pavie 2018) has just received the prize for the best book for academic research in management from the Fondation nationale pour l’enseignement et de la gestion des entreprises (FNEGE – the French National Foundation for Education and Business Management), 2019.

===== FILE 6/17: f04.xhtml =====

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Bernard Reber very warmly for suggesting that I put my philosophical thoughts here in a completely free manner. His proofreading, proposals, kindness and support were essential when writing this book, as for other joint projects.

I would also like to thank Carole, Godard, Anne-Françoise Schmid, Jean-François Balaudé and Philippe Hoffmann for their advice.

This research work, which I have been carrying out for several years, ensuring that innovation and philosophy are combined for a better world, would be impossible without the support and trust of institutions such as the ESSEC Business School and the Institut de recherches philosophiques at the Université Paris Nanterre. Also, the openness, curiosity and wisdom of the students I was able to welcome in class on these themes have been a factor in the writing of this book: they were the first to be concerned by the issues found herein. I also wish to address Aurèle, Léandre and Cléante who had the important responsibility of imagining tomorrow’s innovations with a philosopher’s mind.

Finally, I would like to thank the teams with whom I have the opportunity to work both in Singapore and in France and who allow me to progress on these themes, especially within the iMagination center.

===== FILE 7/17: f05.xhtml =====

Introduction: The Urgent Need to Think (and Rethink) Innovation

“Then are there some who desire the evil and others who desire the good?”

Plato, Meno, 77a–78b

I.1. Critical philosophy of innovation and the innovator

It is an ambitious program to try to formulate a critical philosophy of innovation and the innovator. Both innovation and the innovator are broad, complex concepts which, although not polysemic, have different understandings in the common language. This may be one of the causes of the problems we face with innovation and why we need to address them. It is through criticism that we believe it is necessary to analyze both innovation and the innovator. Criticism in the Greek sense of the word, kritikē (κριτική), which means the art of perceiving. This perception applies to people as well as to things and notions and that is why this form of criticism is welcome for our purpose where concept, theory and discipline will be put to the test. To summarize this desire to achieve a critical philosophy of innovation and the innovator, we could say that innovation and the innovator must be (re)thought and, throughout the book, we will frequently use this construction: (re)think.

Innovation must be (re)thought; it is an imperative need, at least if we want to preserve an authentically human life, which is not an obligation but a choice (Pavie 2018a). However, it is mandatory to ask ourselves the question: what do we want for our future as human beings? If the answer is the preservation of humanity or its development, then innovation must be reviewed again at great expense. Otherwise, there is nothing to do, nothing to think about; innovations take us down the path to the destruction of humanity and its environment.

If innovation must be (re)thought, it is because innovation is locked in a capitalist hermeneutic from which it must be extracted. For decades, innovation has been affected by a culture, symbols, an environment, an ecosystem that drowns it in a way of being, in a way of behaving that reduces it to a device exclusively intended for economic production. This hermeneutics prevents the innovator from thinking, it is no longer just a production tool. And if we have to qualify hermeneutics, let us not be afraid to affirm that it is of a capitalist essence.

To try to (re)think innovation, we need to formulate one or more proposals that go beyond its usual walls. More precisely, a thought that once again examines innovation freshly with new perspectives. They ensure that they redesign what innovation is with the ultimate aim of integrating more responsibility, ethics and humanism. However, if it is understood that this (re)thinking requires prior knowledge of these devices1, then they are not the ones we will use here, because this (re)thinking of innovation can only be established with new tools and new ways of thinking. Thinking innovation with one’s own methods, with the usual deconstruction methodology, is not enough. On the one hand, this has already been attempted2 and on the other hand, there is a risk of considering that we are rethinking without leaving the space necessary for this reconstruction. In other words, the chains of innovation are such that they can lead us to believe that it is conceivable (or rethinkable) in an independent, disinterested way, but this is not the case – as we will see.

It is therefore essential to (re)think innovation with the tools that are most appropriate and that change the way we generally think innovation – generally the engineer’s scientific categories as well as the managerial categories. The challenge is to think innovation, more precisely to (re)think it, with philosophy even if at this stage we use the term in a generic way. On the one hand, it will be a matter of (re)thinking with certain philosophies; not all of them are necessarily appropriate for the work we want to do. On the other hand, the term “philosophy” itself will have to be reviewed to ensure that it is appropriate. In other words, on many occasions, we will question more than we answer. This is because it is a matter of questioning, making people doubt, showing, analyzing and highlighting possible answers, though they cannot be unique. That is why (re)thinking innovation here is in parentheses. The use of this punctuation is an expression of suspension, of doubt. Because, can innovation really be rethought? Are the tools and methods powerful enough to do this? Moreover, we have to protect ourselves from the worldly nature of innovation and its partners (the capitalist and liberal economy, organizations, political systems) who, in fact, for their own interests, will certainly not want to (re)think a innovation.

I.2. (Re)thinking innovation through philosophy

These warnings are intended to prevent the attempts to (re)think innovation that may surprise, perhaps disorientate, because thinking externally about an object, placing it at a distance to deconstruct it, forces us to work from a different vocabulary, using almost a new language, if not a different brain, in any case with new formulations.

So how can innovation be (re)thought? What are the conditions and models? How can we treat it as we would say for a patient? The symptoms of the illness are known and visible. Innovation is feverish and unstable, and sometimes it has difficulty standing upright. Supported by crutches – on the one hand by all kinds of organizations, on the other by political hope – it struggles to stay balanced, desperately leaning towards one side or the other. Moreover, it is regularly under the infusion of a liberal capitalism that only sees it as a way to progress its own development for its own sake. Stressed by its excessive use (in the media, in organizations and by what is constantly expected of it – to ensure its survival – and by using it more or less wisely), it is often combined with invention or research and development. It is also a question of succeeding in extricating ourselves from the worldly nature of innovation and its plan of immanence, even if in the end we will have to come back to it.

When innovation (with or without this name) had the mission of helping humanity to develop in its early stages, from its origins: for example, to increase its longevity (health innovation); to protect itself (housing innovation); to feed itself (food innovation, particularly food security); to move about (innovation in mobility); it is now a derivative of each of the aspects in which innovation is mistaken: the development of transhumanism without conscience for longevity, the omnipresence of surveillance for so-called security protection, boundless food industrialization or the massive production of motorized machines for a supposed freedom of movement. We are in a way faced with the drift of innovation as a being in distress and we must treat innovation as a patient we would like to restore the health and common sense of; even if it is a patient who does not realize they are sick and who, in this state, suits many individuals and organizations. We need a method, a treatment in the face of its drifts and this is necessary for at least two reasons. On the one hand, innovation has been lost, it no longer belongs to itself because it is used against its will; and on the other hand, this loss means that it is no longer working towards a better life. Desire for progress for the common good have become foreign to it.

There are several reasons to consider philosophy to be, it seems, the “right” treatment. This one is curative and preventive, it is cathartic and therapeutic. Indeed, philosophy treats and cures illnesses. Through its work on the soul, philosophy makes it possible to consider situations in a different way, it helps to think in a preferable way to live better (Hadot 2001). It is also preventive, in the sense that philosophy – especially among Stoics – helps to anticipate evils that may arise, prevents obstacles, helps to prepare for future risks and likely difficulties (Pavie 2012c, pp. 71–76). If philosophy is cathartic, it is because it allows us, in a relationship with the truth, to tell ourselves and each other the truth. The path to well-being, the path of wisdom, requires transparency towards oneself in order to be able to tell oneself. The illumination by cathartic expression, whether oral or written, allows us to draw, to grasp, the difficulties, and to consider the path of healing. Thus philosophy is a true therapist; it is even its probable sole reason for being, if only for Hellenistic philosophies. As André-Jean Voelke points out in La philosophie comme thérapie de l’âme, ancient philosophies recognize that humans are plunged into poverty, anguish and evil because they live in ignorance. Evil is not in things, but in the judgments that humans have about things. Philosophy aims to change these judgments, to heal people, and that is why philosophy has a therapeutic value (Voelke 1993). Thus, using the philosophical machine as a doctor is probably a necessity to treat innovation.

Among its technical qualities allowing us to consider healing, philosophy has the capacity to put us on a different level. It allows us a certain distance which allows us – if not yet to treat – at the very least to look at a problem from a different perspective, to analyze it precisely, to criticize it rightly, to judge it with temperance. Thus, one might say that innovation, tested by philosophy, is a provision both necessary to understand innovation and how philosophy can play a role in it (Pavie 2018a). In other words, how it can help it to recover its health, help it to (re)take on its original meaning, even if the terminology “innovation” didn’t exist, only its productions. Philosophy can play a protective role with it, can enlighten it on the path to take, help it not to respond to the sirens of glory and fortune, which is what innovation has undeniably been pushing towards in recent decades. To put it metaphorically, philosophy can play the role of a master of innovation. The wise man who comes to the aid of his disciple. This disciple-innovation is locked in his stultitia (Pavie 2012a, p. 129), constrained, even blinded, by market laws, by liberal injunctions, and by political obligations and from which he cannot escape alone because he is unable to see himself in this state of confinement. The hypothesis we formulate is that philosophy can probably help him with its qualities, its devices, its techniques and its experience. It alone can show him the light, offer him another perspective, (certainly several points of view) and suggest preferable paths to follow3.

However, “philosophy” is too generic for our purposes, especially since there is not so much “philosophy” as “philosophies” (in the same way that there is not really innovation, but “innovations” (Pavie 2018a, pp. 51–64)). And not all philosophies are necessarily appropriate for all issues.

Concerning innovation, three specific thoughts seem particularly relevant to help (re)think innovation, three philosophies that are not linked in their foundations, their approaches and are even relatively distant by their periods of emergence. Their differences are interesting because they allow for a varied analysis of innovation. It is through their different world view that it is possible to address different facets of innovation. These three philosophies do not have the same ambitions either and if one is rather theoretical, the other will be analytical and the third pragmatic. It should be noted that none of them were interested in innovation. Strongly rooted in “classical” philosophical questioning, they have only been used on rare occasions for concrete societal issues. This is what makes this attempt to (re)think innovation with tools that are so foreign to it interesting.

The disciplines, techniques and thoughts of non-standard philosophy, phenomenology or spiritual exercises will dictate the structure of our intention. They seem to us to be most relevant in achieving this objective of “rethinking”. And these three proposals will, we hope, make it possible to “reduce”, “think” and “build” innovation for a preferable future. Because it must be clear, these approaches are not intended to “evolve” innovation and “content” with calling for a new innovator, who is more “philosophical”, more “ethical” or even more “responsible” when implementing his/her innovations and who would not question innovation in an ontological way. The attempt here is to (re)think innovation as innovation. To question it in its being, its essence and for the reason that we need philosophies such as those we propose to address.

(Re)thinking innovation must have a real and concrete end. We must be resolutely pragmatic, that is the innovators themselves, current or future. And the purpose of this book is to ultimately address innovators and innovation students alike. However, a singular thought such as this one needs to be viewed with all the criticism and academic benevolence possible and that is why it is also a question of addressing a population of researchers and academics in innovation, responsible innovation, but also in philosophy, as philosophers too often extract themselves from these questions4. More generally, the guidelines proposed here are intended for all those who notice that innovation can no longer remain as it has been deployed in theory or in organizations for some 50 years.

To ensure that we have a good understanding of this new approach, we will present the three philosophies in a relatively exhaustive way; in a second step we will aim to look at them as objects or tools for (re)thinking innovation. It should be noted that non-standard philosophy, phenomenology and spiritual exercises will be viewed independently, and can also be used, criticized and analyzed independently with regard to innovation. What is important is to seek to understand them and measure their potential contribution to (re)thinking innovation.

1 A solid basis for innovation can be found both in economic literature (Schmid 1990; Schmid 1999) and in contemporary management literature (Alter 2003; Christensen Clayton 2003; Drucker 1993). With regard to questions about ethics and responsibility in the context of innovation, we recommend the book by Sophie Pellé and Bernard Reber (2016).
2 For 10 years, numerous works have attempted to deconstruct innovation in order to integrate responsibility and ethics within the concept of responsible innovation. See (Gianni 2016; Gianni et al. 2019; Owen et al. 2013; Von Schomberg 2011, pp. 39–61; Von Schomberg 2019).
3 This refers to the question of the choice of life, illustrated in antiquity through the bivium. See (Pavie 2015, p. 39).
4 However, let us note the excellent work of Anne-Françoise Schmid who, in a very relevant way, ensures an epistemology of innovation by combining technology, philosophy, art and science (Schmid 2001; Schmid 2012; Schmid, 2014).

===== FILE 8/17: c01.xhtml =====

1
The Need to (Re)think Innovation

“It is now some years since I detected how many were the false beliefs that I had from my earliest youth admitted as true, and how doubtful was everything I had since constructed on this basis; and from that time I was convinced that I must once for all seriously undertake to rid myself of all the opinions which I had formerly accepted, and commence to build anew from the foundation, if I wanted to establish any firm and permanent structure in the sciences.”

(Descartes, 1992, p. 57)

1.1. The innovation context: how far to innovate?

As a result of innovations, mainly new products and services, but also processes or new marketing methods, animal populations and species disappear. The massive development of technologies, products and consumer goods, both current and in the past, has a direct impact on the depletion of natural resources. There is undoubtedly a degradation of the atmosphere, soils and the oceans due to human activity and the constant search for economic growth. Increasing urbanization is constantly changing the balance of the biosphere. These challenges are global: acid rain, borderless radioactive pollution and the “7th continent” made of plastic drifting in the Pacific, outside national waters. These consequences are linked to the unpredictability of innovations that can be introduced to the market. When chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) were introduced in the 1950s, nobody predicted that in the 1970s and 1980s we would discover that they were major greenhouse gases and destroyed the stratospheric ozone layer (Schmid 1976)1.

“Science without conscience is the death of the soul,”2 François Rabelais announced, with a particularly visionary spirit, in the 16th Century. Moreover, it does not stop at the consequences on the environment: electronics has invaded our daily lives with the communication objects on which we have become dependent; the “digitization of the world” becomes a considerable challenge; nanotechnologies are omnipresent in food, in clothing, in furniture and cars. However, this is only the beginning, given the future progress in the exploitation of the human body and its representations in terms of commonplace automatons.

However, new digital technologies and associated new means of communication are no strangers to democratic pressures, making it possible to publicize complex political situations and mobilize populations, in contexts of limited freedom of expression. Medical advances, supported by technology, are showered with praise by their beneficiaries.

Thus, the notion of innovation, like that of science, must be put into perspective with the Greek term deinon, which expresses both the terrible and the admirable, combining to express the power of opposites. This is the example of a man who has “resources, whose ingenious skill exceeds all hope, he advances sometimes towards evil and sometimes towards good,” says Sophocles in Antigone (Sophocles 1955, p. 863). However, it is the individual-innovator and the individual alone who can make an innovation change from one side to the other, sometimes towards evil, sometimes towards good, and make this change either consciously or not. If there was a period when religion had such an influence on institutions that it restricted certain possibilities of progress, for example, in reproductive choice, this constraint has totally disappeared, if only from the scientists’ laboratory benches. Moreover, the latter have not always had the means to achieve their ambitions. It is only in the last few decades that there has been clear technical and technological acceleration, with the increase in genetic knowledge, the first modifications of DNA, the beginnings of cloning and the acceleration of NBIC convergence (nanotechnology, biotechnology, information technology and cognitive science). The problem no longer seems to lie in moral acceptance or scientific capacity, it is instead the duty to act or not act with ethics and responsibility4.

This context necessarily raises questions about the future of humanity. In what form is the human individual advancing and with what uses, or exploitation, of their ecosystem? Are there nothing more than innovations with goals exclusive to one population or another, with a total lack of progress for humanity as a whole?

Progress is a meta-model of change, which deals with the general perspective of evolution, that of knowledge with hope in the future of humanity. What hopes do we have today in the progress we are witnessing? Are we looking, not only for innovations that are highly targeted from a technical, scientific and social point of view, but, essentially, considered in relation to the market? Thus, it is possible to say that innovation is, in a way, a daughter of progress, constantly seeking to meet the needs of individuals. It has made real products and services that were pure science fiction less than a century ago. This is the case of transhumanism, whose declared aim is to improve the human condition through life-enhancing techniques, such as eliminating ageing and increasing intellectual, physical or psychological capacities (Pavie 2018a, pp. 138–159). However, this is clearly oriented towards commercial markets. Is there still progress here, when it is restricted, exclusive, elitist and free from humanistic thinking?

1.2. The innovation discipline
1.2.1. From reality to usurpation: the three stages of innovation

Innovation is a dual-entry device that can be called world-innovation, on the one hand, and consequential-innovation, on the other. The first one was bricked up when the second one was blinded. It is, in a way, a duality that must be accepted, but that does not mean that we cannot contradict this immurement and blindness. These two aspects have developed over time via three distinct stages. Before returning to these aspects and stages in detail, it is not surprising that the meaning of the term “innovation” has also evolved. This evolution has continued through the ages. Indeed, the “origin” of innovation, it is said, was determined in the Middle Ages, and we find its Latin composition: in (inside) and novare (change), and thus its purpose: aiding survival. However, at that time, innovation emerged, more in the legal spheres, to mean the change of contract to a new debtor, than in the arts or sciences. Before the 20th Century, the notion of “new” was clearly preferred to “innovation” and “creation”, but especially “invention”. In the 16th Century, Nicolas Machiavelli used the term precisely in The Prince, then, a century later, in 1625, with Francis Bacon in Of Innovations. The pages devoted to innovation by these thinkers then evoke, in religion, people who are resistant to innovation, to change. It must be understood that, until the 18th Century, “innovation” was more of a pejorative term, an “innovator” was a person to be wary of. This was the case in political spheres, where change was negatively perceived, and in religious spheres, because of orthodoxy; innovation was considered heresy. The pejorative aspect was also felt in the 18th Century, when inventors began to earn money from their inventions. It was not until the end of the 19th Century that the first theory of innovation emerged with the French sociologist Gabriel Tarde, a century in which he distinguished between static and dynamic societies. He was interested in explaining different social changes, whether they concern grammar, language, religion, law, constitution, economic regime, industry or the arts. However, while he spread the notion of innovation as a novelty, he did not explicitly define this idea (Tarde 2001).

We propose to review this change from a new perspective, more precisely, with two major dimensions: world-innovation and consequential-innovation, which help us to understand why innovation has become what it is.

1.2.1.1. World-innovation/consequential-innovation
1.2.1.1.1. World-innovation

Behind world-innovation is the human desire intrinsic to progress. Progress comes from Latin progressus (to march), from progredi (to march forward), from pro (forward), and gradi (to march). This “forward march” is an evolutionary process oriented towards an ideal, it is what advances and develops over time. The roots of innovation are those of progress, its source and, first and foremost, the progress and evolution of knowledge. There is a tenuous link in “classical” philosophy between understanding and progress. We only understand by progressing, we only progress by understanding. This explains the historical intertwining between philosophy and science. The astonishment that characterizes the origin of philosophy according to Aristotle (Pavie 2018a) has led philosophers to wonder about the arising phenomena. They began to understand and progress in knowing what surprised them. If the answers were scientific, they all stem from philosophical questions. Philosophers seek to understand, or advance their understandings and thus their knowledge. This explains why the first scientists, physicists and chemists were philosophers. We can mention the atomist theories of Leucippus, Democritus and Epicurus, the alchemists of the Middle Ages or the 16th Century, such as Paracelsus5 or, more recently, chemists such as Berthelot, who belong as much to the field of science as to that of philosophy. They have never ceased to be intellectuals of progress. They have advanced both science and knowledge, articulating both discovery and thought. Philosophy is the daughter of progress and evolution, whether this progress is “natural”, scientific or intellectual.

World-innovation expresses the evolution that tends towards an ideal, whatever the field in which it is expressed: economy, sport, art or politics, and ultimately, only responds to its purpose, which is to change something or someone in order to solve a problem or survive. Its desire is to bring about these changes towards an ideal. There is a form of disinterest behind the notion of world-innovation, in what this term implies, the desire to change for a whole and not for a single community is identified, where innovation is understood not as a means but as an end and that end is generic. This is not to say that world-innovation is positioned outside the economic stakes, particularly – often necessary – questions of profit, but only with the desire to maintain a dynamic that makes it possible to preserve the survival, the resolution of the problem, the search for the ideal that was the origin of world-innovation. It is worth noting that the notion of “world” is necessarily understood as the place where action takes place. It is a world of immanence, a secular life, where implementation and action take place. This willingness to act by striving towards the ideal for the world here and now defines world-innovation.

If we consider that world-innovation is enclosed or silenced, it is because its forms and its original purpose no longer have a place. There is no longer any space for it to express itself, because innovation is now only understood for its consequences.

1.2.1.1.2. Consequential-innovation

Consequential-innovation can be seen as similar to world-innovation in that it also acts in response to a problem, a change from an external environment. However, it is almost its opposite, in that it does not care about the ideal and focuses only on its own success – all the more so if it is financially profitable. Moreover, it is not the result – like world-innovation – of a philosophical question, it is limited to the study of customer needs, market analyses and business plans. Innovation terminology is nowadays essentially understood as such: the search for success, performance and profit as quickly as possible. It is imperative to move away from this recent dominant thinking and return to a world-innovation that is concerned with an ideal. Perhaps we should even freshen up the terminology “innovation” itself again, which eventually becomes misguided. Perhaps we have an obligation to take innovation to a new stage; to move beyond the three stages that have made innovation what it is today. In other words, from world-innovation to consequential-innovation, three phases have been implemented, three phases that have only impoverished innovation, the term and its use. It is becoming fundamental to understand this change in order to propose a new stage that is more in line with what we want to do and no longer to reduce it to being purely a means to do so.

1.2.2. The three evolutionary stages of innovation

Innovation has indeed gone through three major stages where world-innovation has decreased to give way to consequential-innovation, even though the two can sometimes co-exist, depending on organizations and environments. These stages are historical–systematic formations that can be referred to by these terms: nameless existence, profitable innovation and crush-performance. Understanding these stages is fundamental, because it is what makes it possible to work on surpassing them.

1.2.2.1. Innovation, nameless existence

No matter what you want to call it, innovation has always existed. Indeed, the need for change to achieve survival is by no means recent and the first phase began no sooner or later than the origin of the universe. This is because innovation pre-exists its name and its definitions. The fundamental desire of the human race for progress to solve its problems, to survive, requires all kinds of innovations. They can be medical, scientific or technical. Thus Pasteur, Lumière, Curie, Edison, Watt, Ampère and Bell were all individuals who contributed to progress and gave rise to major innovations: vaccines and cinema, electricity and sound, the steam engine and electromagnetism and even the telephone. We find here the words of the world-innovation that we have mentioned: a disinterested innovation that does not neglect financial needs to continue research and progress. The challenge for this first stage of innovation is to innovate without seeking profit beyond the necessary. The possible financial stakes are seen as a means and not an end. Organizations at the beginning of the 20th Century were still in this process, even commercial entrepreneurs, such as Édouard Michelin, Louis Renault or André Citroën. These entrepreneurs were concerned about the development of their industry, but, to put it briefly, not their shareholders. The vast majority of the profits made at that time were intended to preserve the organization, in order to prolong discoveries and research, whether in tires or the automotive industry.

1.2.2.2. Profitable innovation

The second stage emerged at the beginning of the 19th Century, but only developed around the 1930s, and we can say that it is from this stage that innovation began to make sense in the economy. The term “innovation” itself became more and more present, to the detriment of the term “invention”. In its conceptual and economic origins, innovation was presented as a discipline that would have a strong impact on science, discoveries, inventions and engineering in general. It did not hesitate to criticize these categories by finding their weak point: creative destruction (Pavie 2018a, pp. 73–103). Innovation would show that in a capitalist context, all kinds of inventions, possible discoveries, however brilliant they might be, would sooner or later be destroyed and replaced by “better” systems, products and services, or, at least, preferred ones.

The issue of creative destruction will justify the losses that inventors, discoverers and scientists put on the market and implicitly, therefore, will justify the need for innovation. It is placed in a transcendental position that somehow observes the destruction and positions itself as a savior in order to hope to survive and endure. Yet it is only an observer of imminent actions (tests, failures, temptations) and will reappear, impose itself and drape itself in success as soon as the first successes appear.

This leads to a form of stress, because we understand that what is important is no longer so much the product, the service offered, the more meaningful the discovery or invention that can make sense, but instead what will be sought is innovation – in its new use, that is, performance, and with no regard for everything else. If a vaccine could be sought for its intended purpose, for example, its development is now mainly driven by the profit it can generate. Consequently, it is the size of the market, its potential, that drives research on a particular vaccine rather than another in pharmaceutical companies.

It should be noted, however, that a significant number of organizations – often with shareholders for whom the company’s purpose is the common good and not profitability at all costs, as quickly as possible (often family organizations) – do not fall within this scope and innovation continues to be “disinterested” in a certain way. “Profitable innovation” is not an end in itself for them, anarchic capitalism in the constant pursuit of profit by undermining innovation will become the norm.

1.2.2.3. Crush-performance

Schumpeter, his contemporaries and economists have worked hard to shed light on what innovation – which we have called “world-innovation” here – was initially, a layer of varnish that means that today any discourse on innovation is more related to this varnish than to innovation itself. This is explained by the fact that this varnish layer is a financial layer, a layer of profitability. In a globalized economic organization, dominated by blind shareholding, this has become the dominant discourse. The only way to think innovation is to think about profitability and generated profit, and all the means previously implemented upstream, are nothing. Financial and human investments in research, tests, trials and other experiments can be “purchased”, “rejected” and considered “negligible”. That is why more and more organizations are outsourcing their research and development6.

Innovation has been reduced to the Schumpeterian discursive scheme. It must be realized, however, that innovation has never been a rigorous theory, it is not even a discipline, there are only attempts at self-definition, which are only an expression of a desire, not a tangible scientific reality. Proof of this is its inability to exist without calling to a discipline external to itself, in this case to the economy.

Moreover, the innovation “discipline” is defined in one academic field – the economy – but it is worked on in another, that of management sciences. Its real use, its Reality, if you will, is in a field that is completely outside the academic world. This is disturbing, because it is a kind of acting: those who create the innovation are on a theater stage, and the academics watch them as spectators, comment on what they do, but have no control over the play being performed. Innovators know this very well and question academic models about it very little – have we seen Mark Zuckerberg, Steve Jobs or Elon Musk use academic innovation methods to launch their products? Academic researchers in this field spend their time developing methods and analyses that are ultimately all just feedback on what has happened. In the end, they are only trying to explain – a posteriori – what these innovators would have accomplished, when in fact none of them really thought about it that way.

Innovation is in fact an undefined object, but one that is readily abused: economists stress that only innovation can lead to sustainable growth, innovators are only concerned with the success of their project, and between the two, politicians and shareholders see innovation only as a means to make their personal (electoral or financial) project a success. Researchers in management sciences are not to be outdone, since they are striving to make academic, scientific, and modeling innovation processes that have probably never existed in the field. Thus, they analyze past innovations in an attempt to understand them and seek to produce models that no one else will really use. No academic production around innovation has seen the Internet, artificial intelligence or the economy of sharing, for example, come into being. No one has used models to bring them about.

Thus, innovation is crushed by its economic, academic and political stakeholders under the lead of capitalism, represented by the shareholders who play on its ambiguities. They do so by showing innovation as the way to solve problems (employment, growth, etc.). Paradoxically, it is when it is mishandled, misunderstood and ill-defined that innovation reaches its notoriety. In this third stage, innovation is gaining a foothold not only in the economy, but also in management and among the general public. Innovation is present in terms of the slightest supermarket product or service and very often proclaims itself as “innovation”, even if the reality is different. It is even demanded by this general public, totally blinded by the proposals of commercial organizations. Everything helps to increase the demand for a smaller, more efficient, more technological telephone, everything is being done to ensure that the latest largest television with better definition is in demand, not to mention slimming yoghurts or ever larger and faster cars.

Innovation is at this stage today, totally out of control, absent from any reasoning. We must innovate, that is the watchword, and not just in any way: innovate according to the principle of profitability and power, control and success.

Finally, it should be pointed out, the development of this third phase is closely linked to globalization. The increase in global competition (which is the primary driving force of innovation) seems limitless, and economic boundaries have exploded, giving way to “boundaries” of agreements, negotiations and understanding. In this context, innovation is a key element and the heavyweights (United States/China) have fully understood that their survival and hegemony depend on it.

1.2.2.4. The cause of capitalism

These three stages of innovation highlight a dislocation of innovation and a call for (re)thinking innovation with a fresh perspective: with new tools, new methods and new ways of thinking. In other words, a fourth stage of innovation must be established, no longer under the auspices that have led it astray, but by rethinking it based on its DNA, its essence. Without (re)thinking innovation, without imagining a new impetus, or, rather, a reconstruction, humanity is in danger of losing it, and we have to admit that capitalism has somehow killed innovation while exploiting it, and that is why it must be rebuilt. Innovation is simply destroyed (or must this destruction be completed to rebuild it?). Since the beginning of English capitalism (associated with innovation), with James Watt and the steam locomotive7, we could fear what has been emerging for 50 years. The Industrial Revolution, the globalization of economies, in other words, the great spread of liberalism and capitalism, have resulted in a strong human footprint that has pushed the planet into a new geological era, where all ecosystems are affected. Capitalism has taken root in all ecosystems and is unable to restrict its course. Rulers and organizations cannot think without it. This is why we are interested here in capitalist organizations, liberal companies and not in “humanity”, consumers who are only executors or subjects of the capitalist machine. While the development of this system began at the end of the 18th Century, it was the last 50 years that were the most dramatic and led to changes. In recent decades, the destructive pressure of human activities on the environment has accelerated at an unprecedented rate: massive industrial pollution, the sixth animal extinction, ocean acidification, desertification, overfishing, ice melting, concentration of greenhouse gases and global warming (Steffen et al. 2007).

The causes are those of innovation, yet the solutions cannot come from innovation, at least not the type whose processes we have used, the one that uses methods that strengthen capitalism. That’s why we need a “new” innovation, another stage.

1.2.2.5. The need for a fourth stage of innovation, a thought innovation
1.2.2.5.1. The amphibology of crush-innovation

Innovation is a nest of amphibologies where ambiguities, misinterpretations and, sometimes, double meanings can mix. Between the self-proclamation “this is an innovation” and the lack of awareness that there is innovation (as is the case, for example, in medicine, where the term R&D is preferred, even if it does not have the same meaning), innovation is neither defined nor understood and always interpreted. Innovation is a sum of definitions, amalgams and in the face of this void of rigor, it does not hesitate to define itself, to position itself, to proclaim itself “innovation”. In this way, it ensures that it takes root, that it becomes the essential mechanism of capitalist “thought”, as the only way for organizations, even individuals, to exist. It is the desire for innovation to be a universal structure.

Innovation crushes the world and the world becomes no longer able to think of itself, suffocated by innovation. Crush-innovation must be considered in a real way, in fact, innovation devastates and destroys, it imposes its way of life and way of being on all compartments of life, in each of the ecosystems. The Latin innovare underlies this, the necessary change “inside” forces any organism to crush what can harm it, directly or indirectly, consciously or not. Schumpeter or Darwin, the same fight. We need agencies, bodies and organizations that are sufficiently adapted to allow them to survive. However, since power does not exist without resistance, adaptation does not exist without the crushing of what is no longer adapted – no matter whether it is a living species or an organization. Globalizing systems certainly do not question these aspects, quite the contrary, in fact. This crush-innovation has no boundaries or specificity, no origin and no target. If sprawling organizations have a first point of support at the local and, regional level, it is only a stepping stone to the world (and the world market).

1.2.2.5.2. The absence of innovative thinking

From this crush-innovation can emerge the first resistance, which can be formulated in the following form of questioning: why has innovation evolved at this stage, that it has come to be seen as crushing the world? The answer comes from itself: because it has not been thought about or has stopped thinking. It is the very absence of thought that has generated innovation as it has become and allows it to be imposed on us. The absence of thought simply means that innovation is never questioned, doubted or challenged. We look at innovation in a superficial, simplistic way: what it costs, what it brings in, the potential consequences, if any, but often in a simplistic or rapid way, too concerned about the urgency of getting it to market. In other words, if we thought innovation before it crushed us – at its invention stage – then its attempt to crush would be in vain. Thus, artificial intelligence is only necessary if we decide that it is necessary – consciously or not. As things stand at present (i.e. the lack of thought about innovation), there is therefore every reason to believe that artificial intelligence will subjugate human intelligence. The same is true of the development of a new generation of communication technologies. Operators will develop it to generate new profits, customers will demand it to get faster output: but what about replacing antennas? Deploying new cables? What are the consequences of adding new, more powerful waves? What are the stakes for the environment, which is already in agony? And finally, what does this development answer? Why is it necessary? The latest generation makes the previous ones obsolete and positions itself as the norm, the standard, the overwhelming contradictory desire. Crushing resistance can be done at the time of the innovation being made, at its establishment, but it is already too late; when the genie is out of the bottle, we cannot put it back in. Crushing is not an immutable thing, if the resistance-in-thought is operative, and in a continuous way and not on the occasion of something. We too often think innovation in retrospect and, by definition, it doesn’t work.

It is almost conceivable that there will be no crush-innovation if one dares to suggest that here there is no thought. Indeed, isn’t the absence of resistance, above all, a demonstration of the absence of thought?

1.2.2.6. Innovative teaching
1.2.2.6.1. An archaic form of teaching?

As innovation existed before its name, its teaching is, in fact, late, and emerged with the economy making the link between innovation, growth and profit. While “product development” could exist in engineering schools, it is with the emergence of business schools, through management education, that innovation courses emerge.

The method of teaching has hardly changed and its content has changed little over the last few decades. Innovation is taught by differentiating between innovation and invention (Godin 2008) and explaining the role of research and development. The aim is to explain the notions of creativity and, of course, the different categories of innovation and the degrees that can be associated with them (Pavie 2018a, pp. 51–64). Finally, innovation education is articulated through innovation process management and its five phases (idea generation, feasibility, capability, launch and post-launch), which are associated with innovation marketing, where the promotional and technical issues of innovation adoption by target customers are addressed. These few phases, taught in all the world’s universities in a few dozen hours, have hardly been called into question in recent decades. No questions on the need to innovate or not, on the consequences of innovation, no “responsibility” or “ethics” phase has been added, no philosophical or even psychological questioning about the innovator. There are, however, a large number of areas where questioning the merits of innovation would probably not have been in vain. On the contrary, teaching and research have focused on how to improve the process to make it even more efficient. Over the past 20 years, innovation education has evolved, above all, to become a discipline that is both rigorous and relevant for all organizations seeking to (re)connect with growth. With a large number of theories, innovation processes and their conceptual names – ranging from blue ocean strategy (Chan and Mauborgne 2004) to open innovation (Chesbrough 2003), business model canvas (Osterwalder and Pigneur 2010) and design thinking (Brown 2009) – have succeeded in not only characterizing the major structuring steps that make it possible to move an idea to an innovation stage, but also to develop them to a level of sophistication that limits (but does not completely rule out) failures.

In addition to the processes, the creative phases that feed these mechanisms have also developed increasingly robust tools and methods. The classic benchmarks and competitive monitoring are accompanied by now common techniques, such as brainstorming, mind mapping or SCAMPER, among many others. However, neither in innovation processes nor in creativity techniques was there any question of questioning the model or changing it profoundly to include not only what is necessary – growth – but what is fundamental – responsibility – more precisely, understanding, anticipating and taking into account the consequences of innovation.

1.2.2.6.2. The consequences of inadequate teaching

We cannot criticize, be afraid of and regret the consequences produced by innovators, given the way they have been trained and educated. How could we be sorry about a car accident if its driver had received a license? To put it in the same analogy, we have blindly entrusted the innovation vehicle to all those who wanted it and passengers are naively seeing the damage. Glyphosate, asbestos, nuclear power and cloning, to take just a few examples of risky innovations, are the work of innovators who have been allowed to do so. These inventor-innovators may have taken courses in innovation, but no one pointed them out to them, no one educated them about the risks they could make themselves and their ecosystem take. If these mentioned innovations are particularly symbolic of the dangers they can represent, this is no less true for innovations that seem less harmful a priori; what about 4x4 vehicles, whose fuel consumption is very demanding, and emit a lot of CO2? What about the overabundant touch screens, whose production is particularly polluting, not to mention the inability to recycle them? There is no doubt that the innovation process worked well for these examples, especially because there was no criticism, no element, no process and no education to question the responsibility for their implementation. The innovator in the whole process followed has never had to question their “responsibility”. Again, can we really overwhelm the innovators who have done this, or rather, who have been allowed to do this without educating them? How can you blame a child for bad manners if the basics of politeness have not been taught to them?

Billions of hours of innovation courses have been given without ever mentioning the innovator’s responsibility, millions of innovators have never been made aware of these issues, thousands of books have been published to give the best techniques for innovation without any mention of ethics. It seems that we have never understood what innovation is – reducing it to the managerial sphere – or the responsibility that the innovator held. Innovation has been relegated to a discipline, a course, essentially taught in business schools, whereas it is found in medicine and engineering, in political science and in art. For example, the artists of the Cyborg Foundation8 advance science as much as technology, as much art as the evolution of the human species: what about the advances and consequences they generate with their proposals mixing body transformations and the development of techniques, similar to transhumanism? There is a lack of understanding of what innovation is, both its definition and the places where it is found, and blindness, or misunderstanding allows innovators to operate, who are often unaware of it themselves.

The consequence must be a rethinking of innovation education, more precisely underlining where it is, what it is, and, whether one is a geographer or historian, a doctor or a business leader, whether one can define it, be aware of it and draw out the consequences. “Ignorance is the mother of all evils,” Rabelais (1973, p. 806) points out, and many individuals, in many sectors of activity, are innovators who ignore each other. The innovator can be a doctor, philosopher, business leader, artist, sportsman, etc. The innovator is evolving in all segments of society, and this is why it is everywhere that the message about their definition and responsibility must be widely shared. In other words, many innovators do not necessarily recognize themselves as such and do not necessarily act with the responsibility that falls upon them, but are ultimately interested only in the success of their idea. Therefore, on the one hand, we have poorly trained innovators who are unaware of the consequences, unable to evaluate acts, not trained to think or to develop a critique of what they do, who are only oriented towards action, and, on the other hand, individuals who innovate without knowing it and are no less dangerous.

1.3. Attempting to expose innovation, the importance of philosophy
1.3.1. An objectification of innovation

“Responsible innovation”, “innovation care”, “research in responsible innovation” are the terms that have been popular for the last 10 years or so and if we can only salute their desire to bring ethics and responsibility to innovation, are they really relevant and useful? Don’t they have limits (Pavie 2018a, p. 184)? Moreover, if all these terminologies and concepts make sense, do they not complicate the situation, the understanding of innovation and the challenge it raises? Should we not review the way in which we want to develop innovation more drastically? In other words, wouldn’t it be fundamental to review innovation anew, to make tabula rasa from the assaults, interpretations and misuses it has undergone in recent decades? Exposing innovation in the same way as Descartes, who, doubting his knowledge because it was built “on sand and mud” (Descartes 2016), began to rebuild from the famous Archimedean point. We cannot claim this ambition here, but we must take a first step, make first attempts to move in this direction; it is a necessity for contemporary thinkers.

Innovation generates fear: fear of what it can do, of not being able to control it and of evolving without it. Innovation is like a crutch for developed societies, a crutch that developing societies want to own. Organizations and individuals fear that they will not be able to work without it and that is why it is put up as a pilgrim’s rod or a support. The pilgrimorganizing leader who uses this support as the only possible way to allow him to walk does not even wonder about another possible way. That is why innovation must be naked, it must be exposed so we can see what it is all about and question its supposed necessity. It may be that we realize that it is nothing and that its existence is mainly valid or solid only through the projection we make of it. Here again, it is not a question of saying that it does not bring anything, but rather the question is: what does it bring? Exposing innovation means realizing what it brings and what it does not bring, to learn to live, not without it, but without this dependence.

By exposing it, it is its narcissism that we are also trying to bring down. At the center of all attention, with the spotlights turned towards it like the birth of a baby, innovation has become the spoiled child of organizations. Everything must work according to it and it receives the honor, profit and reward. Of course, in these conditions it does not have to think, it is nourished by investments, pampered by its progenitors and protected by its users. This is practically absurd because the organizations cannot think or even live without it. To expose it is perjury in a consumer society, akin to exposing the king. However, it is necessary to depend on it no longer at this point, to put it in its place and question its relevance within organizations.

Innovation requires an objectification of what it is and what it provides, in the most exhaustive way possible. In a way, it is like taking stock, in this the way that we are asking innovation. Taking stock of what it has done and what it has contributed, of its consequences, and society as a whole cannot be the only judge. We will not ask private beneficiaries what they think of the innovation they have developed, because they are no more owners of it than those who receive it directly or indirectly. The subjectification of innovation is its essence, a political or capitalist subjectification, sometimes both. But the objectification of innovation is totally absent from the debates, from the thought itself, which nevertheless would allow an attempt at distancing, at otherness, which would suggest a positive first step for its evaluation.

Like any discipline with a “scientific” mind-set, innovation must be able to divide its object and distinguish what is relevant from what is not in the phenomena it deals with. Hence the fundamental distinctions to be made about what is meant by the term “innovation”. What is there in innovation that is susceptible to theory? This exposure must allow this to happen. Innovation has never been a rigorous theory. Developed by economists or academics in charge of the discipline whose thinking is centred on it, it has become self-defining and only based on Reality.

1.3.2. Reducing innovation

If we are aware that it is not a question of getting rid of innovation, a vain desire that would have no meaning and no future, one way could be world-innovation. For, certainly, exposing it allows us to look at it in its “original purity”, but the world allows us to get rid of its crass casing of unhealthy capitalism, of this rough cover of exploitation which that implies. Reducing innovation means cutting down its recent excrescences, which view innovation only as a device of power, glory and fortune – the three evils that philosophy fights against. It is at the third stage of innovation, described above, that these excrescences appeared, at least in such a visible way that they become the main elements of it. Innovation is power, taking possession of users; it is glory, being carried as a hero and appearing as the winner in a dense competitive space; it is fortune, since the success it brings is now only assessed through the view of the profit generated.

Reducing innovation is to remove its recent impurities, that is, to remove its inappropriate, inadequate complexities that only serve an elite, an environment. It is a question of reducing and not of cleaning. Because innovation has not only been crass, it is a real casing that has been affixed to it by the liberal economy, by deregulated markets, by behaviors that have seen in it an opportunity to use a Bergsonian vital momentum for their own ends.

Cleaning innovation is therefore useless as it is its origin that must be recovered, and the removal of this varnish, which means that it is no longer recognized, is essential. Whitening innovation may be another avenue, but here again the layer that has been added to it, the layers, we should say, are still at risk of sticking to this bleaching process. Reducing is the way to go, and the term for innovation in the making, it is the condition for its objectification, with the help of philosophical devices.

1.3.3. The future of innovation through its reversal
1.3.3.1. A lack of vision for innovation

In the state in which it is, innovation has no future. We do not mean that it will not last, but it will be content to be what it is, hegemonic and overwhelming, without a thought and satisfied with Reality. As things stand at present, its future is only in Real Life and will dissolve into technical, technological and sometimes ethical production, on the one hand, and into the oldest past of inventions and industrializations on the other. Its only hope is its reconstruction, based on this thought that is lacking in innovation. For only this thought, which we have yet to determine, can give rise to hope for innovation, even if it has disappeared from its current form.

1.3.3.2. A possible resilience of innovation

Its sudden development is expected, its ability to bounce back. It is most likely that philosophy can help it with this. Philosophy is a therapist; it analyzes and thinks. Its critical approach makes it possible to rethink the history of innovation in a truthful way to help shape the future. The current history of innovation is a story told by winners and reserved for potential winners. The defeated and the pioneers, the failures and attempts are left out. In this sense, innovation is aristocratic. It has been confiscated by an elite that will be considered as the ones who “succeeded”, as the ones who obtained “success”. The others are left behind, even though they may have been at the origin of some innovations. Nevertheless, innovation is not part this class, this elite. Innovation is also aristocratic in the sense that it holds power, the financial power that gives it the possibility of developing other innovations, which will give it even more power. The innovation machine is spinning on itself. By injecting critical thought, this will contribute to the destruction of its pedestal and the return to a sensitivity that is necessary for it to survive. This is the price to pay for resilience.

This resilience is, as we will see in detail below, as valid for innovation as it is for innovators. It is a question of taking up the story of innovation, which is made only at the altar of social success and profit. There is a cycle that feeds itself, a form of consanguinity between successful innovators. They are often from the same training, the same educational systems, the same social background and are sometimes found in the same “incubators”.

The resilience of innovation is also possible if it accepts an introspection of its own history and accepts allowing objective criticism, admitting that the history of innovation is a geographically reserved domain – essentially globally north-western – by a self-proclaimed “elite”, because it has itself defined the conditions and criteria of what an innovation is. It is this supposed elite that has put innovation in the spotlight by declaring, proclaiming and deciding what innovation is and what it is not. Innovation must burst its frameworks to envision its future. Should it return to its nature or should it change with new practices (social, media, etc.)? By sinking into communication, into the search for social and profitable status, it seems to have clearly abandoned its old initial practice of progress for the common good (Pavie 2018b). The possible future of innovation has, so far, no reality and is dissolving into ethical production with terms that are finally dead in the water: “responsible innovation”, “social innovation” or “inclusive innovation”. Can we say that innovation has a future if it is the one that at least partially shapes the outline of that future? Innovation has no future if we do not decide to give it a future, perhaps against itself and its habits. This is where otherness – given by philosophy – can seem to provide the solution at last.

Paradoxically, innovation is lagging behind. It has remained stuck in a conservative limbo, in, sometimes consensual, conservative schemes and nostalgic frameworks and has fed itself while being disconnected from the common good, from the world that needs to be built, because it does not care. Its anticipatory feature, always present, is delayed this time, it is the same structure that is preserved while it is affected, broken, dispersed and separated from the world that we need to make.

We do not know what recent and future technological developments will bring about in terms of renewing innovation: will they simply be a continuation of current developments or will they introduce a new way of innovating? In other words, will artificial intelligence, for example, only be “the auxiliary” of current thought, a means or a tool that extends current thought? Or will it introduce a new way of thinking? This is questionable, because there is no reason why the extension of current thinking should be a vehicle for criticism of what brought it into the world. An opportunity to think innovation in the context of its achievements? This would somehow mean that a programmed “good” artificial intelligence (?) would be more capable than a human intelligence of thinking about the common good.

Changing innovation so that it achieves its resilience can only be achieved through shock treatment, certainly by killing its most entrenched illusions. Maybe we have to go through another mind, another brain, even an artificial one?

1.3.3.3. The political stakes

For another future of innovation, we must ensure that innovation abandons its attitude of reaction and self-defense, especially through liberal policies, but not only this. Anti-liberal political thinking is certainly much worse, because it does not even seem to accept the very principle of the existence of innovation, which it relegates exclusively to the private and commercial spheres. These Marxist-inspired political movements often have difficulty understanding what innovation is, its role in the economy and society or its utility, and throw out innovation as a whole without considering the benefits that can be derived from it, with innovations for social, inclusive purposes, etc., for the good of all. Liberal policies, on the other hand, exploit and over-mine the innovation vein, which they do not hesitate to use, above all, as a promotional tool, a tool for all kinds of promises. In the same way, their understanding of innovation, which is often reduced to a personal or a single community interest rather than an aim for a real common good, may be questioned.

In other words, politicians do not know how to use innovation, because they are caught in the middle, between its now exclusively liberal use, on the one hand, and the inability to think of progress without innovation on the other. Governments are in a situation of innovation-dependence; whether they admit it or not, no policy knows how to move their country forward without going through profit-generating innovation. No one accepts or affirms this, but it is a reality. Profitable innovation generates growth, employment and higher incomes for all, that is a fact, and if we want to gain or maintain power, this logic is the simplest and most commonly accepted, whether it is stated publicly or not. If some policies do not play this game, which is the rule in a globalized market, this is even more suicidal, because the country excludes itself from the game and will have great difficulty in preserving its development, depending on the innovations of others.

At the same time, if this is the only solution, it is also the one that generates the problems we have raised and the consequences of this approach are disastrous, both for individuals and the environment, both for the future of humanity and for its entire ecosystem. More precisely, it is the known, logical and relatively easy solution (even if it is not understood by everyone), but this does not mean that there cannot be policies of innovation, of progress, with an approach that is not the exclusive search for economic progress as it is accepted. Economic policy can be based on more than profit generation. It is the dependence on profitable economic growth that hinders creativity, the imagination to have innovation without linking it to profit generation. However, the role of a government is not necessarily the well-being of a population through its economic success. If this was the case, for the sake of simplicity (as in the era of les Trente Glorieuses9, for example), we cannot extend or replicate this given the change in context. In other words, (re)thinking innovation is also an opportunity to rethink innovation policies.

1.3.3.4. The academic stakes

Finally, the last overhaul of innovation must take place in the academic environment, in the management sciences. It can be said that innovation in the academic sphere is conceived as a regression, even if, of course, it is not so. Innovation in the academic sphere is only a rear projection, as we have pointed out. It is taught from the past, analyzed from past facts to reproduce the same outcome. On the other hand, in medicine, for example, research is aimed at finding solutions to current problems for a better future. The purpose of virus analysis is to create a vaccine. Once it is found and implemented, a follow-up can take place, but, overall, the problem is solved. Academic research in the management sciences on innovation is quite different. It consists of analyzing past facts, drawing conclusions (syntheses, analysis grids, etc.) to find good practices in order to reproduce them, and this poses two problems: the application is quite relative, since the problems of some organizations arise in a culture, a context, a structure that, by definition, cannot be replicated. The so-called solutions such as blue ocean strategy, business model canvas or design thinking, that we have already mentioned, have all been pure regressive retro-projection for some time now. Innovation concepts actually only invent an ersatz of the present and certainly not its future. On the other hand, thinking using only the past and used methods, innovation is actually unable to imagine a, strictly speaking, new future.

1.4. Philosophy as therapy
1.4.1. Modesty in the use of philosophy

Faced with the challenges of innovation in all the aspects we have been able to describe, we must now try to find answers and, as already mentioned, it seems to us that this can only be done with philosophy. Indeed, philosophy is the discipline that we must use, or, more precisely, its tools and its purpose. Thinking as a philosopher, with philosophy, is certainly the best proposal for (re)thinking innovation. We must use philosophy, its term itself, without blushing, by overcoming its paradoxes. Philosophy is too often found between two perspectives, on the one hand, it can be considered abstract, useless, futile, on the other hand, a kind of modesty emerges in its enunciation. Should we use the term philosophy? Is it suitable? Isn’t it too imposing, too overwhelming for the person who uses the term or for the object concerned? Especially in the context of management, of the management of organizations?

On the contrary, philosophy must perhaps enter as much into the shallows of liberal realities as into the foundations of organizational structures. There is perhaps a need to summon philosophers whose desire is to put philosophy into action, capable of highlighting reprehensible acts, criticizing, analyzing and proposing at the same time. In other words, we need to act as philosophers and not as philosophy teachers, and that may be what makes the exercise complex. It is not a question of taking an existing philosophical position, but of acting as a philosopher, that is, by suggesting, proposing, daring to advance in criticism and reflection in an original way. We can only think of Thoreau for whom:

To be a philosopher is not merely to have subtle thoughts, nor even to found a school, but so to love wisdom as to live according to its dictates, a life of simplicity, independence, magnanimity and trust. It is to solve some of the problems of life, not only theoretically, but practically. (Thoreau 1854)

For Thoreau, philosophy is his guide, the scout of life, the visionary, because he is ahead of his contemporaries (Thoreau 2007). Shouldn’t we be looking to be ahead of the curve, given current innovation practices?

If the American philosopher is interesting, it is, on the one hand, because his philosophy is close to those of the past (Pavie 2012c, pp. 243–248), and, on the other hand, because he is contemporary with the massive “beginnings” of innovation. At the end of his studies at Harvard, he wrote a text entitled The Commercial Spirit of Modern Times Considered in its Influence on the Political, Moral and Literary10, which included a critique of modernity, commercial spirit, and the materialistic and opportunistic appetites of individuals. Commercial life generated concerns that, for Thoreau, made the whole of the 19th Century restless, nervous and trivial. However, all is not lost, as he points out that humanity will be able to emancipate itself from material possessions and the increase in wealth (Thoreau 2007, pp. 30–32).

1.4.2. Healing through philosophy

Innovation needs to be cured of the ills we have highlighted and philosophy, with its devices and methods, seems the most relevant for this. It is also because philosophy has the real virtue of healing. In Sentences vaticanes, Epicurus emphasizes this need to philosophize for therapeutic salvation, as a solution to heal the soul and spirit. Thus, he warns: “One must not pretend to philosophize, but to philosophize in reality. For we do not need the semblance of health, but true health” (Epicurus, as quoted in Ghisalberti 2018). Its purpose is fundamental to understanding the meaning of philosophy since Antiquity (Pavie 2012c). It is not enough, he explains, to listen to philosophy, to interpret philosophy, even to teach philosophy. It is about experiencing philosophy, living as a philosopher.

All Hellenistic philosophies agree with Socrates that humans are plunged into misery, anguish and evil because they are living in ignorance. Evil is not in things, but in the judgments that humans have about things. Philosophy aims to change these judgments, to heal people, and that is why philosophy has a therapeutic value (Voelke 1993). It must be recalled that philosophy does not have a therapeutic connotation for Epicurus, it is therapy. It is a question of curing humans’ illnesses, their diseases, which are passions or dissatisfactions, “sorrows, torments, sadness, which gnaw at souls and overwhelm them with worries”11. It is a true medicine, even if it is essentially preventive, by seeking to avoid, in advance, the causes of displeasure, the causes of evil. While philosophy has, for Epicurus, the therapeutic role of healing the soul, just as medication heals other ills, we must use philosophy to heal acts, proposals and ways of acting as innovation does.

The challenge is to take care of innovation, which has become all-powerful, and sees itself as the only power capable of solving the vast majority of contemporary problems. We need to see innovation as the soul to be cared for. Because, in a way, innovation no longer belongs to itself, aiming at the search for power, being interested in materiality in the form of financial profit, subject to its passions of control, it must be medically taken in hand. Her healing is essential to expel the disorders that affect her, by freeing her from ephemeral things to become, once again, the mistress of herself, and no longer at the mercy of a harmful environment. However, philosophy does not heal as a drug, whose composition is not understood, it teaches that “it is not possible to live in pleasure without living according to wisdom, good and justice, nor to live according to wisdom, good and justice without living in pleasure,”12 as Epicurus emphasized, therefore it is the learning of philosophy that has the function of healing. In other words, it is in learning philosophy for innovation and for the innovator that we can hope for a cure.

1.4.3. Innovator and philosopher, two sides of the same coin for a new way of being

If innovation and the innovator can hope for a cure through philosophy, it is also because philosophy has many points in common with innovation. More precisely, the philosopher and the innovator share a large number of criteria, characteristics which define their personality. As paradoxical as it may seem, the innovator and the philosopher are indeed close to each other because of their extraordinary character. We do not return in detail to these common points, which we have developed elsewhere (Pavie 2018a), but simply note that they are found within seven axes: permanent questioning, the search for continuous progress, exceptional creativity, individual commitment, the loneliness of the herald, the ego to be satisfied, and finally the unceasing proliferation of ideas.

There is no question here of saying that the innovator and the philosopher are fully merged, their respective common features cannot hide their singularities. If both of them want to accomplish something strong and unique by making life somehow simpler, the purpose of accomplishment is not the same since, on the one hand, making life simpler, for the former, means offering products and services, offers that make life materially more comfortable. The second also makes life easier, but through the work of the mind, through the acquisition of wisdom. Perhaps it is here that the decisive point of our purpose is to be found. Faced with the major innovations that have been developing before our eyes, for barely a few decades, given the recent innovations that have upset humankind, humanity and the environment, given the almost uncontrollable nature of the current developments, shouldn’t the question of integrating for the innovator, this search for wisdom and love also fall to them? What if the work of the mind was also a duty, a parameter for the entrepreneur in addition to their responsibilities? Even if it is not necessary to require the philosopher to acquire the spirit of the innovator, even if some possess it, we do have an obligation to require the latter to acquire the philosopher’s spirit.

It is not about asking innovators to stop being who they are; it is about making sure they understand the consequences of their actions, that they understand that they can no longer act without the necessary discernment, without the responsibilities of self-care and of caring for others. While expertise and analysis, science, hypotheses and inferences are often the decision-making tools of innovators, in no way do they remove the uncertainty of the offers they can put on the market. The risks that innovators take, that they make their customers and, sometimes, citizens as a whole take, must be increasingly taken into account in launching decisions. This cannot be done exclusively through tests, trials or analyses. Innovation is defined as escaping from the hands of its innovator. It has been a long time since social networks no longer belong to their creators, since the now fast and inexpensive sequencing of DNA is in the hands of countless organizations and not only the scientists who initiated it, since the first steps of cloning are now present on almost every continent. It is not a question of waiting for laws or regulations to come in and frame innovation, innovation comes before the law and that is a fact. If neither legislative regulation nor scientific anticipation has any control over our future, how do we go about it if we want it to be humanely sustainable?

1.5. Towards a thoughtful innovator

If philosophy seems to be the preferable way to help the innovator to be a thoughtful innovator, the philosopher is, it seems, the one who is able to help them. As a guide, a mentor, they are the one who can allow someone to be someone else, help them to see who they are and how to act differently. To understand this, we can rely on the role of the master in ancient philosophy. The philosopher’s role with their disciples is then to lead them correctly towards knowledge and understanding, towards know-how and behavior. In other words, how can I behave otherwise? The master’s mission will be to take the disciple out of the stultitia. Stultitia is a fundamental notion of Stoic philosophy, as we can read particularly in Seneca’s work13. Stultitia comes from stultus, meaning “one who has no concern for himself”, and stultitia is the situation in which we find ourselves before we have taken care of ourselves, before we have begun the philosophical journey14. The one who is open to all winds, the one who allows everything that comes before them to enter their mind without examination or analysis15, is stultus, explains Seneca. Remembering nothing, remembering no action, the stultus constantly changes their mind and lets life pass without thinking for a moment about taking care of themselves.

To leave this state is, for Seneca, is to have the desire to access the self. Nevertheless, the difficulty is that what characterizes the stultitia is precisely the inability of the stultus to leave it, because they do not want to. The stultitia is precisely defined by this non-relation to the self. The only possible outcome is the intervention of others. The external individual will polarize the desire to escape this stultitia and help the stultus to be selfcontrolled. This individual inducing this output, its operator, is the philosopher. Whether among Epicureans or Stoics, only the philosopher is able to help others, by leading them. “The philosopher is the one who is the hêgemôn, the guide, for all humans, regarding the things that are appropriate to their nature”16. Philosophers say how to behave just as they explain how to lead others, as Foucault summarizes, about the role of philosophy: “Philosophy is the set of principles and practices that we can have at our disposal, or make available to others, to take proper care of ourselves or others” (2001d, p. 131).

The innovator does not know how to escape their exclusive state of “the producer of offers”, therefore, they do not think about what they are doing, they are in this stultitia that makes them blind. Only a certain form of analysis is the one that shows them a new way of doing things, of acting, of progressing, of evolving, but in no way does it integrate a benevolence that is in fact foreign to them. It is not just a matter of telling them that responsibility and benevolence, wisdom and respect must be integrated into their innovations, they will hear this without knowing how to do it. It is their education that needs to be redone, it is their model that needs to be rethought, by starting from the fundamentals, whose roots lie in philosophy. The innovator must die for the benefit of the thoughtful innovator, creative destruction must also apply to themselves, they must disappear to bring out a new form of innovator: the innovator of the 21st Century.

This 21st Century innovator can only be a philosopher. They will only be able to act with philosophy, with the philosopher’s attitude to take care of themselves. Two philosophies, in particular, can and must help them. First of all, the philosophy of the spiritual exercises, this philosophy of the origins of Antiquity, whose resonance in the contemporary space is growing ever greater, and phenomenology, whose essence allows the innovator to suspend their judgment, to question themselves, which they have not done for decades. But before that, before focusing on the innovator of tomorrow, it is certainly a question of questioning innovation as such, how to successfully rethink it, how to reduce it, how to regain its purpose. From this perspective, it seems that the non-standard philosophy is most appropriate.

1 One of the first articles to predict global warming due to carbon dioxide. See also (Mon 2013).
2 (Rabelais 1964), Chapter VIII, “Comment Pantagruel, estant à Paris, receult lettres de son père Gargantua, et la copie d’icelles”, p. 137.
3 Author’s translation.
4 Among many examples, let us note, in 2011, the birth of the first “baby-drug”. The parents of a little girl with a genetic disease decided to have a new child to save her. The parents of this “baby-drug” benefited from a dual pre-implantation diagnosis; it was necessary to discard the embryos carrying the disease, select, from among the healthy embryos, the one most compatible with the older sister’s genetic heritage, and implant it in the mother’s womb. While we can salute the technical prowess, we can question the development of such a success, which borders on eugenics. See Bayle 2011.
5 Paracelsus was already trying, in the 15th Century, to experiment with the “chemical” reproduction of life, see Bensaude-Vincent 2001, p. 35.
6 This is particularly the case in the pharmaceutical industry, where the outsourcing of research is constantly progressing: Drug Discovery Outsourcing Market Forecast 2016–2026 Chemistry Services, Biology Services, Lead Optimisation, Lead Identification and Screening, VisionGain, 2016. See also: Pharma R&D Outsourcing Is On The Rise [Online], available at: https://www.biopharmatrend.com/post/30-pharma-rd-outsourcing-is-on-the-rise/.
7 Andreas Malm (2017) describes how English capitalists popularized their ideas in Europe, in their colonies and then all over the world, thus starting the Industrial Revolution.
8 https://www.cyborgfoundation.com/.
9 Les Trente Glorieuses (“The Glorious Thirty”) were a period in France of 30 years of high productivity, average wages, consumption and growth following the end of the Second World War.
10 The story goes that he refused his Bachelor of Arts degree. He also refused to buy the honorary master’s degree, awarded three years later for five dollars. See David Bazy, “Un esprit de décision” in (Thoreau 2007, p. 14).
11 Fragment Usener 485, trad. A.-J. Voelke (1993, p. 48).
12 Letter to Menoeceus.
13 Seneca, De Tranquillitate Animi (On tranquillity of mind), II, 6–15.
14 Ibid.
15 Ibid. II, 37–4, cited by Michel Foucault (2001d, p. 127).
16 Musonius Rufus, fragment XIV: “hêgemon tois anthrôpois esti tôn kata phusin anthrôpô prosêkontôn”, Reliquiae, O. Hense (ed.), p. 71, quoted by Michel Foucault (2001d, p. 130).

===== FILE 9/17: c02.xhtml =====

2
The Non-standard Philosophy for Thinking Innovation

“Don’t be like philosophers, invent philosophy!”

(Laruelle 2019)

2.1. Questioning philosophy

There is a large number of arguments that underline the need to use philosophy to (re)think innovation. It is probably the best discipline; the “preferable” means to analyze, criticize and reconstruct. However, it is necessary, for a rigorous study, to consider the system we propose to use: its relevance, rationality and objectivity. Let’s face it, philosophy is undoubtedly the best, if not the only, device for (re)thinking innovation.

However, is philosophy really the best discipline, the best treatment for innovation? Does it not have problems it first needs to solve in order to come to the aid of another discipline? Doesn’t philosophy have a number of problems to solve in order to leave it entirely free to deal with innovation? Is it not too peremptory to give it the opportunity to deconstruct innovation, which itself has a certain arrogance towards the world? In other words, wouldn’t leaving philosophy as such be tantamount to letting an arrogant discipline heal an arrogant “discipline” that is no less arrogant? Indeed, these two have a lot in common. First of all, there is certainly a certain pretension towards the world. Innovation builds the world, and philosophy thinks about building it. This is how we could summarize these two claims. No other discipline is open to these complacencies, which, however, are not entirely false. Innovation makes the world, no doubt, through its products, services, organizations and processes. However, often abused by its political-liberal ecosystem, it has only become a shadow of itself in its essence while nevertheless presenting itself as a savior. The fact that philosophy claims to think the world is no surprise. Its purpose is to understand the world. However, its history has led it to an assurance that seems to allow it to think about everything and to even have a certain pretense toward reason. This stance is what has led the other disciplines that could historically “depend” on it to take off and extricate themselves from this illegitimate control1. This did not prevent philosophy from continuing to think, but to think about itself.

Let us be quite clear, the purpose here is not to question philosophy as such and to develop the critical axes for its rebuilding. Rather, it is a question of raising the limits of philosophy and using them as a lever to (re)think innovation. The challenge is to successfully find the devices that have made it possible to rethink philosophy and assess how they can be relevant to (re)think innovation. Let us also point out that, as a first step, we will present what non-standard philosophy, derived from non-philosophy, is, and of course we will regularly use its vocabulary, instruments and methods of deconstruction. The challenge is to show how this discipline and its use can be relevant to our discussion of innovation. However, we will also see, both in this chapter and in subsequent chapters, that we will distance ourselves from this non-standard philosophy, taking care to follow its method rather than following its thinking fully or blindly.

2.2. What is non-standard philosophy?

If we want to review the critical device that we propose – philosophy – to question innovation, it is to sweep away (as much as possible) the criticisms that will be made by the use of this discipline, and it is also to avoid naivety about the role of philosophy in relation to other disciplines. There is no doubt that philosophy will somehow take too much pleasure in “bringing down” a discipline like innovation, which believes itself superior through its economic activity, its media exposure, its popular success. Under a guise of innocence, philosophy often takes a wicked pleasure in distilling its sufficiency through morality, politics or ethics for a purpose that only suits it, because it is now untouchable; a discipline above all others.

That is why we are trying to find another analysis, even if it is not perfect. However, it allows, for a short moment, to (re)think innovation “outside” philosophy to better ensure, finally, perhaps paradoxically, that philosophy is the “preferable” tool. We will also see that this exercise makes it possible to imagine a new face for innovation.

It should be noted that “non-standard philosophy” is the other name, we could say the “new” name, of “non-philosophy”, thanks to the publication of Philosophie non-standard : générique quantique, philo-fiction by François Laruelle (2010). However, the anchoring of non-standard philosophy is indeed done with non-philosophy and that is why we propose to understand this thought by examining its development using its original expression. We will demonstrate that the term “non-standard philosophy” is more appropriate, especially when it comes to (re)thinking innovation.

2.2.1. Non-philosophy

The term “non-philosophy” has for many decades become a recognized autonomous syntagm. The term is moreover old (between Kant and Fichte), then was forgotten or clumsily reduced to designate the absence of any philosophical culture. It was François Laruelle’s work that brought it back to life with another meaning, one of invention in thought, that of a theoretical and practical method of transformation rather than interpretation, of philosophical, religious and/or scientific statements. The “non” is not the negation of philosophy – it designates its other use, the only one that can be defined outside its spontaneous belief in itself; a practice of philosophy that is no longer founded and enclosed in the philosophical faith – consisting of being able to think about the world – but which is established in a positive way within the limits of the parentheses of that faith (Laruelle 1989, p. 16). In other words, it is about being able to think beyond the belief in philosophy, which alone would be able to speak and think about the world.

Non-philosophy emerged in contemporary space in the 1980s with the French philosopher François Laruelle, who sought to establish a movement towards generalized deconstruction of the whole Greek–Western philosophical tradition. To do this, he elaborated a thought whose aim was to transform and produce new philosophical texts and objects by modifying the basic assumptions of philosophical work. As Laruelle pointed out, in a spirit that was not without echoing Derrida or Deleuze, it was to make thought “function differently from philosophically” (Laruelle 1996, p. 120). While this non-philosophical thinking has the very direct consequence of producing concepts, they are different from philosophical concepts because they “are valid for philosophy as such [because they are] the expression of a free, non-philosophical theory of philosophy” as Hugues Choplin (2000) explains.

The critical approach of non-philosophy towards philosophy and its nonacademic aspect in practice has had the effect of attracting enmities and disturbing those who consider philosophy as content or a discipline dealing with certain themes.

Laruelle, in fact, reproaches philosophy for appearing to be a repetitive and monotonous, predictable and sufficient discipline that only deals with new themes to think them in the same way since its “creation”. Thus, he states that “philosophers are necessarily content to operate a machine that they have found along the way” (Laruelle 1989, p. 105).

Moreover, according to him, philosophy has a major flaw which is its claim to Reality, to know it, to describe it and to reflect on it. However, philosophy, for non-philosophy, would never have known this Reality (nor humanity, for that matter) (Laruelle 1991, p. 248). This does not prevent philosophy from constantly making this return to Reality and therefore misunderstands by looking back on itself. Finally, non-philosophy seeks to break the circle of thought of philosophy, to include another mechanism of thought. Indeed, the project of non-philosophy is the desire to “proceed to an opening up […] of thinking and to the establishment of an original logic, irreducible to philosophizing” (Choplin 2000, p. 21).

What is important for our purposes is to observe how non-philosophy (which we will later call non-standard philosophy) has sought to dissect the claim of philosophy in order to rethink it and to what extent this non-philosophical tool could be useful to us in (re)thinking innovation. To put it differently, we will use non-philosophy here as a kind of toolbox that allows us to distance our object, open it, dismantle it, criticize it on the one hand in order to bring it to light but also to understand it and to heal it, to repair it so to speak. “We no longer find ourselves here in philosophical questioning or even in its margins, but in another way of thinking that thinks under the necessary and first condition of the given Reality without presupposition and that is not itself a presupposition,” says François Laruelle (1996, pp. 111–112, underlined by Laruelle). Our point is precisely not to be on the margins of innovation thinking by adding an “ethical”, “responsible”, “social” or “societal” dimension, but to provide a new “thinking” of innovation. Our objective is to avoid formulating a classic philosophical critique of innovation. Making the philosophical machine work whatever the current of thought proposed – but often around the “ethical” dimensions – in order to think innovation is something that has already been done, whether it is considered responsible innovation, social innovation, inclusive innovation, or collaborative innovation, for example. These initiatives do not really reach innovation; they seem insufficient to deconstruct innovation (since philosophy is not enough to think philosophy, it needs a new device). These proposals, which are “adjustments” of innovation, remain on the surface (one of the probable reasons, to which we will return, is certainly that philosophy aims at innovation when it is certainly more relevant to focus on the innovator).

Finally, if non-philosophy is of interest to our work, it is because it has, as François Laruelle recalls, two sides. On the one hand, it reduces philosophy to a material state, in other words, a material to be worked on and not a sufficient device; on the other hand, it sets out new rules, not positive, non-philosophical, but reduced to the vision-in-one, of working with this material (Laruelle 1989, p. 17). In other words, there is a desire to dismiss philosophy with the development of new rules that make it possible to work on it. However, this is probably what we should be looking for with innovation. As non-philosophy does, we must first identify where the two faces are and perhaps even have the audacity to create them, namely: to reduce innovation to the state of some material and no longer as the only material of survival, as a device claiming to be the only one to build the world. In addition, to set out new rules for “innovation”. The first side consisting of reducing innovation to a material state can be considered thanks to the contribution of non-philosophy; the second must probably be developed with the innovator. We will look at this in a chapter to follow where we will discuss the question of spiritual exercises.

As stated at the beginning of the chapter, the term “non-philosophical” has recently evolved into the expression “non-standard philosophy”2. This terminological change preserves the essence of non-philosophy, and the challenge for “non-standard philosophy”, rising in a different way from “standard philosophy”, that is, “traditional philosophy, that which is received as an academic standard, smoothed out as a scholastic tradition, with worn or tired axioms, a system of labels and coded gestures, and which is sometimes called living and sometimes dead” (Laruelle 2010). This “new” formula is certainly welcome so as not to interpret an “opposition” to the philosophy that the term “non-philosophy” could imply. This has a particularly interesting meaning for our purpose, which is to develop another way of innovating, which could be called a “non-standard innovation”.

2.3. Using non-standard philosophy as a tool to (re)think innovation

The challenge of rebuilding innovation, as it is possible to see Laruelle’s desire to rebuild philosophy, involves developing new processes and new ways of thinking. For Laruelle:

A philosopher is not only involved in separation or division, being a dissident of the common world. The philosopher simulates the abandonment of the position to better return to what they had surpassed. They simulate adventure, the loss of body and property in order, from this detour or this suspense, to return, under other conditions which are now those of truth, to the world; to bring to it what it would lack and what philosophers call meaning and, beyond that, value and truth. Contrary to what malevolence says, the philosopher descends into the world, they only move away from it with the intention of returning to it […]. The philosophical tradition is a threestranded rope […]. Why three strands? Because there is the ordinary experience to leave, the movement to leave it and the movement to return to it.3

We are making progress in this process concerning our willingness to deal with innovation and what we could aim for with – dare we say – a non-standard innovation: leaving the ordinary experience of innovation as we know it, starting the movement to leave it, considering the movement that will allow us to return to the ordinary world. Because we have to leave the ordinary experience of innovation for all the reasons we have mentioned, for all the distortions that have been made of this discipline. We are at the stage of the movement to leave it with the use of a possible non-standard innovation. This concept is in a way the vehicle allowing movement, both the take-off and the wrenching of current innovation. Finally, we will have to come back, without a shadow of a doubt, because otherwise innovation will continue as it has been in recent decades with all the harmful consequences it has generated.

To do this, it is undoubtedly a question of bringing about new concepts, and a new vocabulary as well. With all the necessary precautions and in an effort to advance innovative thinking, we will try to develop what could be a non-standard innovation. How could it help us achieve our objective of ontological-innovation, “washing” it, succeeding, helping us to (re)think, to what extent can the emergence of such a concept allow us to distance ourselves from the innovation that causes us so many problems? The hypothesis made here is that non-standard innovation is the only use of innovation that is not programmed by it, that this new innovation proposal (which is called non-standard innovation for the sake of convenience in this chapter) allows it to no longer be founded or enclosed in the faith of management, of the capitalist and liberal economy. In concrete terms, this non-standard innovation is the refusal to think in terms of the current world, the rejection of a form of superiority that is imposed on it (in terms of media, financially and morally) and it is certainly the only way for innovation to really become available to all. In other words, by positioning itself outside the financial stakes, private interests and emancipating itself from the expectations that can be placed on it, innovation will above all be a tool for the common good.

2.3.1. Innovation in-Real

Multiple challenges, but also opportunities, arise when it comes to (re)thinking innovation with a non-standard innovation attempt. The first concerns thinking innovation, without which the proposal is neither willing nor able to take root. Because thinking innovation involves thinking about it with the normative frameworks that have made it what it has become: only a means to the survival of organizations. While innovation existed even before it was given a name, one may wonder whether it is now just a shadow of its former self. Overexploited, inappropriate, worn out, misused, misguided, innovation is in every discourse, every strategy and every organizational program. It is both a means and an end in itself. If we sometimes have to go back to the standard frameworks, it is only to better understand the situation, the context, the starting point, and it is only to know who we are really dealing with – in the language of use.

While the proposal for a non-standard innovation is attractive, it is partly because (re)thinking innovation may not be a solution. Isn’t (re)thinking the act of crediting the previous thought and recognizing certain validities, which we can’t be sure of here? And it would therefore not only be a question of redesigning a thought, which can be described as improved, but of doing so while maintaining traditional normative frameworks overall. That is why we need to (re)think, to suspend thinking as it has been given to us, which is what non-standard innovation seems to offer.

If there must be a suspension, it is because of the claim of innovation, which we will detail below. However, to put it simply here, it is linked to the fact that innovation claims to think about everything and to have accomplished everything itself: the past, the present, as well as the future to come, obviously through innovation. Reality is the domain of innovation as it is its victim. Because, in reality, innovation spreads and exploits everything it can, everything it finds around it. And when we have to think innovation and even (re)think it, there is a risk of thinking about it by it and for it, which is obviously something we have to deviate from. Otherwise, there is a risk of adopting the point of view of innovation and thus making it think of itself. To put it another way, innovative thinkers, like innovators, are caught in its claws that they cannot escape from. The innovator believes that he/she must go through it to keep his/her organization going, the thinker of innovation is often his/her slave who makes sure to stretch it to find new forms and uses to make it even stronger, more powerful, which explains a large number of methods and techniques as we have mentioned above. And it is not on the side of anti-innovations that we must count on to (re)think that. These individuals are only reinforcing their power by condemning their failings when it is their use and not their essence that needs to be reviewed, without forgetting the innovator who is the key to the system. Thus, it is preferable to aim at a thought that will suspend innovation, defend a position of non-standard innovation rather than anti-innovation.

As we have mentioned, the “non” is not to be understood as a negation but rather as a tool that will allow us to be cleansed of the approximations, misunderstandings and abuses that affect innovation. Laruelle even points out that the “non” somehow calls into question the “positioning” of philosophy (Blanco 1997, p. 75), which philosophy had claimed for itself. Even if Laruelle mentions this “non” for non-philosophy, it is no less relevant for non-standard philosophy and we are on the same plan. And this non for non-standard innovation is in no way a negation of innovation, but it makes it possible to suspend innovation, particularly its positioning. This is why punctuation, parentheses as well as some capital letters are used. These mark this suspension, show the necessary distance from Reality, a departure from these previous uses and finally avoid crushing and make it possible to invest in a space to think. This use of the non is no less relevant in a worldly form that can take the form of resistance. There is a refusal that occurs with non-standard innovation. A refusal to no longer accept innovation in its pretense, certainly, but also, in its mediocrity, to be at the mercy of private beneficiaries who generally only use it for their own purposes, even if it is obvious that innovators have sought to mix social, inclusive actions at the same time4. There is therefore a need to resist this power of innovation and show it a refusal, a contradiction, an opposition. Innovation can be refused as it is given to us, non-standard innovation can be the mechanism for this refusal.

The innovation we are questioning is its position in Reality, not in thought. Because its thoughtful position is benevolent, at worst naive; its Real position is demonstrated every day on the platform of markets set up by the capitalist system. If we want to think about it, we must move away from it, maintain distance from it, at the risk, if necessary, of bringing it back in another form. We must also move away from its context. Indeed, it is an unhealthy context (capitalist, liberal, selfish, essentially profit-oriented) that does not allow innovation to be thought of in a serene way. Thinking innovation away from its Reality has become a necessity. That is why we are taking the side both of resistance to innovation and at the same time for innovation, which is perhaps paradoxical, a resistance of this current innovation without thought, value or belief (even if we have to consider and highlight rare examples such as the Patagonia company, whose values since its inception have been particularly oriented towards respect for its stakeholders and its ecological impact). A resistance to this overwhelming innovation. If a non-standard innovation is the choice, it is to better find it, to better institute it. It would therefore be inappropriate to see here a thought “against” or that is anti-innovation. And non-standard innovation is innovation, simply innovation.

By targeting a non-standard innovation, it is not a question of rejecting the past, but of refusing to be determined by it when there is a need to deviate from it. It is certainly not all the past, but at the very least the past that has covered innovation with inadequate principles. Non-standard innovation is the inversion of innovation as it is today; this “non” makes it possible to address innovation itself, as it may have been, but above all in the form of Humanity (as does non-standard philosophy with philosophy). In other words, in the form of necessity according to and for Humanity, and no longer in a financial form, for example.

2.3.1.1. Knowing, learning, daring to (re)think innovation

(Re)thinking means asking at least two questions. First, is it up to innovation to take charge of the world’s progress, as has been the case for several decades? Indeed, to what extent should a discipline, a technique, a method take charge of the way the world works? Second, in what way does innovation seem to be the most willing to do this?

This dimension to want to make, create, develop and build seems intrinsic to living species and more particularly to the human species. Moreover, the desire of Nietzschean power (Nietzsche 2003, p. 87)5 as well as the Bergsonian vital momentum (Bergson 1998) underline the motivation of the living to develop, to grow and to create as well. This desire for the human species presents itself in different ways. Certainly, there is the desire to survive, and physical and psychological adaptation will develop characteristics aimed at this. But there are other desires, such as solving problems that some people consider essential. In other words, some individuals are motivated to develop organizations, some find solutions because they believe they have the answer to the problems they have encountered and that others will find this solution relevant and will either use or buy it. If this is the reality, it is not without creating major problems. Moreover, when Plato expresses that “the true creator is necessity, who is the mother of our invention” (Plato 2002, p. 221), the question to be asked is: what is “necessity”? Is it really necessary to solve a problem just because it exists? Do we necessarily have to formulate an answer to every difficulty, every problem? This principle, which is generally at the origin of large (and smaller) commercial organizations, is never called into question. However, we can question this “primary need/problem = solution to be issued” approach. Just because a problem arises and corresponds to a need of a large number of individuals does not mean that it is necessary to formulate a response. The absence of a response can be an answer in itself, it is even an act of resistance that is entirely legitimate. It is even an act of thought – which innovation lacks.

The crush between the problem and its response, without a space of thought between the two, is the source of many difficulties. It is probably the cause of the reprehensible hold of innovation on the rest of the world. Innovation today is that way of doing things that does not, or hardly, seeks to foresee the consequences of this primary way of doing things. Things are done without taking the time to think about it fully. The short- and medium- term consequences on the near or distant ecosystem resulting from responses to problems/needs are hardly addressed at best. There will still be the assessment to be made to judge the economic performance or improvements necessary to be even more competitive. This is the innovation today, this is the innovation whose disappearance must be questioned, these are the questions that are at the root of non-standard innovation. And it is not the absence of innovation, but at least the suspension of innovation as it happens, its interruption and wrenching to come and associate it with the whole mechanism: thought.

To put it another way, innovation does not think, but it does provide given-without-giveness. In other words, it stays away from what it produces; it remains alien to its own (often financial) productions, once they have been made. Whatever its productions, what will evaluate innovation is the financial result. If it fails, it is not the innovation that is condemned; it is the invention that has not worked. The principle of innovation is protected and will continue until the next attempt. That is why it is given-without-giveness despite the given, despite the actual achievements. The confiscation of the data, at least the suspension of the data, finally makes it possible to question innovation. It is by removing its productive attributes, its concentration on the purpose, that it is possible to (re)think it with fresh eyes.

The second fundamental question is the following: is it up to innovation to develop a practical theory, more precisely to think about its Reality? A priori, it seems that it does not, and as proof it acts without questioning its practice, without questioning its basis or even its aims. That said, just because it doesn’t need it to exist doesn’t mean that its existence wouldn’t be better with thought! If this is at all possible. Theories about innovation and academic thinking about innovation are often only descriptions when they are not “reflections” on its improvements6. But these only have one purpose: to improve their hold on Reality, strengthen their practice, develop their performances, never return to their essence, which is “normal” in the end since these “reflections” are based on innovation when it is a question of tearing themselves away from it to imagine an above-ground thought, without being attached to the worldly space in which it is located. There may well be “ethical” thoughts that could be assimilated to questions about its practice (such as responsible innovation, inclusive innovation, social innovation, etc.), but here again, as already mentioned, it is often constituted as a thought based on innovation and, finally, it is only something that adds up (often seen as an additional constraint) if it is fundamentally challenged.

The proposal here is to finally think of innovation, and this in a new way, with innovation itself, as independent of its liberal, capitalist failings, turned towards profit alone when it is also (only?) a question of thinking of the common good. We could even say that it is a question of purging innovation in order to think according to innovation and to stop thinking innovation.

2.3.2. The principle of sufficient innovation

Overwhelming and with almost limitless power, innovation is based on the principle of sufficiency. This situation gives innovation an extraordinary situation that paradoxically places it in an extra-worldly position, when in reality it is. It is obviously on both sides, it crushes society, it plays it, but it makes sure to stay beyond the affairs of worldliness and can even look at it with disdain. This situation of sufficiency is no different from the one to which philosophy can claim. Let us recall that Laruelle said that it is “the philosophical sufficiency that I am trying to destroy […] everything is good to take in philosophy, except its sufficiency” (Laruelle 2015). The French philosopher approached the Principle of Sufficient Philosophy (PSP) by qualifying it as self-defense, by which philosophy claims to be close to Reality and sometimes even to be Reality or to realize it. Thus, the Principle of Sufficient Innovation (PSI) could be seen in the same way as a form of self-defense – which now confers on the attack – by which innovation claims to be Reality. But as we have pointed out, it is rather in argument and a position of authority, innovation is Reality, in-Real, and that is the criticism we can make of it. This Reality is determined in every aspect of our environment, whether it is obviously in the production of goods and services, or if it is in the political, social and educational spheres. Nothing escapes the Real world of innovation. It is only by removing innovation from its claim that it is possible to imagine another way forward. This is the challenge of the possible emergence of a non-standard innovation. This would be the thought of innovation without its Real, “naturally” uncovered part, that is nonetheless decisive to bring under control the overwhelming innovation.

This sufficiency comes from the belief that innovation changes the world. In reality, it should preferably be said that it changes the world it wants, to give it the shape it wants and without worrying about undesirable and unforeseen effects. This is explained by the fact that innovation thinks of Reality as a whole. However, it cannot really think of Reality. It can only think of a certain Reality. And this poses three problems.

The first is that it changes a certain world that does not think, a capitalist world crushed by its liberal convictions and characteristics which is the pursuit of profit for private groups; but that does not mean that other worlds could not think and rebel. Innovation is now clearly limited to its business aspect, its ability to develop a competitive advantage to crush others, its financial gluttony and its hegemonic desire to monopolize everything it can. It is impossible for it to think otherwise, caught in the clutches of the stultitia we have named above. Unable to think of its role, what it could do differently (differently for a better common good), it turns in on itself and keeps growing, by digging the groove of liberalism on the one hand and by constituting itself into a typhoon on the other hand, sweeping aside everything in its path. What is terrible about this newly constituted innovation monster is the confiscation of innovation, too often reserved for liberal “values” where only profits, benefits and powers matter, forgetting community, sharing and the common good. No one seems to be able to question this, and this is the second problem with the Principle of Sufficient Innovation.

Indeed, the second problem is that innovation overwhelms other worlds that may be in agony or on a development path at best. The Principle of Sufficient Innovation feeds itself into its liberal ecosystem and does not look at adjacent ecosystems, or only does so to engulf them. Developing countries, for example, have a crucial need for innovation to survive, in all categories of their lives: education, health, administration, economies. But innovation does not enter into it, or only to a limited extent, because it is now constituted only to please itself in the developed systems that will feed it: the United States, Europe, and now China and its associates. There are many attempts at neo-innovation in societies that are watching their development. Consider the Jugaad innovation, for example, which seeks to find practical, useful solutions available to all without any profit motive (Rajnou et al. 2013). Or the innovation “bottom of the pyramid” (Panzera and Owen 2018) whose idea is to launch initiatives aimed at profitably selling goods adapted to the needs of people in poverty. However, these initiatives without investment, without real dissemination, often involve more “Do It Yourself” than real innovations designed to bring about concrete change in those societies that would certainly and as a matter of priority need it.

The third problem that connects the first two is that we no longer know what the foundation of the world is: what it is for, what its trajectories are, how to develop it or protect it. The first problem shows that innovation is plunged into inertia and no one knows how to stop it, if only to slow down this way of doing things. The second finally highlights the ever-increasing divide between those who have everything and want more, blinded by power and money, and those who need innovation stripped of any unhealthy desire for control or profit. This is perfectly illustrated by environmental issues, for example, the stakes around transhumanism as well, where only a small group of individuals are taking on the protection and development of their bodies, to live as long as possible while being more and more “efficient”. The risk of a destruction of the current world cannot be ruled out if new thinking is not introduced to avoid the spread of dominant thinking and to attempt to reduce innovation inequalities. We have to rebuild the foundations common to human beings, for the benefit of all. This means reviewing the foundations of innovation to free it from its sufficiency, considering it as a tool, a means and not an end. Finally, this implies that innovation is not a possession, but something shared, that it is a network of power and not a confiscation of it.

By distinguishing the Principle of Sufficient Innovation from the essence of innovation, we are trying to extract authority from innovation, an attempt to separate the wheat from the chaff and recover the original concept, stripped of those bad attributes that are ultimately recent. The essence of innovation is unchanged (it has never changed), but we will ensure here that the sufficiency that has been affixed to it is removed, and its high strength really requires a removal.

2.3.3. Innovation and ego

The Principle of Sufficient Innovation is so dominant because innovation does not doubt itself. As we have said, both society and supposedly extra-society, this one is in a position of arch domination. We can understand this position when we see that innovation is based on the ego, that is, it is turned towards itself, it turns on itself and is only interested in that which can make it increase (not necessarily grow). There is no doubt that innovation is resolutely worldly and that is all there is to it. It is simply unable to think outside itself, to stand at a certain distance. Otherwise, it would have looked at the world with a little more empathy and would not have hesitated to take such an intense interest in less commercial, less media-oriented but more necessary aspects (world hunger, education, the environment, accessible health for all). In this constitution, it is therefore a question of (re)thinking innovation, of detaching the society part from the extra-society part or at any rate of ensuring that this can really happen. Consequently, if a non-standard innovation could emerge, it would have to be above all a resolutely transcendental discipline, which could allow distance, with at the same time roots in immanence. The distinction is obviously a major one. Innovation sees the world only revolve around it, and in a way, that is not entirely false. However, it should be pointed out that it has sought to make this situation possible and especially for a specific world. Indeed, if a certain world – the dominant, known, mediatized one that has established itself as a norm – has been able to build itself on the principles of innovation (through the developments necessary for its survival), the construction of other worlds, parallel, different, previous (and obviously later) has not less existed. The qualification of the existence of a world is not specific to its sustainability, exposure or hegemony. The existence of worlds where innovation has not played the role that it can play in our known world is not only reprehensible, but desirable. However, the question does not quite arise in these terms. The problem comes from the hold it may have had on certain worlds and, in this case, the one we are crushed by.

As we said earlier, it is through its ego that it has imposed itself on everyone: by its desire to dominate the world. Innovation has not only succeeded in making it seem essential, but also in making every individual act according to it. Omnipresent – we think and act by and for it, omnipotent – it controls and can a priori do everything (it has the desire to) – it feeds on its subjects-individuals who live only to satisfy it. This magnifying ego is what can kill it, because it is nourished, pampered, desired, and nothing can make it question itself anymore. It risks falling asleep, suffocated by this surplus of itself, which it itself has produced, generated, and at the same time suffocated its slave protégés.

Without ego, innovation does not seek – would not have sought – to increase but to grow, and not necessarily from itself. It would therefore not have seen a possible development by itself exclusively but also by others, environments, devices, tools and contexts. And it is to prevent this magnification, this attachment to a ground that a non-standard innovation must be transcendental. It is in no way driven by a short-term visionary character; it does not conceal anything that would only serve its own purpose or the interests of a small group of individuals. Transcendence to this characteristic of being disinterested, of pulling upwards the one who recognizes it as such.

It cannot even be said that innovation has remained only at the imminent stage, rather than at the crushing stage – it is unable to resist at that stage. It focused on solving problems for the here and now in a process of immediacy, with the objective of spontaneous satisfaction. Contrarily, this possible non-standard innovation is determined through reflection, the ability to think beyond its own end, beyond its immediate interest, beyond any plan of immanence.

2.4. (Re)thinking innovation, a non-standard innovation?

The three objectives of non-standard innovation could also be inspired by the non-standard/non-philosophy. These are presented to succeed:

1) with an individual’s thought;
2) with a transcendental method, only rigorous by the immanence and reality it guarantees to thought;
3) the need for a quasi-scientific theoretical domination of philosophy (Laruelle 1991, p. 17).

The objectives of this non-standard innovation could be these in a way that is obviously appropriate, namely:

– Non-standard innovative thinking for the individual. And not as is the case today, a thought of innovation for “some” individuals.
– A transcendental method for non-standard innovation, that is a method that does not remain at the stage of immanence, more precisely that does not remain at the primary stage of superficiality and simplicity. Nor does it remain at the level of profit-seeking, for example. It is not a question of excluding the search for profit, which is obviously necessary, to know how to extract oneself from this single concern in order to rise, grow and take a more holistic position. It is uncomfortable to oppose for this objective transcendence and immanence. At the same time, a non-standard innovation must be immanent, it needs to be in direct contact with reality, with everyday life and the challenges we have noted (education, health, environment). In other words, we can aim for a non-standard approach to innovation as an immanental principle as philosophy can be immanent (Tousseul 2010). That is to say, a method of thinking capable of addressing transcendental, holistic issues, removed from power, disciplines, individual issues and that is, at the same time, interested in the progress needed for the here and now.

Non-standard innovation must be a quasi-scientific discipline. Because it is not a question of drawing up a new thought that is incapable of proving its interest or reduced to a proposal that does not have practical application. However, it cannot have this single directive, at least in its constitution, which must be transdisciplinary, open to both the arts and the humanities, to both the hard and social sciences.

Indeed, if the history of innovation has been made on the altar of engineering sciences with the fields of mechanics, energy and automation, it is the lack of social sciences that has recently been lacking. The absolute concentration on technical developments has made us forget the reason for innovation. More specifically, to whom is the innovation addressed? Who are we completing these things for? These are questions that are absent from innovation developments. And if all social sciences are to be considered in reviewing innovation (sociology, psychology, economics, demography, geography, history, anthropology, ethnology, ethnography, etc.), political science is certainly the most important to address. Innovation is a political issue: organizational policy, public policy and urban policy. Whether in its politikos sense, relating to the organization and exercise of power; politeia, which defines a structure and its functioning; or politikè, which refers to the practice of power. Innovation is found in every place. It means innovating to organize, to exercise power differently, to innovate in structures and their functioning or to innovate to practice power. It is not always accepted that innovation is a political issue, and that is precisely what this non-standard innovation must do. Consider it as a political issue and articulate proposals so that innovation is no longer marginal to policies (public, private, social, societal, etc.) but is well and truly integrated, shared and debated.

These three objectives are among the foundations of non-standard innovation, they could be the foundation for the creation of the materials intended for it. They help to understand the common thread: innovative thinking for innovation; the method: both transcendental and immanent; and its desire: to be a fact-based discipline. It is from these three objectives that materials (texts, teachings, communications, methods and techniques) must be developed.

2.4.1. The foundations of non-standard innovation

What could the hypothesis of a non-standard innovation really cover? If there were a non-standard thought of innovation, that is, a focus on the orchestration of vital devices without simple adjustments to current processes, then crush-innovation would be absent, or at least slowed down. It seems that this proposal would fill the void of thought that leaves room for innovation in its most hegemonic characteristics. The hypothesis of a non-standard innovation would avoid the pseudo-Parmenid crushing which is such that the same is being and thinking; today, innovation is being, since there is no thinking. More than being, innovation is Reality, thinking is completely negligible. In fact, a non-standard innovation makes it possible to insert oneself into gaps that make it impossible to crush, but above all to begin to glimpse a path where thought can become a counterweight to innovation in Reality. The same person can then continue to be and think, but this time by combining doing and thinking. In other words, there is no doubt that thought must come together with innovation, from which it is excluded today. And it is indeed an association between doing and thinking. For it is not a question of no longer “doing”, but of doing with thought, with conscience to put it differently. This means that innovation must no longer simply be conviction and affirmation, but must be conceived, developed, implemented, launched and experienced with arguments and reflections, with conscience and doubts, with questions and hypotheses.

The implementation of a non-standard innovation is necessary for all the reasons mentioned. And from the outset, it should be pointed out that this is part of the perspective, as Deleuze and Guattari want – for philosophy – of a creation of concepts driven by non-standard innovation. When the two philosophers affirm that “philosophy is the art of training, inventing, making concepts” (Deleuze and Guattari 1991, p. 8), the authors recall that philosophy has had and still has to undergo the attacks of rival disciplines that have claimed to challenge its power to create concepts, that is, to have intelligibility and understanding. However, this power of creation is also a power of self-position. This is what happened with innovation, which in a way can be seen as an economic and managerial concept that has positioned itself and appropriated a certain power. Philosophy should not be excluded from these reflections, taking part in the debate and the creation of concepts, especially since they concern the future of humanity. We therefore need to go through a production of concepts in relation and with regard to innovation, but with philosophy, to succeed in thinking. And even if they can be criticized and abused, they have the merit of existing and they are necessary attempts. It is a question of laying the foundations for a future world, a (re)thought world that is no longer under the auspices of current innovation, no longer under the authority of worldliness, no longer under the yoke of liberalism and capitalism but of this new given that non-standard innovation is. This is a better idea than innovation.

The existence of non-standard innovation can and must take many forms, in many different places. It will thus be possible to make it active and also to make it possible to remove the current innovation authority. Its use is therefore just as important in medical schools as in research and development centers, and its presence is just as important in commercial organizations (or not) as it is in the learning of management sciences. This is because the foundations of a non-standard innovation must by default be laid in an academic sphere as well as in a practical ecosystem. This contribution must make it possible to think innovation differently, to reflect on ways of innovating without being set by decades of past methods, now unsuitable, to innovate while taking care of the common good.

To do this, it will be a matter of producing texts, language and teachings, because they are the means and vehicles of change. The material is still to be produced, to be constituted. Let us wager that we are laying a foundation of stone here. The material can only be made through the three features that qualify the non-philosophical practice that we must take up again: freedom, rigor and generality (Choplin 2000, p. 82). Freedom is a major first pillar. Any (re)thinking innovation must be done in a free way. On the one hand, in order not to be manipulated by organizations that would not welcome this challenge, and on the other hand, to succeed in thinking autonomously without being influenced by a history or context that is too strong, too heavy to bear, and that we fear being questioned. It is this freedom of innovation that will allow new materials to emerge to promote non-standard innovation. This makes it possible to redefine innovation and not simply with a philosophical or non-philosophical approach, but with a focus that is not briefly addressed, and not exclusively “business”.

Freedom does not exclude rigor and this non-standard innovation proposal must be developed with knowledge of the history of innovation in order not to return to the mistakes that led it to what it has become. Rigor is also important to ensure that non-standard innovation will not be an anti-innovation or a collection of inventions, ideas whose effectiveness is reduced and whose impacts are modest. This is why rigor is necessary in reasoning, such as ensuring the logic that must prevail in the development of a non-standard innovation and that must also be applied in the drafting of texts, in the philosophy of implementation, and in its teaching. Finally, rigor is required to ensure that this non-standard innovation is transdisciplinary. We cannot allow this non-standard innovation to be constituted and developed for itself and by itself as was the case for innovation. By its very nature, it is omnipresent in all segments of society and must integrate the disciplinary fields around it. This will only make this non-standard innovation more consistent and reasoned by surrounding it with history and philosophy, science and literature, reflection on aesthetics and architecture for example. This need to go beyond the disciplines resonates with the third issue, which is generality.

Non-standard innovation cannot be entrusted solely to the field of organization management. This was not the case at the “origin” of innovation, which was philosophical, scientific, naturally in a pluralism that seems to have been forgotten. Non-standard innovation must find this essence again. The generality underlines that everyone must speak out to shape the sustainable, desirable world, and not only the proponents of a liberal capitalism that all too often acts for the sake of profitability – which is not without paradox since the advantage of liberalism is by definition that it accepts pluralism. It also means that management sciences cannot confiscate this field either. We need the world’s purpose to be transdisciplinary and philosophy-based, like non-standard philosophy, as well as other disciplines, sciences, knowledge and ways of thinking can also contribute to it.

This non-standard innovation can only be understood as a form of overcoming, a radicalization or an accomplishment of innovation. Admittedly, it is systematically rooted in a material, that of innovation (since it seeks to achieve its original purpose), but with a different paradigm, necessarily different since innovation as such has failed7. More precisely, it is not so much that it failed, as philosophy has “failed” according to Laruelle. It is because its project didn’t come to fruition in the way it was imagined. Innovation ended up being caught between liberal, selfish claws and found itself under shareholder pressure, which saw it as a means of generating profit. This is all the more damaging as many innovators and innovations have, contrarily, ensured that humanist proposals and solutions are put in place for the common good. However, it is only a minority of innovators and the criticism we are making applies rather to the vast majority of innovations.

To draw a parallel with Laruelle’s non-standard philosophy, what the French philosopher reproaches philosophy for is certainly not having accomplished its project by thinking only about itself, to only having pretensions of thoughts about the objects and themes it claims to deal with. And to escape this paralyzing situation, it was necessary to develop a radical way of thinking that somehow goes beyond philosophy, even if it remains the primary material.

The same applies to innovation, there is a need to go beyond its framework in a radical way and ensure its achievement. This cannot be done by it alone and for it alone. It must take another form – non-standard innovation – it must articulate other disciplines, it must maintain rigor in its purpose: to accomplish the common good and take care of its ecosystem.

2.4.2. Non-standard innovation practice

The practice of non-standard innovation is revealed in several ways; more precisely it is determined with five pillars whose means that we have stated above enable its deployment (texts, messages, communication, teaching, etc.).

2.4.2.1. Politics

Non-standard innovation is an ethical issue, “philosophical”, but above all political as we have already pointed out above. The seizing of city life through innovation must be reviewed with non-standard innovation. Public and private policies must understand that the future can only be achieved with an old vision of innovation and non-standard innovation must now be part of the vocabulary, language and themes to be addressed. This non-standard political innovation is a concrete demonstration that the future must be shaped for the benefit of all, with all – that is, in a collective and collaborative way. The example of Wikipedia is interesting in this respect; this website is in a way the opposite of what classical innovation is all about. And it is very clear that its scope and challenges are political. First and foremost, it has the desire to make knowledge available to all. Second, it is not a hierarchical construction but a collective and collaborative one. Finally, if there is a need for profits to survive and operate this site, it is not in a quest for profit in the first instance but rather for the common good. It is necessary to highlight this type of initiative, “innovation as it should be” or non-standard innovation. And the major policies to encourage “innovation” must clearly announce the shape, the types of “innovations” that we want to see appear: for whom should they emerge? How should they emerge? And with what social and political dimensions? For example, non-standard innovation issues in education and training must emerge in terms of need, need in the short, medium and long term for both young pupils and older, more advanced students, and not in terms of the budget to be managed without knowing what is behind it. In this field, it seems that in recent years we have been seeking to innovate more on the basis of an available budget than on the basis of real needs. Similarly, for public policies of innovation in health or transport and mobility, there is a need to start from needs that already have many constraints, rather than from a budget envelope. As such, the collective, collaborative aspect of citizens is of course relevant. Consultations, surveys, studies and analyses concerning mobility needs, for example, are sources of policy innovation.

It is important that providing this non-standard innovation spirit can see it emerge in public policies, because they must be notable. They have the need to set an example of what can be done for the common good, for a truly human future. It is not a question of neglecting the economic apparatus, of despising the resounding and stumbling need to implement such policies, but of not considering progress, advances, and the response to needs according to potential profits.

2.4.2.2. Information

This is why politicians (public, private) would certainly have an interest in communicating, informing and trying this non-standard innovation proposal. We have to recover the spirit of “innovation” and it may be necessary to go through the emergence of this new term. And this must be explained, defined, understood broadly as we have tried to establish the first steps above.

Non-standard innovation must be owned by everyone. At different levels, different stages, different sectors, it must be applied. Informing that other forms of use, methods and processes can take place to constitute the world(s) is essential so that it is not reserved for a domain, an elite or an audience. This is the case for collaborative platforms as we have noted, whether for knowledge sharing, new product development or public policy participation. It is also the integration and encouragement of public debates on the occasion of the emergence of new ideas in research and development laboratories (before they are released to the market). It also means having an educational approach to explain with transparency the stakes of innovation, its necessity and its return on investment. To put it another way, the idea of non-standard innovation is to take the opposite of confidential, even secret innovation, non-shared developments, hidden enrichment. The advent of another way of doing things is possible and showing it, informing people of the possibilities, and sharing it is crucial for the success and appropriation of a non-standard innovation for all. This is why it is important to put this new way of “innovating” in the spotlight: showing, informing, speaking about and encouraging people to do things differently. It means questioning the principle: innovation = growth → growth = use → use = richness → richness = well-being. Non-standard innovation replays the cards and seeks to develop a system: non-standard innovation => common good. To allow this, however, we must move away from the communications of past Liberal-Conservative policies for which only the old world, the old system, can work.

2.4.2.3. Teaching

The next step after information is teaching; learning to innovate in another way. Innovation is often taught in management schools and faculties, and often confined to these exclusive fields. However, the innovation concerns students in medicine as well as in politics or in sport, as well as in economics or social sciences. In other words, if innovation is everywhere, it is taught “almost” nowhere, and it is important to distinguish between:

1) what is being done in innovation management;
2) innovation in each discipline;
3) innovation regarding each discipline.

It is thus necessary to identify the places where its teaching is delivered even if it is not called “innovation”. We must understand its use in the field concerned and undertake a reform to achieve non-standard innovation.

Being the result of mainly technical courses from engineering schools, innovation has remained stuck to questions of method and process. From the emergence of ideas to the market, including filters, whether marketing, financial, commercial, or technical, classical innovation education is sometimes close to project management methods: we deal less with content and the type of ideas, than with the process itself, commonly called innovation process management. It is therefore a question of acquiring methods for students to search for ideas, to know how to evaluate costs, how to communicate about something new, to learn to manage a new product’s production, to make a new product accepted in the organization, to succeed in spreading this new product in its ecosystem, to think about pedagogical approaches to make its usefulness understood.

Innovation education is about giving students a detailed understanding of the entire innovation process through different chapters. Overall, the challenge of the chapters, of learning, is to ensure that the innovation process is as efficient as possible. We would never find a chapter dedicated to the innovator’s “qualities” as an individual, nor courses explicitly devoted to the question of the relevance of innovation for the common good or how to uncorrelate innovation from the question of profit.

The emergence of non-standard innovation could be an opportunity to rethink innovation education, not through the process of innovation, but through individuals – which we will see in detail later on in this book – and in the possibility of thinking about the purpose of innovation. The challenge now is to deconstruct innovation education by focusing less on the process of doing than on the why. Learning to philosophize in a non-standard way is learning to question why we do what we do, for the benefit of what and who. In other words, the teaching of non-standard innovation is a teaching of doubts and questioning, challenging and resistance. And the objectives of non-standard innovation must always be kept in mind:

1) having a non-standard innovative thinking for the individual;
2) having an immanent stance on innovation;
3) keeping in mind the quasi-scientific nature of the non-standard innovation discipline to ensure the necessary rigor even by combining disciplines, raising doubts, relying as much on hard sciences as on social sciences.
2.4.2.4. The non-standard innovator

Thus, the non-standard innovator is the emergence of a new being which will be able to train in what it does, inform in transparency, implement what we could call innovation, but with the individual in mind: what he/she needs, without damaging his/her ecosystem. However, the answer can only be immanent and not simply individual. In other words, the non-standard innovator must have an extraordinary ability to move beyond the exclusive demand of the individual to question himself/herself by going beyond sectoral shackles, going beyond the pursuit of profit, ensuring that short-term demands are rejected, the essence of which would only suit private interests and neglect ecosystems. If this non-standard innovator must learn to train, inform and take a high view of his/her actions, this must be articulated with extremely concrete problems. The non-standard innovator must have the necessary qualities to take an interest in, and question, everyday life and the very concrete issues which, as we have said, can concern communication as much as education, health and mobility. Finally, this non-standard innovator must develop a cross-fertilized scientific perspective as we have said: hard sciences and management sciences, social sciences and more particularly political science on what he/she does and proposes. It is not a question of focusing on ideas or approximations, but on facts, anticipation and consideration. For each non-standard innovation proposed, a scientific, solid, reliable and rigorous analysis of what is being done for its organization and ecosystem must be orchestrated. Ongoing monitoring must be implemented in order to track, to determine the development of the proposal.

2.4.2.5. The means

The means of non-standard innovation are those we have noted, whether they are education, the media, or information channels in the broad sense. However, the main element remains the production of materials and content. These materials are concretized with proposals and methods, a language, words, sentences, texts. Non-standard innovation requires research, written production and confrontation, which is in its infancy. It is also a question of setting up debates to imagine what “tomorrow’s innovation” can be and perhaps discuss the attributes, the components of a non-standard innovation. Because its reality can only be envisaged with disputes, exchanges between the “innovators” of today and the producers of tomorrow, between the “philosophers” and the citizens. Nothing should emerge from a single small group of individuals for another small group of individuals, especially if another group of individuals is likely to suffer consequences.

We must keep in mind that no one will spontaneously want this non-standard innovation, that there will be strong resistance, that it will be ridiculed, despised, marginalized – especially by those who support current innovation, but also by a general public that will not understand its role and purpose. Perhaps also by intellectuals in management, political or philosophical sciences, who will see in this proposal only a misunderstanding. And yet, this is the major problem, because we need intellectuals to bring about the new world. Intellectuals are the neglected actors of innovation. They have no say, no involvement on their part in productions and achievements. They are simply cast aside. However, their contribution is valuable, because they are the ones who can slip from thought into the interstices of innovation.

Intellectuals in the broad sense, whether philosophers, thinkers, sociologists or anthropologists, should no longer have the suppressed voice within organizations when it comes to innovation. They should actually take over the field. By abandoning this field, they are abandoning the world’s march, its understanding and its future. The honor of intellectuals is to be concerned about the world in motion through the actors who do it. Non-standard innovation should enable intellectuals to take on or resume speaking out on this theme, which is at the same time political, social and societal, in organizations and in the public debate. It is up to them to extend the definition and understanding of the theme to ensure its future.

2.5. “Invent philosophy!”, let’s invent innovation

“Don’t be like philosophers, invent philosophy! Change its practice! Treat it experimentally like any material! If you need a program, here it is…”8, exclaims François Laruelle to force philosophers to leave the commentary, to do other than repeat the academic tradition of philosophy that turns on itself. The question is the same for us here as philosophers, as thinkers of organizations, as citizens. And the issue of this first part, which ends with this injunction to invent innovation, is a formidable summary. Because we need to invent innovation. The way of thinking innovation over the last 50 years by essentially looking only at performance no longer makes any real sense. The consequences of innovation without a conscience, of the search for innovation for a population determined by a determined population, with the sole purpose of profit in sight needing to be rethought. How can we invent innovation? How can we think innovation differently? Once again, if many attempts have been made to (re)design innovation, this has mainly been implemented with a desire to make processes more efficient, possibly to make innovation more responsible, but these attempts have always only been based on what already existed, on the basis of existing innovation. The proposal made here in this chapter has sought to counter these experiences and to (re)think the edges of innovation, perhaps even outside it.

To propose a non-standard innovation to distance oneself from innovation, to succeed in thinking afresh this discipline is certainly not ideal, certainly open to criticism. The conservatism of innovation and the “classicism” of philosophy lend themselves rather badly to originality. Philosophy and innovation are always presented in the name of “tradition” and “seriousness”, and yet we need “new” philosophical tools to allow us to think of “new” ways of making the world. We have to escape from recycling, out of the diversion of philosophy and that is what we have tried to do by convening an “other” philosophy for a “new” innovation, at least a new way of (re)thinking it. It is important to be aware that non-standard philosophy itself could find fault with it, that the reappropriation we are making does not suit it, that it is perhaps being flouted to feel used in a certain way for a management science. It must be admitted, we used the non-standard philosophy, as Foucault said of his books and concepts that they should be used as small toolboxes. It must be said that non-standard philosophy is a tool that we have taken up, used and if its use is not exactly as it should be, if its use is questionable, if its use is not made in an orthodox way, we hypothesize that the result, the purpose allowed by this approach is certainly what we should retain, a path for the deconstruction of innovation. Perhaps it is even a way of bringing non-standard philosophy to life, of putting it into practice when it was founded as a theory (or according to the One or human thought) (Laruelle 1998). To anchor it in ground that is not its own or even the subject of its criticism is perhaps in some way a form of homage to it.

Non-standard innovation is probably a way of (re)thinking innovation. This new constituted apparatus allows us to maintain a real distance from Real innovation, to think philosophically and non-philosophically, since it is thanks to this discipline that we have been able to constitute this apparatus. This is only the beginning of a work, a proposal, aware that we are the task to be accomplished: materials, texts, messages, confrontations, proposals are to be produced. However, the beginnings of the guideline are traced; a first step is proposed.

We know the limits, we know the risks of this theory and that is why we do not stop at this single proposal to (re)think innovation. We need to continue to seek ways of appropriating innovation through philosophy by seeking to maintain an external view of it. We must always continue to maintain and develop the critical devices that can enable us to deconstruct innovation in a radical and unprecedented way. Non-standard philosophy may not be exclusive and other philosophical approaches may have relevant arguments to make.

1 See (Hadot 1995, pp. 385–389).
2 It should be noted that François Laruelle continues to develop his thinking and other terminology appears as his work progresses. See Anne-Françoise Schmid, “The triptychs of non-philosophy”, for the Laruelle and Non-standard Philosophy: The Last Resistance symposium, organized by Pierre Bonneels and Takeshi Morisato at the Maison des sciences de l’homme of the Université libre de Bruxelles (February 8–9, 2019).
3 “Y a-t-il une philosophie populaire ?” course handout Télédix, Université Paris Ouest Nanterre La Défense, 1993–1994, p. 3, emphasized by Laruelle.
4 Bill Gates and his foundation are an example.
5 See also (Lapoujade 2013).
6 Blue Ocean Strategy, Disruptive Innovation, and Business Model Canvas, which are highly successful innovation methods, do not question the responsibility of the products or services they will generate.
7 In the same way that we can say in a way, with Laruelle, that philosophy has failed, except for its history. See (Laruelle 1991, pp. 172–174), emphasized by Laruelle.
8 François Laruelle, Lettre non-philosophique from November 9, 2006, Organisation non-philosophique internationale (ONPHI).

===== FILE 10/17: c03.xhtml =====

3
A Phenomenology of Innovation

“First, anyone who seriously intends to become a philosopher must ‘once in his life’ withdraw into himself and attempt, within himself, to overthrow and build anew all the sciences that, up to then, he has been accepting. Philosophy – widsom (sagesse) – is the philosophizer’s quite personal affair.”

(Husserl 1999)

3.1. Passing through phenomenology

The radical autonomy of innovation – regardless of who it depends on – must be pursued with no external pressure to make it more suitable for contemporary challenges. This radical autonomy requires the removal of any connection with innovation as it has been developed in recent decades. It is necessary to continue via a new perspective, a method of empowerment, a way of extracting oneself from the impurities that are often capitalist, from the fantasies and wanderings of innovation. If this view can only be philosophical, perhaps it is time, or it is appropriate, to stop using an “external” discipline, as was the non-standard philosophy in our previous section, but preferably to use a strictly philosophical tool to try to “solve” these problems.

The challenge here is to look at innovation as a production or vector of phenomena, and therefore no longer be interested in its consequences. Usually the consequences are the most monitored, especially if they are financially assessable. The phenomena, more precisely the phenomenality of innovations, must be analyzed, i.e. the phenomena generated in several ways: phenomena in the sense of noted facts, observed, in the sense of singularities, originalities, in the sense also of what appears to the consciousness. And this can be translated into many areas: financial, ecological, social, in market and non-market sectors, or in education. The analysis of innovations as phenomena and not as consequences makes it possible to establish a radical autonomy of innovation. It is about looking at innovation without artifice that could alter a truth, without self-serving influence, without an environment that conditions judgment towards it. The challenge is to describe innovations for what they are and what they must bring, and not only for the fruits that are used without considering the tree, roots, leaves and soil necessary for production.

The phenomenology developed by Edmund Husserl in the tradition of Fichte and Hegel seems to be an advantageous way to help us understand innovation and its phenomena. This new and original way of forging a criticism of innovation will not fail to generate criticisms here too. However, given the complexity and often the inability to think innovation differently, we must try the initiative. As a science of phenomena, that is, the science of experiences versus the objects of the outside world, phenomenology may be a path that will allow us to review innovation, to take an interest in its experiences.

3.2. What is phenomenology?

Just as non-standard philosophy can be considered as an invention in philosophy, phenomenology can be perceived as a recommencing of philosophy, a renewal, a rebirth. For Husserl, phenomenology has only one challenge: to restore philosophy to its primordial place at the very foundation of knowledge, because the philosopher is for him the archon of humanity (Husserl 1976, p. 80). We must therefore begin a radical approach comparable to philosophical revolutions such as stoicism, Cartesianism or German idealism, for example. Thus the ambition of phenomenology, its central problem, is nothing more or less than “the origin of the world”, explains Eugène Fink (1975, p. 124)1. It is about understanding what is happening by describing it, by detailing it as it appears to us. Thus, phenomenology is regularly explained as a new discipline that presents itself as the descriptive study of all the phenomena that are available to the subject’s experience. In other words, phenomenology is the return to the subject’s experience, supported by a method of description.

The founder of phenomenology is also a scientist, and Husserl’s approach requires sound, solid and rigorous knowledge transcribed in the famous “return to the things themselves” that reflects the search for accuracy. For Husserl, “from its very first beginning philosophy had the ambition to be a rigorous science” (Husserl 1989, p. 11). Husserl’s watchword, “the return to the things themselves”, then announced phenomenology as a philosophy of knowledge. Let us understand here that it is not a question of explaining knowledge as a fact in nature, but of understanding the meaning of knowledge. Thus, it will not be so much knowing an object as the access to it that will be highlighted. The phenomenologist’s experience is not limited to the object in question, but also includes the access path, as Levinas points out: “Access to the object is part of the being of the object” (Levinas 2000, p. 161).

To understand the essence of phenomenology, it is important to see what knowledge Husserl was fuelled by (Barbaras 2004, pp. 15–16; Tilliette 2005, pp. 17–18). In addition to a scientific and mathematical background, Husserl took courses in psychology, first with Brentano, from whom he borrowed the concept of intentionality, but also with the psychologist Stumpf. Husserl’s courses were of interest to him, particularly in terms of perception and imagination, as well as the introspective and experimental foundations of psychology. What would transpire from these courses in Husserl’s work appeared in Logical Investigations, which proposes a descriptive psychology of experiences. It is this notion of “experience” that finally formed the basis of the Husserlian project.

Experiences are those linked to perception. Husserl considered them the source of consciousness. It is through them that we become aware of objects, of the world, and we can appropriate them through the senses, through their materialities and impressions. In order to ensure that experience does not only remain within consciousness and thus that it can access objective truth, Husserl demonstrated the link between experience and objects of the world and made the essence emerge.

Thus a connection is played out between the objects of the world, what they generate, as experienced in consciousness, and the link between the world and consciousness. Husserl characterized this connection through the notions of noema and noesis. Noesis is a subjective form, it refers to the knowledge of hyletic experiences, the “raw material”. Noema is the objective form of knowledge; it is the meaning of the object in consciousness as a result of the donation of this one (the object) to this one (the consciousness). The relationship called “noetico-noematic” is therefore this relationship between the scope of the objects of the world and the meaning conferred by the lived experience in consciousness (Depraz 1999a, p. 15). However, we will see that the perception of the experience centers around other characteristics such as intentionality, for example.

If phenomenology takes root in psychology, it is because it allows Husserl to analyze, to live the experiences for the phenomenologist and to understand their connections in consciousness. Moreover, it should be noted that Husserl, in Logical Investigations, stated that “phenomenology is descriptive psychology. Epistemological criticism is therefore, in essence, psychology, or at least only capable or being built on a psychological basis” (Husserl 2001, p. 176). However, it is only the descriptive notion of psychology that serves phenomenology and this to the exclusion of the explanatory dimension. This explains the use of the term “phenomenology”, which is more appropriate than the term “descriptive psychology”, which can be misleading (Depraz 1999b, p. 14).

3.2.1. Phenomenology and innovation?

Upon analysis of these first elements, phenomenology does not seem to offer the attributes to consider it as a way of (re)thinking innovation. The search for truth, access to “the things themselves”, the analysis of experiences, do not seem to be obvious elements to characterize a “new” innovation.

Yet, when we look more closely at the components of phenomenology, questioning the worldview, its demand for surprise, its questioning of the things that surround us and that are taking place its obsession in the broad sense of understanding the world; it seems that these are relevant to (re)thinking innovation. This makes all the more sense if we also question the innovator, that is the individual who innovates. Who is surprised? Who gets the world? Where does this awareness of the world and analysis of experiences come from? It is necessarily a work of the human, of the innovator, and it is perhaps through them that phenomenology must be applied. It may be up to them to no longer deliver innovation, but to learn it, to no longer produce innovation, but to live it. In short, to put themself in a position that is not limited to the framework of a contract of employment nor to a space within the workplace environment in the same way as any other activity, but is practiced continuously, without limit.

Raising the question of phenomenology in order to (re)think innovation means making the knowledge of things themselves a practice that can contribute to the improvement of things themselves, but also that accessing this knowledge, this questioning, requires, fundamentally and first of all, knowledge of how to question yourself. In other words, it is a question of how to know, taking into account certain knowledge. To put it another way, instead of thinking about the effects of innovation (performance, consequences or profit), it would be more a question of knowledge of innovation. Why does it exist? Should it exist? But also who generates it? Why do they do it? As a result, we could influence phenomena.

We propose to focus on the method of phenomenology, its detailed constitution both in its theories and in its modalities of implementation, and to compare each aspect systematically, each step of this philosophy, to measure a possible contribution to (re)thinking innovation.

3.3. Husserlian phenomenology to think innovation?

Science, psychology and philosophy color Husserl’s phenomenology. What will transpire from its introduction is the rigor that emerges, a rigor that translates into a method, tools, almost procedures, for this phenomenology to be established.

This phenomenological method is intended to be a mathematical theorem, a natural law, a scientific process and ensures a certain demanding and rigorous process. The five axes we are going to see, the return to the things themselves, transcendental intentionality, reduction, the emergence of essence and retention, form a whole, a kind of five-pointed star. These five dimensions, chronologically and in a structured way, make the Husserlian method unique. An element cannot be missed in the phenomenological approach; all are ordered with each other. Like the acts of a play, they have no meaning, no coherence and only work because they are together. They blend and function harmoniously with each other, like the five senses of touch, sight, smell, taste and hearing. If each can exist independently, harmony can only be achieved through these five elements. However, a sixth element is necessary to initiate the phenomenological process, for its orchestration, even if in some ways, it remains external. This sixth sense, if we can call it that, is the ego; it is also – but to a lesser extent – others. The ego is the one who determines, creates and operates the phenomenological machine, the one who assembles the axes.

It is around this implementation, this mise en abyme around these six phenomenological parameters that we must question and (re)think innovation. Look at how they can be a source of inspiration for a new innovation.

3.3.1. Return to the things themselves
3.3.1.1. The return to the things themselves, the phenomenological will

The “return to the things themselves” is the watchword of the phenomenological call that is present in the introduction to Logical Investigations (Husserl 2001). This return to “things” comes from the German Sachen and means the problem, the problem of a thought – unlike things in the physical sense. It means a return to the original, a return to the stakes, and this is thanks to the astonishment that must be shown by getting rid of doctrines and “ready-made” thoughts. This return is not easy, because we can only get there through a long and tedious effort, by a number of exercises and rigorous training of self because naturally we are overwhelmed by things problems, without questioning their origins.

To make this return to things, Husserl relied on the notion of intuition; this is where thought comes into existence and feeds on experience. An object for Husserl can only be known in this form, if it is given in intuitive evidence: “Every originary presentive intuition is a legitimizing source of cognition, that everything originally […] offered to us in ‘intuition’ is to be accepted simply as what it is presented as being.” (Husserl 1983, p. 44). The return to the things themselves is therefore a test of “seeing”; of “seeing” carefully the things in front of us, as they are given. It is then the only source of truth that ignores – as much as possible, it is in any case the hope of phenomenology – any imagination, interpretation or construction of thought. This is where phenomenology is deeply rooted in a descriptive approach. The phenomenologist only tries to describe, rigorously, what he sees.

The descriptive demand then requires method and asceticism. Describe what we “see” or “perceive” and only that, do not add or omit a dimension, specify all the facets of what is given, do not add or anticipate a non-existent parameter, for example, a previous experience, whether the object is “physical” or “intangible”. This description alone requires honesty and rigor, even if the perfect description does not exist, each person making more or less pronounced connections to his or her experiences, memories and testimonies (Husserl 1985, p. 113).

This requirement for description is not without difficulty and Husserl warns that the phenomenological method, as a whole, requires us “to move freely along this new way without ever reverting to the old viewpoints, to learn to see what stands before our eyes” (Husserl 1962, p. 39). These difficulties are much greater if we incorporate linguistic dimensions. Indeed, how can we describe philosophical dimensions without perfect language, without criticism, without argument, without interpretation or explanation? These questions are legitimate. Indeed, everyone works on thought with his/her interpretations, his/her arguments, using a language and without really caring about descriptive purity. However, this has consequences on the inauthenticity of the truth to be described, on the veracity of the givenness to be described and even risks a form of illusion of transparency.

The Husserlian demand will therefore be to gain the best possible access to this truth as it is given to consciousness, seeking to avoid interference from access to things, such as judgments and prejudices.

3.3.1.2. The return to the things themselves, a necessary effort for innovation

The Husserlian watchword is not a return to physical things, but a return to the stakes, to the problems, in a particular attitude which is that of questioning the world, of astonishment. Husserl emphasized the need to banish preconceived doctrines and thoughts.

To access this truth, these “things themselves”, phenomenology uses a unique method, original means, all anchored, however, in humankind, but which humankind does not necessarily use, because most of the time they give themselves up to a natural attitude, to a worldly facilitator of existence. This proposal to move away from preconceived thoughts and return to things is fundamental to innovation.

Spontaneously we could ask ourselves what “things themselves” might be for the innovator. What could or should be done to return to these? Does the return to the things themselves make sense to (re)think innovation? But perhaps we need to ask ourselves the question in a different way: Do we consider innovative things for what they are or for what they can generate?

Let us take a new computer like a new drink, a new phone or a new car for example and ask ourselves to what extent these objects, these products are thought of as phenomena rather than as things only, or only as possible consequences. The methods combining innovation and marketing have the objective of detecting conscious or unconscious needs; they have the challenge of translating these needs into an appropriate response. The purpose of this will be to generate new profits, growth, some performance for the organization that produces the solution, whether it is a product, a service or a process. These are the main terms of innovation for a very large majority of organizations. In other words, innovation as such is not so much a problem for organizations, because it is only worked on for its potential effects (consequences). Therefore, innovation is not really for its own sake, the things themselves is not thought, the product or service is only secondary, they are only means. Should we not, as Husserl encouraged, return to the things themselves, and even with Levinas, to the conditions of access to the thing? Isn’t what we do and how we do it more important than the effects?

This is not an obvious fact, because in this return to the original things, it is a return to the stakes, to the problems, to the phenomena, to the astonishment by getting rid of the doctrines and the “ready-made” thoughts and in our liberal world, the ready-made thought is simple: Is it profitable? It is therefore a question of approaching what is done, from what is usually done, with a different attitude and a unique questioning method that will ask: Why are we doing what we are doing? The method, the spirit of phenomenology seems to be able to help us in this. So “customer” demand is a sufficient reason to produce? To what extent is potential profit an argument for doing this? It is therefore a question of “looking at” a “demand”, and questioning not only its spontaneous relevance, the natural attitude that one can have, in other words its possible profitability for example, but also its stakes if we access the demand, its legitimacy, its effects. It is a question of returning to the things themselves “demanded” and wondering why we must satisfy this or that demand, what is the “essence” of that demand. It is a desire to recover some form of truth about what we are doing, and therefore allow us to recognize that what we are doing or about to do is or is not to be implemented.

We thus understand that in the “return to the things themselves” proposed here to (re)think innovation, what matters is the reason for the thing as much as the thing itself, thus voluntarily ignoring, at this stage, the consequences of things, of innovations, which is nevertheless the usual way of doing things. The return to the Husserlian things is in a way a first tool that the innovator and his/her environment could use, a form of meditation in terms of what we do and what we do it for. Not an absolute question, but a question about a very specific element, a need, an answer, a proposal. In other words, the perspective would no longer be vertical:

but lateral and systemic: need  solution  performance (profitability). A total laterality which, to return to the things themselves, must consider a 360° questioning, a complete look at the questioning, its legitimacy and even more so when it comes to the answer to be considered.

To come back to these things, it is necessary to carry out complete work that we are not used to in this context of organizations. As explained above, it is a question of working on thought with its interpretations, its arguments, using a language that will make it possible to formulate descriptions that are as objective as possible. By stating what we see, what we understand, what is before us with the necessary astonishment and naivety. We must return to an original form, an authenticity of what appears to us, take the time to describe it, even if a form of subjectivity remains. Even if objectivity remained complex, any description will at least have the merit of highlighting the raw material. This material that questions, this material of questioning, this material of the question is in fact the same thing. It is the foundation of innovation that is being challenged, it is the beginning of questioning that we are innovating for; and the first step in these things themselves to look for is to question them, to look at their foundations, to question the legitimacy of action and how to carry out this action.

3.3.2. Transcendental intentionality
3.3.2.1. Intentionality, engagement in phenomenology

Intentionality is one of the key words of phenomenology. This notion is taken from Brentano and refers to the character of psychological phenomena. Brentano himself drew this notion from Scholasticism (Bégout 2003, p. 15) and precisely from Aristotle. In De Anima, the Stagirite states that intentionality consists of looking at both internal consciousness and object as one and the same phenomenon (Tilliette 2005, p. 37).

Husserl took up this notion again, however, by changing the meaning. For him, intentionality is the fact that consciousness is conscious of something (Husserl 1994, p. 12); for example, there can be no perception without an object or intellection without intelligibility. Consciousness is always intentional: either it moves towards the object or it reflects on the act; no two moments are the same. In other words, consciousness is destined for the object in question or it escapes it through the reflexive act.

Intentionality is the “ideal” ambition, the intentional object of consciousness, the one by which everything begins and which will bring the knowledge, the givenness and, more precisely still, will question the essence of things.

The uniqueness of intentionality is to look outwards. Instead of looking at oneself, instead of generating a form of introspection, intentionality forces us to look beyond ourselves, where consciousness can be felt. Thus, Husserl points out in the Cartesian Meditations: “The world is for me absolutely nothing else but the world existing for and accepted by me in such a conscious cogito. It gets its whole sense, universal and specific, and its acceptance as existing, exclusively from such cogitations.” (Husserl 1982, p. 21). This shows a demarcation with Descartes (Pavie 2008, pp. 30–31), the latter anchors himself in his cogito when Husserlian intentionality, on the contrary, opens up to the world. Phenomenological intentionality integrates into its cogitations the very object that is targeted.

3.3.2.2. Intentional experiences

To understand intentionality in more depth and to understand the mechanics described by Husserl, based on Brentano’s work, we must focus on intentional experiences. Husserl showed that if you perceive a tree in a certain way, then in another way by changing your position, the perception of the tree changes, but the perceived tree is undeniably the same (Husserl 1985, pp. 335–341). It is therefore necessary to show the difference between the experience of the tree that evolves over time and the tree itself; the intended, intentional object which, as identical, is transcendental to the experience (Barbaras 2004, p. 70). Unlike the fact that the tree is autonomous from the experience, it is within the experience itself. The first experience, the immanent experience, is not enough to give the object. The disappearance of experiences, moments, variations, changes in perceptions, are decisive in the consideration of the perceived object. This is how a transcendent unity is achieved through the multiplicity of experiences that are obviously distinct from perception.

Each psychological phenomenon is linked to content: in perception, something is perceived, in imagination something is imagined, in love something is loved, and so on. Intentional experiences here include the relationship with the object, they intentionally possess the object in an eidetic way (Husserl 1994, pp. 116–117). Intentionality means that the object is covered by the act. It is therefore important to make it clear again that there are not two things in the experience – the object and the experience – but only one: the intentional experience (Barbaras 2004, p. 69). Thus, there is no object-experience relationship, but the experience that comes into the relationship with the object. In other words, the object does not penetrate the experience, but the latter nevertheless opens itself to the object.

Intentionality is therefore this initial, major step that shows how the conscious mind is aware of something, how the experiences are given. However, this step is passive for the phenomenologist who, in a way, undergoes the givenness of consciousness.

3.3.2.3. The innovator’s intentionality

Of course, we must not be mistaken by confusing intentionality with intention. The issue is not to measure or act on the innovator’s intention (desire), the point is to look at the internal awareness of what we do and what we achieve. To be aware of our conscience and to do so, to force ourselves to shift our gaze on our actions, to somehow go back upstream in the process of reflection on what we are doing things for. What we are trying to do is to be aware of what we are doing, to try to think, to reflect on our actions. It is not natural, and very often we do it without conscience, without reflection, rather by reflex. Intentionality further complicates the proposal since the point of intentionality goes a step further by seeking not only to be aware of the actions but to think about the way of thinking, in some respects. Indeed, thinking about what we do is not without its problems because our thoughts are colored by our history, our education, our environment; in other words, we think in a biased way and it is a question of escaping this bias by (re)thinking our way of thinking. Husserlian intentionality helps us to extract ourselves from our methods of reflection if we make the effort to look into it. If we become aware of the way we think, then there is hope for changing the way we innovate.

When we reflect on our practices, we seek to improve, modify, change them but only through our frame of reference. If we think in terms of the frame of reference, and particularly its openness, then other perspectives may emerge. Perspectives of empathy, perspectives open to other dimensions, new and original perspectives. And this is the whole point of intentionality in phenomenology as in innovation; to succeed in finding frames of reference that are no longer those which have been in “power” for decades, to use perspectives that put us in the shoes of others (“customers”, “prospects”, “users” in the case of innovation); to propose original, unpublished solutions that are not simply a repetition of common and usual uses.

Awareness of what we do and how we think what we do is the key to intentionality. This awareness will allow us to understand the givenness of what is proposed (and not to be stifled). It is in this way that we will succeed in not dissociating the object (the product, the service) and the experience (what I think of it as an innovator), but to associate the two, the intentional experience of the innovator and/or innovation with a kind of metapsychology, which in addition to this intentional experience, will allow us to change the innovator operator’s frame of reference.

3.3.3. The reduction method and the transcendental epoché
3.3.3.1. Reduction, the backbone of phenomenology

It is the reduction method that will truly be the phenomenologist’s first involvement. It brings about the truth of the “thing” as Fink explains, “[reduction] leads the philosophical subject, in the most radical self-awareness, through himself, to the life of transcendental belief” (1975, p. 121). According to Levinas, reduction is also “the opening of this game of intentionality”2. This third step of the phenomenological method, that of reduction, could be considered as the backbone of Husserlian3 phenomenology. It consists, following intentionality, once the object is targeted, of removing the essence of it, in accessing this famous “thing itself”. The fundamental challenge of phenomenological reduction is to convert one’s natural attitude, despite the fact that one knows that this attitude is natural, only when one has made the phenomenological reduction. We will come back to this aspect later.

The term “reduction” takes its etymology from the Latin reducere which means “to renew”, “to bring back”; these meanings define its role and objective well. Indeed, reduction generates the act of reflection, which initiates a movement that, this time, is no longer open to the world as for intentionality, but comes back to itself. Thus, this return to self comes to question the experience of the object and no longer the ambition as previously seen in intentionality. There is an “internal” return in this implementation of reduction.

Husserl himself presented this reflexive act “as a conversion of the gaze”4, which once again shows how the phenomenologist must understand reduction, how he/she must turn his/her gaze away. While it was intentional, while it was turned towards the world, it must now be turned towards itself. The use of the term “conversion”, convertere, shows the insistence on changing paradigms and underlines the need to turn towards oneself by turning away from the world.

What does this conversion of perspective offer to the “innovative phenomenologist”? What does access to these things now experienced show? To be as close as possible to this sought-after truth, Husserl sought an experience, certainly, but one not specific to an individual; it must be universal and necessary according to all rigor. It is through the eidetic concept of experience that Husserl sought to achieve this universality as we will see in more detail. It is through the factual, unique and contingent experiences of individuals that the essence of universal and necessary experiences will emerge.

3.3.3.2. The practice of the epoché

Reduction for Husserl was the inaugural act of phenomenology. It is presented in Cartesian Meditations as a “gesture” whose objective is to give access to the absolute, to bring about a theory of knowledge, in search of apodictic evidence (Husserl 1994, p. 59; Barbaras 2004, p. 87). This famous gesture begins with the epoché.

The epoché is a term taken from antiquity, from the school of skeptics, which means “switching off”, “in parentheses” and applies during the initial phase of the phenomenological method. This “parenthesis”, said Husserl (1985, pp. 99–101), consists of suspending judgment in the face of things that are given.

The purpose and consequence of this suspension is to interrupt the flow of thought from daily actions in order to be able to convert the gaze, or to achieve an eidetic variation.

The challenge is that the epoché becomes an attitude, a permanent gesture, a reflective activity intended for the conversion of the gaze, and allows eidetic variation. Among the uniqueness of the epoché, it is necessary to note its capacity to suspend reality, the existence of the universe, but also of its natural ego. The epoché makes it possible to suspend the natural ego of the practicing individual present in the world, to make a transcendental ego emerge which will then be modified.

3.3.3.3. Doubt and the epoché

We understand that this suspension is not far from Cartesian doubt, moreover the connection with Descartes is very important. The founder of phenomenology himself considered phenomenological philosophy as “neo-Cartesianism”5, Husserl not hesitating to define himself even as an heir to the “know thyself” from Socrates to Descartes6.

The claimed connection concerns two major axes that phenomenology considers: the establishment of a critical questioning on everything that seems obvious and the foundation of an apodictic knowledge. Moreover, both Husserl and Descartes had a radical intention through a quest for a pure and original beginning. This does not mean that doubt and epoché are identical, and the differences are clear between the two (Lowit 1957), but having in mind this filiation makes it possible to grasp the “spirit of doubt” that pre-exists at the epoché.

3.3.3.4. The epoché, anticipation and motivation

The ambition of the epoché is to reconsider all certainties and other mental elaborations; its practice results in a return to naive astonishment, to the first givenness of meaning (Husserl, 1994, pp. 14–15). This ambition is not without consequences for the self. This position of the epoché allows a positive and even constructive constitution of the world, as well as of my ego following this astonishment. As an ego, I am bound to a certain worldly reality, the world is not external to me. The epoché will allow the constitution of a world in my transcendental ego, where I will be allowed to positively access a transformed vision, working on the worldliness on which I can find my astonishment (Husserl 1994, pp. 14–15).

3.3.3.5. The post-epoché world

Once the epoché has been made, the phenomenologist finds himself in a unique, original and unprecedented situation. The world never appears to him as before and this is perhaps what Husserl implied when he specified that, for the phenomenologist, “the existence of the world, based on the evidence of natural experience, can no longer be for us a self-evident fact; it is only for us an object of affirmation” (Husserl 1985, p. 105). Husserl went even further in Ideas: General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology where he states that with the epoché, we reach “a new region of being” (1985, p. 106). We are thus projected towards other perspectives. For Fink, reduction “leads the philosophical subject, in the most radical self-awareness, through himself, to the life of transcendental belief […], whose world ‘is’ the correlate of validity” (1975, p. 154). Thus, since the transcendence of the world is neutralized in the epoché and this transcendence is found within the life of consciousness, we can speak of transcendental reduction (Barbaras 2004, p. 121). Reduction transcends the world to a consciousness; therefore, it does not leave the world. It is transcended, but finds itself reintegrated into the sphere of being that transcends it: “Transcending the world […] does not lead outside the world […] to another world; on the contrary, the phenomenological transcendence of the world as an opening of transcendental subjectivity is simultaneously the retention of the world in the universe” (Fink 1975, pp. 123–124).

3.3.3.6. Epoché and astonishing ability to combat natural attitude

The role of the epoché is to reconsider all the certainties, to suspend them. This has a fundamental consequence, which is the reversal of the evidence, the possible opening again to the capacity for astonishment. In this respect, phenomenology is also a renaissance of philosophy, insofar as it seems to allow this return to the human capacity for astonishment.

Because once the certainties are suspended, what will be the givenness? How will the world give itself unto consciousness? It will necessarily give itself as something, in an, unprecedented, unique way a first. Everything suggests that the interpretation of this world will be different from before the practice of the epoché. It will be an interpretation that welcomes things in a new and original way, with a new focus, a new prism, a new perspective.

This capacity for astonishment that phenomenology offers is at the root of ancient philosophy with Socrates at the forefront. The latter, through dialogue, interrogation, perpetual questioning, rose up against certainties to find himself in a permanent7 sensation of first interpretation. During his conversations with the Athenians, Socrates shattered everyone’s convictions so that they could reconsider the world, to make it “new”.

In addition to Socrates, astonishment was also fundamental in Aristotle’s work, as we have pointed out with the quotation from Metaphysics (Aristotle 1970, pp. 17–18). Phenomenology seems to be part of this search for astonishment, as it was in antiquity. To access it, it is a question of fighting our natural habits; we must convert to see things differently when we see them spontaneously, to be surprised again.

Astonishment is the cornerstone in the fight against the natural attitude and, in Cartesian Meditations, Husserl describes the epoché as a conversion of the world that goes so far as to question the claim to existence (Husserl 1994, p. 61). This claim to existence is first raised through the suspension of the natural attitude (Husserl 1985, p. 5) which is the objective, the stakes of the epoché and allows us to become like a “disinterested spectator” (Husserl 1994, p. 31 and p. 80)8. Thanks to this, it is possible to discover our relationship to the world without being clouded by our instinctive attitude. However, this requires a “radical change in attitude”, says Husserl (1985, p. 6).

The natural attitude is first and foremost a way of living with dogmas that ignore any questioning of the world. Husserl characterized this attitude in Ideas as, “the one spatiotemporal actuality to which I belong like all other human beings who are to be found in it and who are related to it as I am. I find the ‘actuality’, the word already says it, as a factually existent actuality and also accept it as it presents itself to me as factually existing.”(Husserl 1983, pp. 56–57). Thus, the natural attitude is a belief, a belief in the world as it gives itself. Things, animals, plants, people are there and are not questioned in their essence. The world is, and it is not a question of questioning it. The natural attitude considers that the world is anterior and underlies the acts in which I rely on it, and I am locked in it. We are then truly in the realm of belief in a certain world and even, says Fink: “The fact that the belief in the world is itself in the world still belongs to the content of this belief” (1975, p. 134). Rooted in this belief, transcendental life is discarded, the world that seems to be real is a misunderstanding of the world, an artifice.

The natural attitude is also the theory that shows that we take the world as real, and the epoché consists of putting this theory in parentheses. This worldliness has not disappeared, however, it remains there, simply with this use of parentheses; we no longer adhere to it (Husserl 1994, p. 148). More precisely, we no longer believe in it spontaneously, as Husserl points out: “Instead of simply existing for us, that is, being accepted naturally by us in our experiential believing in its existence, the world is for us only something that claims being” (1994, p. 62). A claim to existence that phenomenology attempts to combat and which is reminiscent of the struggle that non-philosophy wields against philosophical claim, as we have seen (Laruelle 1989, pp. 7–36).

It is not a question of contesting a certainty of the world; moreover, the essence of the epoché is not to act, not to pose, but to suspend what is posed, what is already there. In other words, the epoché does not enter into the debate of the world, an impossible debate because it suspends it.

The power of the epoché allows us to question the meaning of the world that is given and to understand in what way it is real, in what way it is, it exists, and of which we can also doubt. Thus, by suspending the natural attitude, we can remove the veil that is placed on life. And what we discover under this veil is the belief in the world, not the real being of the world, but the subjective being of its theory, that is, the belief in its existence.

For phenomenology, astonishment makes it possible to combat natural attitude as soon as it is known, accepted as existing and must be fought. Philosophical astonishment is highlighted by Fink: “Through astonishment, the obvious becomes incomprehensible, the ordinary extraordinary without this taking place in the familiar world of the incomprehensible or a pure and simple reversal. Astonishment makes the well-known unknown, and this in a sense hitherto unknown, the familiar non-familiar and this in a non-familiar sense” (1975, p. 202).

The capacity for astonishment is fundamental, because it is the means of breaking with. Let us note that astonishment is different from the unknown, and the world around the one who practices the epoché is not unknown to them; nevertheless, it is in these terms that they must understand the world again. The purpose of astonishment in the epoché is to question, whereas nothing lends itself to it “naturally”. To be astonished by the world is, strictly speaking, a spiritual exercise, because here it is not the astonishing that monopolizes the individual but the individual who will provoke it. This is why it is important to put yourself in a position that favors, welcomes, provokes astonishment and promotes it for yourself.

3.3.3.7. Reduction, transcendental epoché and innovation

The issue of reduction is particularly relevant for innovation and the innovator; both for the purpose and for the practice itself. Indeed, focusing on the “very essence” of an innovation is certainly not a common use for innovators, as we have said several times; it is mainly the consequences of innovation that they believe are important. To focus on understanding the essence of innovation is to convert your natural attitude, your way of being and acting as an innovator. It is no longer a question of looking at the value generated by innovation – at least no longer in terms of cold, hard cash – but at what it is as such, and perhaps its generated phenomena, whether they are societal, social or environmental. It is a real conversion of perspective that is at stake and can only be essential to the innovator. It goes without saying that neither their environment nor their education, let alone their experiences, make the task of this conversion easier. However, this is essential if the innovator is to stop looking at profit, benefits and financial results from an advantageous point of view. They must learn to look away, change their attitude and develop innovations according to other values, the very ones that enable environmental sustainability or genuine human development.

It is probably the gesture of the epoché that is most central for the innovator, as it is for phenomenology. For it is the moment of suspension, the moment of doubt, the moment of putting it in parentheses. This is an inaugural gesture that is totally absent from the innovator’s practices. The innovator’s usual doubts are those allowing him/her to change, modify their product or service to improve it. Doubts are specific to the performance decision. It is no longer the approach of the epoché with the conversion of the gaze. The doubt is now linked to the action, on whether or not to do it. The innovator must learn to deal with the period of suspension and not just the market. This period of suspension is that of individual and collective questioning, the time when putting performance in parentheses is key. To put it simply, it is a meditative time.

The innovator, for a time, must learn to switch off, to interrupt the flow of their thoughts, external contingencies, their daily life shaped by performance. Their purpose is to achieve an eidetic variation, that is, to take the time to examine and verify all the components of innovation, the phenomena, in an exhaustive way. In a very concrete way, this could mean varying the essence of the innovative thought in question, the manufacturing methods, the ways in which it is distributed, its uses and even its abandonment, its cessation, its recycling. The eidetic variation applied to innovation, if one can say so, is therefore a way of approaching innovation, including access to it, in a holistic way; and this time in a entirely original and new way, with a new perspective. It is not a question, as usual, of asking all about the components and stakeholders of innovation (such as costs, reliability, interest), but its essence and its ecosystem, with new ways of questioning, new questions, which once again will be around the theme of environmental consequences, with respect to the social and societal aspect.

Eidetic variation is a tool of the epoché; it allows us to cling to elements, to questions that allow us to suspend innovation. The variation allows the modification of the gaze and creates doubts. This new attitude helps us reconsider all the certainties, the mental elaborations and finally, as we have said, return to a naive astonishment. Astonishment is the state to be found for the innovator, after having gone through variation, through the epoché. Astonishment, we might say, is almost the desired goal and this astonishment arises from the suspension of the practicing individual’s natural ego. It is therefore also thanks to this suspension of natural ego and this astonishment that we can reconstruct a positive vision, then positive innovations to develop another world, which in phenomenology, we understand as “a new region of being”. It is now that a new paradigm opens up with new opportunities to innovate, new ways of doing things. It is no longer a question of thinking about innovation by improving, by marginally modifying what we do, it is a question of innovating in a different, paradigmatic way. We could compare this to a conversion, a radical change that leads the being – the innovator – to a new way of life and being. For this innovator, the world would never again appear as before, both for what it was and for considering its future construction.

The realization of this work of suspension of judgment of the epoché in the context of the innovator is above all a suspension of desires, certain desires, those to which he is used to succumbing: desires for control and power, of performance and gain. It is a question of reversing the evidence, conscious or unconscious, the evidence of growth and the lure of gain, the evidence of possession and control, and finally the evidence of selfishness and a reversal of the self. The reversal of evidence generates the appearance of new desires and these are of the order of being authentically human, of its sustainability in an ecosystem where self-care and caring for others becomes a matter of course. The position now adopted is one in which the consideration of oneself, of others and of one’s sustainable future takes precedence over taking profits into account for the benefit of an elite group. Innovations will emerge from this new approach, innovations that will compete with the world, that will break away from the usual conventions to propose transcended innovations. These will go beyond groups and divisions, short-termism and elitism, efficiency and exploitation. These transcended innovations will ensure the importance and sovereignty of the common good in the short, medium or long term.

The phenomenological progress that we are making for the innovator, and on the subject of innovation since the inaugural gesture of the epoché, the reversal of the evidence, as well as the astonishment and fighting the natural attitude, allows this new perspective, where necessary, to think of a possible new world. As Fink points out above, “the obvious becomes incomprehensible”; how and why did we act in such a way? The evidence given in the media, in a neoliberal environment, led us to believe that the evidence of innovation was profit, gain, performance and power. “Astonishment makes the unknown know,” he says again; in other words, thanks to astonishment, what seemed natural to us, this way of doing things now becomes alien to our thinking.

3.3.4. The emergence of essence
3.3.4.1. The Husserlian eidetic variation

We have seen in relation to the epoché that this has led the phenomenologist to realize an eidetic variation. The purpose of this is to reach the essence of things. And to do this, there is a need to “vary” the way we see it. Indeed, the essence that the phenomenologist can bring about when he reduces this or that thing is in fact only possible by varying that thing as that thing has already been experienced or perceived by them, has been told to them by someone, has been dreamed of, that they have seen in this or that situation; in short, that it is an experience beyond the phenomenologist’s own experiences. It is not a question of generalizing or counting the number of times this thing appeared to them, but of seeking, in the multiple confrontations with this thing, the “essential” content of it. In other words, all the experiences have similar characteristics beyond those that are non-essential. The latter are ousted in favor of the former, which will constitute the essence of the thing in question. To explain this, Husserl takes the example of color; it cannot exist without a surface. In fact, the essence of color, in particular, is to appear only on one surface (Husserl 2006, pp. 81–82)9.

The essence appears in Husserl as a rudimentary structure; without it, the object could not be what it is. This invariant or these invariants are necessary for the existence of this object. And yet, paradoxical as it may seem, the essence does not exist in itself, it is not an object. As Ricoeur points out, Husserl reconciled the intuitive character of the knowledge of essence, of eidetics with the non-worldly character of the object (Barbaras 2004, p. 51).

The return to the things themselves implies this notion of accessing these things, of perceiving them, of distinguishing them, of seeing phenomena and essence, whether material or an appearance, an imagination, contents of consciousness, aesthetic, cultural or other realities. The phenomenologist’s objective will be to access these things, to what they are, not in their first givenness, but more precisely their essence, their eidos. Objects, facts and events are only illustrations where the intuition of essence is found (Barbaras 2004, p. 51). The essence of the phenomenon is what manifests itself through it. The intuition of the essence, its eidetic content, will be what makes it possible to experience the profound presence of the object, for the one who realizes the eidetic variation.

Far from being metaphysical, the essence is present in the sensitive. However, its access is only possible through eidetic variation, thus removing the subjective certainty of the subject. This variation is possible thanks to imagination, because of its unlimited nature. This massive variation will ultimately present one – or more – invariants that will constitute the essence.

Indeed, imagination plays a major role in the emergence of the essence. Once all the different experiences have brought about a first form of essence, it is then a question of activating the force of imagination. Indeed, to bring about the essence of the plant, it is not a question of seeing all the plants only physically. Imagination will allow a detachment from the experiences while keeping the search for the plant’s essence under consideration. Husserl showed that this imaginary projection is possible in a form of epoché of the situation in which the phenomenologist operates (Husserl 1985, pp. 100–111). The latter, in a way, switches off the situation they are experiencing in order to transpose themself into this imaginary situation where he will then be able to look at these “imaginary plants” and compare them with those he may be reducing.

3.3.4.2. The eidetic variation of innovation

The eidetic variation of innovation means succeeding in measuring the objects offered, the services offered and the organizational changes. The challenge of variation here is to know what has been done, what is being done and what we could propose. The first step is to analyze previous proposals and consequences, look at the effects and act accordingly. Any innovation is based on a previous one, directly or indirectly, and they are all to be looked at removing the necessary essences. If we are trying to achieve the eidetic variation of a product, we must first look at what this product replaced previously, what the alternative offers were, how they were conducted, manufactured, what the consequences were, the contributions of this solution, the difficulties encountered, the stakes in terms of organization, in other words, approaching the previous solutions in a holistic way. This position will initiate a specific provision, in the context of the new proposal the innovator wishes to offer on the market. An eidetic variation of the new offer is inevitable and will have to be implemented with a full, complete and total analysis, both in terms of form and content. It will also be necessary to consider the merits of the proposal. The eidetic variation of a new telephone would lead to the conclusion that: it exhausts rare earths for its production; could emit harmful waves in terms of the user’s health; hosts games with addictive power, or that it would not be recyclable. Therefore why should it be offered on the market? Why wouldn’t this variation be an indicator of how to do it better? Thus, variations can lead to reflections and proposals at several levels; this can be in terms of the means of production, on the materials used (recyclable raw materials), on possible means of protection to prevent wave propagation or even to imagine how to restore the games’ playful rather than addictive power.

The interesting thing about eidetic variation is that it will develop imagination, both to look at things better and to “take care” and “do better”. But it is understood that this eidetic variation of innovation cannot be acheived by the sole provision of the innovator. To be viable, it must be carried out by stakeholders: customers or future customers, shareholders, institutions and associations. It is the ecosystem that must be targeted in order to have any hope of reaching the essence more closely. This is why the innovator (we will come back to this later) must be a phenomenologist in their individual, but also collective approach with the stakeholders. They must share know-how and eidetic variation so that everyone can contribute and learn to share their “essence”. And it is this holistic variation that will make it possible to target an essence of caring.

3.3.5. Retention
3.3.5.1. Phenomenological retention

The notion of retention emerges in phenomenology when the latter, via the reduction, the epoché, is confronted with the notion of time and its capture. Is the present moment static or dynamic? When I speak of the now, is it present or past as soon as I say the word “now”? We see again, through these questions, that phenomenology seeks to break free from natural classical attitudes, break free from worldliness. For, in terms of society, the “now” is polymorphic, not very definable, it wanders through uses without precision or a truly determined function.

Husserl sought to resolve this question of the “now” because according to him, time is a dynamic extension of the notion of the “living present” (Husserl 1994, p. 164). It includes what has just happened and what will happen immediately afterwards. It is possible to enjoy the present moment insofar as it has ultimately not gone completely, it is possible to feel its remanence in the immediate past and anticipate its immediate future.

This “just past” is this retention as Husserl calls it. The most significant example he gives in his Lectures on the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal Time is sound (Husserl 1996). This makes it possible to feel the work of consciousness and retention. Music is a succession, sometimes an overlap, of notes. This succession of notes is “caught”, “held back” by the consciousness; thus, the first note remains in the consciousness until the second so that the melody is formed, the notes are successive, sometimes stacked or accumulated. Without this retention, which here can also be called “trace”, we would have only have one sound, only one note at a time and never a melody. Moreover, the sound necessarily passes, otherwise we would have an accumulation of notes that would only cause confusion. It is therefore necessary that the sound happens, that there is retention or trace and that it succeeds or precedes another. Renaud Barbaras calls this specificity a “productive imagination” (2004, p. 151); it reproduces the content of the sensation that has just occurred by adding the moment of time just passed. The sound that has just occurred is reproduced as past and then followed by a sound in a permanent and continuous process. Husserl calls this situation a Datum: “The unity of consciousness which encompasses the present and the past is a phenomenological datum” (Husserl 1985, p. 28).

This example of sound is also interesting to understand the notion of givenness, including that of an object. Indeed, when a sound occurs, it flows in time and we are aware of it as a present moment. When the sound stops, we are aware of this sound as a past and, as time goes by, it becomes obscured until it disappears. What happened during this flow of consciousness? Just like an object that would have been given with different outlines or aspects, the sound was given through successive givenness. The possible perception is this accumulation of sounds since I heard the melody. However, phenomenologically, only the current moment of a sound was present. The whole melody was not given at once, it was successive givenness on which the retention was made.

3.3.5.2. Retention of innovation

Within the notion of retention for innovation, it would no longer be a question of simply looking at product or service innovation, for example, but at innovations. It would be about bringing them together, making them whole. This is important, because it is not a question of the innovator approaching an innovation in a phenomenological way, if you can call it that; rather, it is a holistic, coherent and continuous approach in which all innovative proposals are orchestrated. As with the notes that form a whole, innovations must also form a whole, coherent in their essence. This would not, for example, mean paying attention to an innovation in its environmental or social aspects, neglecting the rest of the product range that could be quite harmful to those aspects. There is therefore a retention of innovation as an overall position, like music that we want to be harmonious, melodious and coherent.

Innovations are givenness, they flow, appear, take possession of space and time, and accumulate. Too often independent, they look neither before nor after their existence. This generates confusion and uproar, as is certainly the period in which we live, a mixture of genres, models and consciences. When everything is mixed up with innovation, everything is diluted: responsibility and interest, importance and superficiality. Thus between artificial intelligence and big data, between the digitalization of the world and the omnipresence of social networks, innovations have created a background noise that makes it impossible to correctly determine what is good from what is bad, it is impossible to sort the important from the incidental.

The tool of retention is indeed that of questioning innovations in the broad sense, and not in the particular sense. What do we do and when, how do we do it and with what means? What collusion are we at risk of? What contempt do we create (e.g. through radical innovations that can be misunderstood, misused or inappropriate)? How do we distinguish innovations from each other? How do we prevent contradictory injunctions, sometimes within the same organization? The idea is to make what we do clear and distinct knowing what we do is the challenge of innovations, the way we think about them. And the exercise of retention is certainly appropriate because it makes it possible to retain, but also to project oneself into the understanding of a past in order to write a certain future, and this by looking at things as a whole, in order to harmonize them, capture them and understand the whole story.

3.3.6. The ego as the foundation of the world

The ego is at the foundation of the world insofar as it is from it that the possible understanding of the world, the experiments and the lived experiences begin. It is at the heart of phenomenology, being at the same time, the object, the cause and the consequence of its implementation. In Logical Investigations, Husserl wondered about the ego because the fact of being directed towards something shows a meaning, a path that necessarily emerges from a self, requiring an initial, original, egological extreme. In other words, to the extent that consciousness is a personal consciousness, there must necessarily be an ego, crystallizing all experiences (Husserl 2001, Chapter 4). The ego actually obtains a privileged position in Husserl’s work, since it is necessary; thus, he specifies in Ideas: “the first place is due the relationship of each mental process to the ‘pure’ Ego” (Husserl 1983, p. 190), and it is the ego that forms this relationship. It is not the self that can realize this relationship, for it is not for itself a transcendental object; however, for Husserl the self “presents itself – a non-constituted transcendence – a transcendence in immanence” (1985, pp. 188–190).

There is therefore the ego or of the ego for Husserl, more precisely the transcendental ego. This one emerges logically following the reduction of the self and in Ideas, Husserl explains this passage from the epoché, the reduction of the self to the transcendental ego: what remains of the suspended self, once the reduction is made, is consciousness, the essence of consciousness more precisely (1985, pp. 188–190)10. This essence of consciousness makes the intentional relationship disappear – which can be reproached by the self – in favor of the transcendental relationship. From then on, just as the targeted object becomes a reduced thing, an essence of the targeted object, and is endowed with a transcendental characteristic, the reduced ego, in turn, takes on a transcendental appearance itself.

In a way, Husserl has made the ego the future of the self, a worldly self that allows access to pure, original experiences. This ego becomes a pure self, it is an idealized self, moving away from society while approaching a pure givenness. At the same time, by introducing the transcendental ego, Husserl allows the phenomenologist to exist without being relegated to a subjective or abstract subject (Husserl 1947, p. 115).

3.3.6.1. The ego and others, from solipsism to ego transfer

By the way it acts its method, its constitution, phenomenology seems in fact a solipsistic11 philosophy. However, this solipsism can be called into question as soon as the phenomenologist finds himself in front of others.

Others seem to spontaneously appear as an object, as a transcendence. Another provokes, questions the phenomenological method. How, indeed, can I, who is a “pure” self, a transcendental ego, know another self, this other person who is my alter ego? For unlike the object, the givenness of others is not made “in person”, in “flesh and blood”, the life of this other ego necessarily escapes me (Husserl 1947, pp. 157–158).

Showing that the other is an “I” is not self-evident. Indeed, how could my ego, within me, even constitute another ego? The other “self” seems inaccessible and would tend to refer to phenomenology, the phenomenologist, as definitively solipsistic. However, considering these different interferences between “self” and “others”, Husserl showed the structure of otherness, “the other self”, and sought to understand the ‘self’ of the other (1947, pp. 35–36 and 137–139). What others are to me, I am to others. In other words, the phenomenology which is in fact solipsistic in its structure, its method and its need for self-knowledge does not, however, remove all consciousness from others.

3.3.6.2. The innovator’s ego

As we have said, the ego is not the “I”, and it is not a question of confusing them, even if the ego can be the first steps towards a future self. This would obviously be distinct from the current ego – undoubtedly society-based – since it would act in a naturally holistic way. Nor is it the “simple” representation and self-awareness that one has. The innovator’s ego is the central body of choice, of the decision that allows innovation to be set in motion. We could even hypothesize that the innovator’s ego is composed of a multitude of individuals who all come together and find themselves with the desire and interest to see the success of the innovation they propose (consider a shareholders’ agreement, a consortium, a professional agreement).

The innovator’s ego is clearly at the foundation of the world. It is the original center of all things and its complexity lies in the fact it succeeds in mixing, as Husserl points out, a transcendence within immanence. This is because innovation is fundamentally an immanent device, certainly too immanent, because it is stuck to its actions, its results, its performance. Ensuring the development of transcendence would allow the ego to open up, to imagine a field that integrates others and its ecosystem, the environment and to look beyond the present. Rather than restricting itself, to withdraw, the ego could take on a dimension and depth that would exceed it itself. It is quite clear that the innovator does not spontaneously appreciate this type of approach and is rather fearful even and resistant, because opening up may show gaps, flaws in their system that they spend their time strengthening and barricading. This is why proposals of the “open innovation” type (Chesbrough 2003) are attractive, as long as they are not vitiated by unilateral use, but on the contrary very open to the environment and particularly to others. Openness to others, particularly in the context of transdisciplinary approaches, can only be encouraged. This allows the abundance of ideas, the multiplicity of varied reflections. The crossover of disciplines, the mixing of perspectives from different specialists, naturally forces us to reconsider our preconceived ideas.

Indeed, the necessary openings are made possible thanks to others. While phenomenology can be seen as a solipsistic philosophy, the innovator can also be accused of the same mistakes. The innovator as a thinking subject has no other realities, acquired with certainty, than himself/herself. They are convinced of themself and their actions. It is certainly a necessity for them in order to survive in a deeply competitive world, yet it blinds them to their actions. The solipsism of the innovator can therefore only be thwarted by others and they must put themself within a framework of otherness where they consider “the other of themself”. To seek to understand the other’s “self” for the innovator is to understand how others (whoever they are in their ecosystem) are, for them, what they can be for themselves. We could reduce this to a form of empathy, but it is not just that, since it is a matter of the innovator not only identifying with others, putting themself in their place in what they feel, but also in what they can experience, what they can suffer, the consequences they can endure in the short, medium or long term. And if the innovator can have the keys and information for this, this is not the case for others, because they do not necessarily have all the elements enabling them to consider the consequences of the innovations facing them.

It is not easy for the innovator to convert their ego, to move it from a selfish, self-centered state to a benevolent individualistic state. For individualism may well be the path that would be preferable for them to choose. It is an illusion to think of the advent of a truly collective innovation; human beings are not constituted in this way – except in the context of community cooperation – and their history has always been nothing more than a battle, a competition, with themselves and with others. That is why individualism (not selfishness) can suit them, let them struggle, grow, build, form an organization, but without violating the survival of the other and it is as such that a benevolent individualism is to be considered.

It is understood that this will be all the more complicated because benevolence is not in its current scope. This can obviously be seen as an additional constraint but don’t we innovate better under constraints? Wouldn’t the obligation of benevolence make the innovator’s ego more interesting, useful and necessary? Shouldn’t the future “self” be composed of this duality formed by individualism and benevolence as we can assume with the concept of care and more particularly caring-innovation12?

3.3.7. The phenomenological approach to testing senses

Intentionality, reduction, the epoché are self-implementations where the ego is at stake. All these steps have a very specific objective. During these steps, the senses of sight, hearing and touch are used. However, these senses can also cause confusion, they can interfere with the initial ambition and the “right” search for essence. The phenomenologist’s meditative challenge will be to avoid this confusion by rigorously maintaining the goal initially chosen.

The view to begin with, more precisely the vision, is used from the moment of intentionality. As we have noted, intentionality is linked to the givenness of materials, things, senses. However, this givenness can be fragmented, being only an outline (Barbaras 2004, p. 105); the givenness being made only by profile. A tree that we look at will give itself an identity of a tree, but we necessarily neglect another profile that it has, which is not offered at first sight. Despite the fact that it cannot be seen from all sides at the same time, this tree presents itself well in terms of its identity, even with only one of its profiles, one of its outlines.

The outline shows that the object is only a fragment, that the object as such is only partially presented. The outline is overtaken by the object and, at the same time, preserves the object by maintaining a certain distance. The outline plays an important role in reduction, because it is an immanent experience that corresponds to the sensation, to the given sensations and will have an eidetic meaning. Yet, even if the presence of the outline shows the givenness of the thing, it is not fully present, it is present as much as it is not present, as something given-without giveness. It is therefore given twice at the same time, as an outline on the one hand, and not present on the other.

This vision implemented in the context of intentionality can be disrupted by the multiplicity of perceptions. Thus, a plant that we would like to reduce will offer a multitude of samples for the goal: the leaf, the stem, the flower, the petals, the different materials and textures… Each part of the plant is not equal at all, yet the goal is confronted with these different elements and each of them is necessary for a “good” reduction. There is a kind of contradiction between the need for reduction through targeting and, at the same time, the disadvantages of targeting, in its natural approach through multiplicity.

Hearing can also be a disruptive element for the ambition (Depraz 1999b, pp. 42–44). If I aim for the table in front of me, try to reduce and at the same time, if a sound appears, my auditory perception will challenge my parenthesis by diverting attention from my perception, which will then have to be renewed.

Touch is also a fundamental parameter (Depraz 1999b, pp. 42–44). Instead of observing a terrain, if I walk on it, the sensation experienced will offer one sensation or another; the perception will be specific to touch and will go beyond the simple stage of visual perception.

It should also be noted that internal sensations can disturb the epoché, intentionality and reduction. Thus, during the phenomenological process, I can feel my heart beating, feel a trembling muscle, a moving eyelid, etc.

These experienced sensations, independent of the phenomenologist’s desire, show the difficulty of accessing the phenomenological approach that can be called meditative. Only training, asceticism and exercises can lead to an experienced phenomenological practice. In fact, a complexity emerges here. Phenomenology is not only carried out by the mind but also by the body, by the five senses, and can harm the phenomenological exercise in question.

3.3.7.1. The innovator’s senses

In the same way as things are, the givenness of innovation is only given through a profile, a side, a plot, sometimes a point of view. This partial donation is the one initiated by the innovator and it is received by his audience also only in a fragmented way. The difficulty is that this partial reception is not necessarily identical to the one perceived by the innovator. The fragmentation of an innovation in its givenness is necessarily subjective and, to put it in a worldly way with an example, if the innovator sees in the 3D printer only a process for creating prostheses at a lower cost, it is not impossible that another subjectivity may perceive here the way to manufacture a firearm. Because innovation is only ever fragmentary, is only given by outlines and, as such, can only be given with no givenness. To combat these fragmented limitations, the innovator must be involved in a multiplicity of perceptions. He can try to do this alone, with empathy, by working on ego transfers, but it is preferably with others that this can be done. It is through the multiplication of perceptions, let us call them “opinions”13, “views”, “observations”, that the innovator will be able to widen their vision of innovation and make it as holistic as possible.

In addition to the givenness fragmentation, Husserl underlines the risks, during reductions, of being disturbed by what we hear, what we feel. The innovator is no less subject to external or internal disruptions as well. When innovation is reduced, disruption can come; let us put it bluntly, from shareholders and management, from competitors and from legislation. Internal disruption can come from one’s own motivation to achieve something unique, to achieve one’s goals, to acquire power or fortune. These disruptions very clearly prevent the innovator from having a full, whole, healthy, objective opinion of their output and they are subject to those internal or external forces to which, in one way or another, they risk succumbing to.

Escaping these disrupters and multiplying perceptions are useful elements to achieving a better ambition, a more reliable reduction in innovation. But we understand that these two elements require an extraordinary position from the innovator. Succeeding in freeing oneself from disturbances requires a position that could be described as meditative. Only the turning towards oneself, the objective exercise of depth, the concentration on the current acts, can allow us to escape these disturbances. Successfully building an inner fortress for a better evaluation of innovation is probably the key to (re)thinking innovation as well as possible, as we will see below. However, this fortress has the originality of being open, because it must accommodate the multiple subjective perceptions that will help to best evaluate the proposed innovations.

3.4. Phenomenology as praxis

The path we follow, taking care to understand in broad terms Husserlian phenomenology, underlines a particularly “theoretical” philosophy. The application of this thought does not always seem very simple, even if we have tried to propose some examples and we can legitimately ask ourselves what the real implementations of phenomenology are. Determining praxis is not so obvious here and, moreover, was Husserl not accused, as early as Levinas’ work (Bustan 2006, pp. 35–59), of being too programmatic? The implementation of phenomenology is established in Husserl’s work as a practice of the method, but is not carried out. We must look for it, read it in his followers’ work, in that of his opponents, in the “dissidents” who are more or less close to him.

Perhaps apart from the direct followers of Husserl, such as Fink, for example, any phenomenology after the founder is a phenomenology of dissent. From Heidegger to Marion, Levinas, Henry and Derrida, all of them have, in their own way, transcribed the initial ambition of Husserl’s phenomenology by appropriating it and changing its form and content. They questioned it to the extreme, whether through Life (Henry), Difference (Derrida) and Givenness (Marion). So the question of dissent of Husserl’s phenomenology is both almost limitless and obvious. One wonders whether phenomenological innovation, as we propose here, is not a new dissent.

Among these dissents, the praxis aspect is particularly interesting for our purpose, in particular, through interpretations of Husserlian phenomenology that engage a concrete implementation. However, bringing a dimension of praxis into phenomenology, even if it is necessary for us, seems audacious – let us recall that Husserl called for it. Phenomenology seems to give a method, it offers us an approach, it shows us the goals and expected results, but Husserl’s proposal is very weak as a practical demonstration, even if phenomenology has, in the mind of its founder, praxis based on real experiences, descriptions, summoning lived experiences.

Moreover, whether it is from Levinas, Heidegger or Henry for example, phenomenology seems spontaneously more in line with analytical philosophy, which, if it can be concrete in some respects (in philosophy of science or morality), seems less concerned with its repercussions on the well-being of individuals. Phenomenology can thus simply be interpreted as a theory of thought, of phenomena such that they give themselves unto consciousness.

Nevertheless, we must try to work on this hypothesis of a phenomenology by drawing inspiration from Natalie Depraz’s14 work, who considers that “phenomenology makes or does not make an effort” (Depraz 2006, p. 39), because it is “a place for experimentation with thought as a practice that is renewed each time it questions itself” (Ibid. p. 7).

3.4.1. The practice of phenomenology
3.4.1.1. Phenomenological texts, readings and writings

The first confrontation with phenomenology is necessarily carried out through the text, a phenomenologist’s writing. This confrontation with the text covers two paths: first of all, the delimitation of the text in a defined space, whether in content or form, by a phenomenologist expressing a point of view, a theory, a thought (Depraz 2006, p. 5). The text is then a defined object, self-supporting of an individual thought whose essence remains that of the author’s. Second, the text can just as well be taken not for itself, but for the experience it offers or can potentially offer. On the one hand, the experience that was lived by the phenomenologist writer when they were writing the text and, on the other hand, the experience of the future phenomenologist who is reading the text. This experience is, in itself, already a particular asceticism, because it is not a question of reading the text in the usual way, in the same way as any other philosophical treatise, but on the contrary of reading it as material of a phenomenological experience – subjective and individual – to come (Depraz 2006, p. 6)15.

Reading the phenomenological text therefore constitutes a first commitment in which we take advantage of this confrontation to experience the different parameters of phenomenology, whether they are: ambition, intentionality, epoché… This experience of the text is particularly significant in the epoché, where it will not only be permitted, but fundamental to approach the text with this capacity to suspend judgment and even its transformation and conversion. Weighing up the sentences, taking them in and understanding them, letting them take their full place in yourself. The suspension of judgment will here be the suspension of the reading, by taking the time, meditative in nature, to soak up the text.

Natalie Depraz seeks to show how writing, written as such of phenomenology, is a practical application of phenomenology. To do this, she describes the instructions or rather the instructions of phenomenological writing (Depraz 2006, p. 79). The first rule is to refrain from writing in order to “let a quality relationship emerge, in terms of what is written that is entirely that of the vital moment, without any prior residue or subsequent clutter” (Depraz 2006, p. 79). This “delay” of the given, of the product, is not only found in phenomenological writing, it also constitutes an artistic attitude for a writer, a painter or a musician.

This suspension is reminiscent of the phenomenological epoché both in the retention of product and in the production in power. Like the variation of the eidos, it will be a variation of words, sentences, ideas, a sequence of ideas in order to produce the written word. To practice the epoché of writing is not to write “in order to let the space of meaning and expressive possibilities unfold” (Depraz 2006, p. 80).

3.4.1.2. A historically practical phenomenonology

For Charles Sanders Peirce, the founder of pragmatism, the phenomenologist must possess three qualities (Depraz 2006, pp. 284–285): first, the ability to see what is obvious, the evidence; followed by the ability to achieve uniqueness, which best characterizes observation; third, the ability to generalize, to vary the uniqueness, the essence that is extracted from observation. To these three qualities, which recall the Husserlian approach to intentionality, epoché and the search for essence through eidetic variation, Peirce adds a concrete practice, where the notions of “struggle” and “resistance” are found (Depraz 2006, pp. 284–285). The phenomenon is not given, it is not passively imposed on us. For Peirce, there is an inner struggle of the phenomenon, as for ourselves, a struggle towards it (Depraz 2006, pp. 284–285).

It is not a question here of mixing phenomenology and pragmatism too hastily. What is interesting to note is that there may be a pragmatic use of phenomenology. In other words, pragmatism makes phenomenology operational. And since Peirce, there is the idea of the first moments of a practical phenomenology, a phenomenology in action, a pragmatic translation of Husserlian phenomenology, when he is just his contemporary.

Following this, another pragmatist, William James, developed his own method in which it is a matter of questioning each other, in groups, concerning phenomena, perceptions of phenomena. What interested him, as much as Husserl, was to stress that the “ready-made” positions of both sides should be avoided – in other words, it is a question of knowing how to deviate from the natural attitude that concerns us. At the same time, for James, it is not necessary to reject the natural attitude, but rather to examine these positions to understand what is at stake: “All that really exists is not things, but things that are being done” (Bergson 1977)16.

John Dewey can also be part of this dimension of practical phenomenology according to Natalie Depraz, if we stop for example, on what he calls know-how. This concerns the ability to act in relation to one’s environment, one’s context, in other words to be aware of what surrounds us; this by being particularly attentive to our relationships with others. What effect does the environment have on me, as well as my relationship with others (Depraz 2006, p. 48)? Do the phenomena I perceive have a real influence on me? How do I understand them?

It is possible to mix in Wittgenstein on this subject for whom confrontation with the facts of experience is fundamental. But also Richard Rorty, for whom a philosophy is appreciated, or even evaluated, according to the contingent situations linked to it, whether in terms of contexts, environments or traditions17. In other words, things, situations, experiences are never uncorrelated to their contexts, to the situation experienced, there are no fixed and permanently stabilized conditions, so judgments cannot be made either. This is why, for Rorty, we must “seize time in thought” (Cometti 1992, p. 13), because the contingency of phenomena will necessarily lead to the evolution of this thought.

The phenomenological pragmatism initiated by Peirce is repeated and extended in (Depraz 2003). This text shows the importance of pragmatic phenomenology work: its function is to describe what is being done. This description is not necessarily self-evident. It is about training, learning, practice and effort. Because experience is not given as a fact to the subject’s consciousness. Experience is an act, in effect, a power, to be carried out. In other words, the experience is not received, it is made to be received, according to the subject’s aspiration, his desire, his taste. The experience of consciousness is “the tool of the very relationship of the experiential relationship with ourselves and with others, is it less a conscious being or a conscious having than a conscious becoming” (Depraz 2000, pp. 165–184)18.

The intention here is to update phenomenology in such a way that it has an experiential ambition. The vocation of phenomenology from then on, its accomplishment, lies in the implementation of the subject, of what one experiences, of what will be given to one’s consciousness.

3.4.1.3. The community and others, the practical experiential attempts of phenomenology

In the 1960s, the New School of New York, with Spiegelberg initiated a practical interpretation of phenomenology. Spiegelberg sought to highlight phenomenological texts through their implicit content and arguments (Spiegelberg 1975)19. He sought to produce new analyses, varied descriptions based on our ability to experiment on our own.

Spiegelberg articulated, concretely, this practical interpretation of phenomenology around “phenomenological workshops” (Depraz 2006, p. 55). The participants of this workshop must have nothing with them, no books, no texts, no support. They find themselves together with each other’s consciousness as the only material. This is how discussions begin through the individual experience of each participant. They practice a reexperimentation of perceptual, memorable and imaginative experiences. They then pool the descriptions produced individually, in order to identify a possible invariant of experiences, that were initially developed in a unique way.

3.4.1.4. The role of others in achieving “the things themselves”

Seeking a “return to the things themselves” is for an individual something complex, because they are necessarily following a subjective approach to things. Natalie Depraz argues this point, considering that our own experience is not only entirely subjective, but that, by definition, it diminishes into a deep narcissism that, not only does not allow a return to the things themselves, but distorts them (Depraz 2006, p. 9). That is why others will become a fundamental means of access to the things themselves. More precisely, without the acceptance of the same things by others, by a kind of variation of the essence of things by the ambitions of others, the return to the same things is not valid, because it is subjective and self-conscious. Others become indispensable for the implementation of the Husserlien project.

3.4.2. Towards a practical phenomenology for the innovator

Since phenomenology can have a real practical dimension, it must be able to meet the practice of innovation, as we have seen, to bring it its skills that help it return to the things themselves, to succeed in reduction, to question the essence, to know how to suspend its judgment. Therefore, the questions of “interpreting”, phenomenological workshops or the role of others that we have just discussed must also be able to be implemented for innovation.

3.4.2.1. A new interpretation of innovation

Interpreting phenomenological texts is a practical exercise that makes it possible to understand, this philosophy certainly, but also the experience lived during the reading, it is a matter of questioning the interpretation of innovation. How do we understand innovation? How is its definition proposed to us? Where do we broaden our knowledge of innovation? Are innovation texts, whether from economists or management sciences, interpreted? How are they interpreted? Do we learn to interpret them? For what purpose are they interpreted? When potential innovators confront texts about innovation, how do they learn this knowledge? How do they criticize what they learn? To put it another way, it may be necessary to develop a critical technique to interpret theories, approaches, definitions and understandings of innovation. Without a critical technique, the reader only receives the opinion, the author’s desire, they are influenced, if not manipulated. The innovator needs independence of mind, needs to think and react to what they interpret, which will encourage them to act in a particular way. In concrete terms, a potential innovator who is confronted with innovative works will consider that this is the natural way to go. If they do not operate a phenomenological approach to their interpretations, they will condition him/her to what the texts, the authors want to do with it.

There is a quality relationship to be established in their interpretations on innovation: a quality that allows questioning, doubt and criticism. It is necessary to understand the effects of the theories on oneself as an innovator. Whatever theoretical proposals are proposed, the innovator must succeed in approaching them with the necessary phenomenological distance.

The phenomenological interpretation of innovation is a first practical step and it allows the innovator to acquire a different standpoint from the one they are used to adopting. But more generally, training in phenomenology, the follow-up of the process of phenomenology as we have gone through it, draws a new innovator with very concrete new qualities: learning to suspend one’s judgment; learning to escape one’s ego and multiply points of view, seeing the evidence by knowing how to question and go directly to the essence of things themselves. In concrete terms, when developing a social network for example, the innovator must question their judgment regarding the data that they can collect, and ask themself how to create this network with institutional partners, with non-governmental organizations, for example, so that this service is not their only property but it is carried by a collective. Similarly, the innovator can seek the views of a large number of stakeholders, directly or indirectly, to gather their desires but also their fears. The idea is to go to the very essence of this service, which is no more and no less a form of networking, but with transparency, sharing and kindness20. We find what Dewey calls know-how, the ability to be aware of what surrounds us, to be attentive to our environment, to ourselves, to our relationships with others. The (re)thought innovator is the one with this know-how, they are the one who understands their ecosystem in its reality and succeeds in knowing what the influences on it are. And it is in this respect that a practical phenomenology of innovation is not only possible but indispensable. It makes it possible to be in a situation, to put oneself as an innovator in a phenomenological arrangement that will make it possible to fully evaluate the innovative actions being carried out.

3.4.2.2. Phenomenological innovation workshops

We understand that phenomenology applied to innovation is something to be applied, trained in, practiced and, as such, innovators also need to set up phenomenological innovation workshops. The goal is to make people aware of phenomenology, to teach them to suspend their judgment, to return to the things themselves, to understand the multiplicity of points of view, but above all, it is also about training and helping each other to change their position. This awareness will help to nurture the innovator’s responsible awareness, to acknowledge their responsibility. Phenomenology is a discipline that is interested in and values emotions, sensations, what responsibility a priori does not or too often does not do. Indeed, responsibility refers above all to laws, knowledge, orders that can be moral or legislative, for example. Where necessary, it is not useless for the innovator to work on their responsibility in terms of intuitions, emotions and perceptions. All this can be worked on, experienced, and phenomenology certainly has a role to play. Thus, beyond a necessary knowledge of phenomenology, it is above all a question of how it can be applied to innovators, in practice. This type of workshop is, in a way, an experimental innovation laboratory allowing us to compare one’s position as an innovator, one’s innovation proposals with a population with similar concerns. It goes without saying that such proposals do not replace the multiplicity of egos, of experiences beyond innovators, but it is a question – with the help of a mediator – of making innovators aware of the confined space in which they find themselves, of making them evolve in their retreat from what they do. It also allows them to develop exercises and carry out training that they in turn can implement. By explaining their own practices, sharing their doubts, confronting their situations, they will not only be able to have access to a different perspective from an individual sharing of the same “business concerns” concerns, but also to gather an opinion from outside the sector in question.

3.4.2.3. The other and the innovator

If this type of phenomenological innovation workshop is also a place to learn to take an interest in others, it is in your daily life that this interest must develop. As we have said above, the other is the method that allows access to the things themselves, it allows us to resist our subjectivity. In concrete terms, the innovator must learn to distance themself from others, to multiply the experiences of others and be open to considering them as more “valid” than their own. This is also a disruption for the innovator, who extricates themself from their usual position and learns to ask for the opinion of others, to review the observations of others, to await the judgment of an individual, to welcome the perception of another. It is a kind of daily eidetic variation to which the innovator is called with regard to their proposals, and this requires a radical change of attitude. While they were used to informing and being led by their “management” and to questioning their prospects on “commercial” aspects, they must now take into account the opinions and remarks not only of the prospects, of their “hierarchy”, but of their entire ecosystem, which will be directly or indirectly affected by their innovation. It is at this cost that a return to the thing itself can begin, not because it is a question of “going around” by the various stakeholders, but because the variety of viewpoints will make it possible to penetrate as closely as possible to this thing (through subjectivities, expertise, debates that may arise). It is at this price that innovation can be (re)thought, at this price that we can hope for a preferable innovation for the preservation of a truly human life.

3.5. Being aware of innovations

“Every conscious process is, in itself, consciousness of such and such,” says Husserl (1947, p. 28) and obviously consciousness is focused on something with innovation. But towards what? The innovator’s awareness focuses, in any case, on the possible success, on the performance of the innovation implemented, on the profitability generated. Everything is organized so that the innovator’s consciousness goes in this direction, that they only think with these guidelines.

The objective of taking an interest in phenomenology for innovation is precisely to succeed in working on the awareness of what we do, of what the innovator does or must do. As such, this modification of consciousness can only be made with a new adopted position and it is precisely a new way of being that phenomenology suggests. Learning to doubt and suspend one’s judgment, multiplying experiences, fighting against subjectivity, trying to get to the things themselves, are the decisive elements for a change of consciousness. This involves meditative exercises, questions that can be learned in the workshop, a new way of interpreting.

The challenge of this part was to (re)think innovation with a new form of being, a new face to question innovation. While it has been necessary to go through theoretical and descriptive elements of Husserlian phenomenology, it is to better understand what this philosophy is, how it was constituted and how it is possible to extract its essence for a new purpose, which is that of innovation. Phenomenology has been used for many purposes and far beyond philosophy, as much to capture religion, architecture, art and psychology. Phenomenology has often been a tool to help understand and decipher these complex systems. Innovation is nevertheless a complex system and it seems that mixing this discipline with phenomenology makes sense.

As we have said, we need new ways of thinking about innovation, new methods, and while non-standard philosophy has allowed us to question the very terminology of innovation, its essence, phenomenology has helped us to (re)think innovations to grasp them better. Capture innovations as they are, capture innovations in their environment, capture innovations as they are perceived. In addition, there is the innovator’s position and the way in which it must evolve, based on philosophy. We are aware of both the limits of the exercise at this stage, its complexity of understanding and perhaps even its sometimes abstract nature. But we must face the fact that we will not be able to solve such complex problems as those of innovation without making attempts, without trying them out and proposals that must be unique (at the risk of being hermetic from time to time). We can only succeed in finding solutions to contemporary problems by adapting, by drawing inspiration from disciplines and techniques that are different from the place the difficulties arise without seeking to apply the former without reflection or modification. As a result, new concepts emerge and new forms of use are develop. It is not a question of saying that they are relevant and without criticism, but of looking at them as attempts and certainly as raw materials that are only the first steps towards future, perhaps more operational, developments. This is why phenomenology has interested us here. It is itself a philosophy of intellectual complexities that has not ceased to have dissidents, rebirths and, on many occasions, more or less happy attempts to put it into practice. It is the prize of philosophy to accept that we do not always hold the truth – as we have understood with non-standard philosophy – and of philosophers, to go against the trend of standardized, regular, traditional ideas to propose different perspectives.

1 See also Ricoeur 1990, p. 98, on this point.
2 Cited by Tilliette 2005, p. 44.
3 Note that we use the terms “epoché” and “reduction” interchangeably; Husserl himself attributed an equivalent function to both concepts, as Jan Patocka’s work shows. See Patocka 2002 and Depraz 2006, p. 104.
4 Cited by Depraz 1999b, p. 26.
5 Edmund Husserl, “Les conférences de Paris”, in Husserl 1994, p. 1.
6 Pierre Hadot, “L’histoire de la pensée hellénistique et romaine”, inaugural lesson at the Collège de France in Hadot 2002b, p. 281. It should also be noted that in the very last lines of Cartesian Meditations, Husserl summarizes his journey as follows: “The delphic motto ‘know thyself!’ has gained a new signification […]. I must lose the world by epoché, in order to regain it by a universal self-examination” (1999).
7 See Hadot 2002b, p. 101; Pavie 2012a, p. 134.
8 See also Depraz 1997.
9 See also Barbaras 2004, p. 41.
10 See also Dastur 2004, p. 45.
11 Husserl himself mentioned it (1947, p. 46).
12 Xavier Pavie, “From responsible-innovation to innovation-care, beyond constraints, a holistic approach of innovation”, in Gianni et al. 2019.
13 It requires a real effort to put oneself in such a position, as our “opinions” are very often non-meditative. It is therefore a question of practicing (re)thinking our “opinion”. This is almost an asceticism, as we will see in the next section on spiritual exercises and the innovator.
14 Several of her books or articles concern the hypothesis of a “concrete practice” of phenomenology, we will mention precisely which ones. However, we are currently building on Natalie Depraz’s (2006) book.
15 See also Depraz 2001, pp. 169–173; Depraz 1999a.
16 Included in Lapoujade 1997, pp. 82–84.
17 Richard Rorty quoted by Descartes 1992, p. 12.
18 See Depraz 2006, p. 50.
19 See Depraz 2006, p. 55.
20 In a way, the French search engine Qwant is in this process. Since its launch, it has announced that it will not track its users or sell their personal data, in order to guarantee their privacy and it will be neutral in displaying results. The search engine is part of a list of free software recommended by the French government, even if it is not fully supported: it could be even more open-ended by becoming free software.

===== FILE 11/17: c04.xhtml =====

4
Spiritual Exercises to (Re)think the Innovator1

“I believe in the possibility for modern man to live, not the wisdom (the Ancients, for the most part, already considered it as an inaccessible ideal that regulates action, and not as a realized state), but an exercise, always fragile, always renewed, of wisdom. And I think that this exercise of wisdom can and must aim to achieve a reintegration of the self into the world and into the universal.”

(Hadot 1989, pp. 175–188)

4.1. The need for spiritual exercises

The third philosophical movement we propose is not an ordinary thought for (re)thinking innovation. Originating from the origins of philosophy more than 2,500 years ago, spiritual exercises are much more often called upon to think about lifestyle than the development of new products or services. However, it seems to us essential and consistent with the previous path to focus on this philosophy, the proposal of which is to help people live better. The spiritual exercises are fully in line with the continuity of our work, aimed at redesigning terminology (through non-standard philosophy), and the way we approach innovation (through phenomenology), knowing that here the focus will be on the innovator.

Moreover, if we have previously tried to regularly look for a practical aspect of the philosophical proposals discussed in order to (re)think innovation, paradoxically nothing can be more concrete than spiritual exercises. Since ancient times, philosophers who practiced spiritual exercises had this concrete concern which aimed to articulate théôria and praxis. Their concerns were to make philosophy practical in everyday life. While the concrete, practical aspect was important among the Ancients, this was because the philosopher had a very precise question to answer: how could philosophy help people live better? The answer lied in what Pierre Hadot called the “spiritual exercises”.

4.1.1. Spiritual exercises, from ancient philosophy

All ancient philosophy is a spiritual exercise, an expression that refers to any practice intended to transform, in oneself or in others, the way of living, of seeing things. It is both a discourse, whether internal or external, and an implementation. It is in these terms that Pierre Hadot describes ancient philosophy, which, for him, in the tradition of the Ancients, a discipline intended to help people live better, to be better, to enjoy what they experience rather than to live subject to their passions, which in the end are never satisfied2.

This notion of spiritual exercise was developed in the different schools of antiquity, mainly among the Stoics, but also among the Epicureans and Cynics, who developed techniques and methods so that everyone could achieve a better life. All highlighted man and his serenity, man in harmony with the awareness that life is short and that the time to live is uncertain, that life is punctuated daily by evils, pains and obstacles that must be overcome.

This practice of philosophy as a spiritual exercise was seen throughout all of antiquity, from the Hellenistic period to the Christian advent, when philosophy was partly relayed by religion and became a discipline in the service of God (Hadot 2002b, p. 70). The works of Pierre Hadot, but also those of Michel Foucault, particularly show that Christianity did not forge its own spiritual exercises until the dawn of the 1st Century, when it sought to constitute itself as a competitor to Greek philosophy. However, and as a result of this recovery, an alternative to religion developed for “those who could not or did not want to live according to a religious way of life: the possibility of choosing a purely philosophical way of life”, says Hadot (2002b, p. 70). That is why the notion of spiritual exercise, in the ancient philosophical sense, has been able to persist and is still found today in contemporary philosophy (Pavie 2012c, p. 14).

It is important to understand the two terms that make up the expression “spiritual exercise”. The term “exercise” finds its etymology in the Latin exercitium and means “the act of exercising someone to something” or “forming oneself”3. The classic definitions of the word show that exercise can relate to the body – exercising your body to do something, walking or relaxing – or the mind – doing a memory exercise, for example. The notion of exercise is intimately linked to the notion of work, training, repetition and learning. These elements are important, because “repeating”, “training” and “learning” are the fundamental actions, the pillars of the implementation of spiritual exercises. Nevertheless, “to practice”, “to exercise” must have, like any occupation, a meaning, a purpose. Before you even start practicing something, you have to determine its final meaning, the why, justify what you want to be or become through the exercise. As the Stoic Epictetus said, whether you are a stadium runner, carpenter or blacksmith, you must always relate what you do and what you practice to a purpose (Epictetus 1962a, p. 1015). In this case, it is our “spirit” that must be exercised.

The notion of “spiritual” is a little more complex to define and revolves around what is immaterial, the soul, the nature of the mind. It is an activity of the mind, where reason does not seem to appear without being excluded. This activity of the mind is part of sensory perceptions and, at the same time, of metaphysical interrogations that encompass reflection on oneself and what surrounds us: one’s environment, others, the world. Religion, especially Christianity, used the term “spiritual” very early and extensively to refer to the relationship of the spirit, the soul, with God. However, it must be remembered that the relationship with the soul is not exclusively determined by religion or God.

What is spiritual is free. In fact, the Churches have always been suspicious of it and confiscated it from people, as Paul Lombard (2006, p. 48) reminds us. It is because the spiritual is free, individual and subjective that religions have had the desire to control it. It can lead to God, just as it can ignore His existence. This freedom may have created religions without God and, obviously, there may be a “spiritual” without God4. From that moment on, we could say that the notion of spirituality is neutral with regard to that of “faith in God”; spirituality is the encounter and questioning of one’s own intimate, interior life. In this way, it dissociates itself from religious faith, which is external, because it refers to a transcendent God, as Pastor Alain Houziaux explains: “Spirituality is a preoccupation of the inner and intimate life, while faith, by referring to a transcendent God, is extroverted, tending towards a transcendental force” (Houziaux 2006, p. 15).

The spiritual therefore seems to be something unknown, but not for oneself. The spiritual is known to oneself and by oneself, it is not based on anything external to oneself; it is a subjective experience that is lived from within. This distinguishes it from religions, which manifest themselves through external rituals, myths and dogmas. Religion is, in fact, the exteriority of gestures, behaviors and conventions. The spiritual, on the other hand, is individual, sensitive to emotions, eccentric in relation to itself, but always inside, and it is this dimension that is crucial. It is, moreover, fully anchored in life, which brings it very clearly closer to the notion of “living the best possible life”, because it can accept, or even demand, a form of discipline, a form of asceticism in order to live life in the most complete, full and intense way possible. “If [spirituality] accepts a form of discipline and even sometimes asceticism, it is to be able to better explore all the possibilities of existence with its affects, contradictions and passions,” says Houziaux (2006, p. 19).

This shows us that the association between “exercise” and “spiritual” suggests that there is indeed “exercise”, that is to say work and training, in a relationship with the soul. For ancient philosophy, this relationship to the soul was working towards a certain purpose, which was that of humankind; for religions, this relationship to the soul has only one objective: to improve one’s relationship with God. However, this stance is far from being the only one possible; the soul, the spirit, the spiritual are not the preserve of religions and, moreover, do not appear in any religion originally.

4.1.1.1. To raise up one’s existence

Spiritual exercises are not the aim in themselves. The aim is that tension towards an inner freedom, a state in which the self depends only on itself. An “I” who has taken care of themselves to get to this stage, and who continues to take care of themselves in order to rise. To understand this, we must consider that our existence is confronted with three levels (Hadot 2001, p. 140): the first is that of the sensitive consciousness, which forms a single entity with the body. Here there is a form of crush between consciousness and the body, which results in forgetting or denying the spirit – as in the infant, for example, who as soon as he/she is hungry starts to cry until they are fed. An infant has no capacity for resistance, no capacity for reflection, no capacity for patience. The second level of the self is the awareness of the soul, of its capacity for reflection. It is the recognition of a first distinction, a first separation of the elements constituting the individual. From then on, this level makes it possible to establish a first contact between oneself, one’s mind and one’s body. We could say here that it is the “common man”, the one who is aware that he has a capacity for reflection, that he is not just a body. If the infant is only a “body” that seeks to grow and develop, the young man, but especially the adolescent or adult man, is capable of reflecting, thinking, envisaging and discerning the things around him. Finally, the third and final level is that of spiritual consciousness. The self understands at this stage that besides the distinction of the mind from the body, there is a transcendence both beyond it and that it is aware of. Here the individual is aware that they can work on themselves. There is a transcendence they aspire to. It should be noted that the recognition of transcendence does not diminish a certain immanence of the body, the mind, the individual in general. Immanence and transcendence are not opposed, and it is at this third level of the self that this is understood. There is knowledge of consciousness, knowledge of its multiple dimensions and finally knowledge of a possible work, of a possible influence on these dimensions.

The whole challenge of philosophy, of spiritual exercises, is to elevate the individual from the first to the third level. Through different techniques and methods, spiritual exercises will allow the common man, who is not very conscious of themselves by nature, to be led to a certain spiritual maturity which, once they have left the path of self-ignorance, will lead them to that of self-realization. This success in self-realization requires support. It is the role of the teacher who correctly leads the student to knowledge and understanding, to know-how and behavior. As we have seen above, the master’s mission will be to take the student out of stultitia5, that disposition of mind that prevents an individual from thinking, from taking a step back from themselves, their practices and their thoughts. Thus, this third step, this third level, is fundamentally only possible if accompanied by a master.

4.1.1.2. The innovator’s “self”

At what level is the innovator’s “self”? Is the innovator not like the infant who does not question themselves, who does not interrogate themselves, who does things without thinking? The hungry infant immediately sucks on their bottle, eats the food without thinking about what is good for them or not. Even with the existence of difficulties of being overweight or diabetic, the baby will continue to want to eat as much as they want and will cry if it is taken away, as the food can satisfy them. Is the innovator not in the same process that, without thinking, will continue to innovate, to launch products and services as much as they want? Regardless of the environmental issues, regardless of the social consequences, the innovator must recover a maximum of profits, a maximum of members, a maximum of votes. It is easy to conclude and regret that most innovators are at this stage: Mark Zuckerberg has never seen Facebook as anything other than a means of collecting a considerable amount of data for commercial exploitation (in defiance of privacy protection), and the securitization created by Lewis Ranieri of Franklin Bank was set up by bankers without any consideration for inadequate household debt (Lewis 2006). In a different field, many slaughterhouses compete in ingenuity to bypass or ignore standards and find ways to speed up the pace of killing, to crush the animals to death, fully conscious, sometimes even without stunning them. Regularly caught committing cruel acts towards animals, slaughterhouses always raise the same excuses: the pace necessary to meet deadlines, profits, contracts with customers, or lack of staff to save money6. A final example is Óscar Pérez Marcote, founder of the Spanish group Inditex (owner of the Zara brand), the world leader in textile clothing, which produces only 1% of the clothes it sells. The clothes are mainly made in workshops in Bangladesh, Pakistan, India or Brazil, often by children. A large proportion of clothing uses viscose, a vegetable fiber, which is increasingly preferred to cotton or synthetic fibers, and is often presented to consumers as a more “sustainable” alternative, which it could be. But the viscose purchased by fashion giants is anything but sustainable: it is the result of an intensive chemical process, which is not subject to any environmental control7. As a result, its production results in the release of hazardous chemicals and harmful gases into the environment at doses well above those recommended. Many surveys among workers and residents reveal diseases, water that is unfit for consumption. People living near a Chinese factory have even admitted that they do not dare feed their pigs the dead fish, because of the high levels of contamination! Water quality tests have only confirmed these testimonies, revealing levels of pollutants that are sometimes well above the legal limits set8. Even if, after years of public criticism from customers and associations, Inditex is seeking to remedy the situation, competitors with less media coverage continue to make these same decisions.

Level two of the innovator’s self would be becoming aware of what one is as a body. The organization, whatever its form, is a social body, a political body, and it needs to recognize itself as such in society, because it acts, interacts with others and must take them into account in its daily relationship, its consequences and its issues.

Finally, the third level of the innovator’s self that we can hope for is the one that makes it possible to understand that innovation has a transcendent role, for and in society, that it plays the role that no other discipline, no other “technique” plays. As a result, it confers rights, but above all duties and responsibilities. The innovator must therefore imagine how to succeed in escaping their stultitia which confines them to the first level of the self, to allow them to reach a decisive role in the second and third stages. They must succeed in becoming aware of their actions, in acting responsibly. It is this transcendence that allows the innovator to grow, to have an overview on the issues that they can solve or bring according to the innovation that they are developing. For this to happen, the teacher has a decisive role to play, as does education, but it is necessary for the innovator to understand that they must take care of himself/herself. Thus, for the examples taken above concerning Zuckerberg, Ranieri, the slaughterhouses or Marcotte, it is possible to see which attitudes would have been preferable. Indeed for Facebook: do not try to create a database whose uses are made without the knowledge of its users. Why didn’t you communicate the commercial usage? Be more transparent or even leave confidentiality to the discretion of users.

With regard to securitization, it would clearly have been necessary to not “force” loans that will be very difficult to repay and to inform people about risks or even prohibit certain people from borrowing.

Concerning slaughterhouses: slow down the pace, plan a “decent” death for animals, perhaps increase prices to generate some form of profit, even if this would reduce meat consumption. Moreover, it is common knowledge that meat is not a necessity for human life.

Finally, with regard to Inditex, perhaps it would have been necessary, in a way, to take care of the subcontractors manufacturing the clothing and not to try to produce at a lower cost when we know the obvious reasons for achieving these costs. When were the people in charge of these organizations extracted from their daily lives, to become aware of the reality, their actions, what they do? Who has sought to show these individuals that it is necessary to act with responsibility and care? Justice, the media and associations are the ones that have taken action with these organizations to limit their actions. Why did these individuals not ensure that they were supported in their development by these same associations? Why did they not accept that these associations play the role of the “master”, the advisor, to guide, inform and encourage?

4.1.2. The importance of self-care

Self-care is a decisive expression in the philosophy of spiritual exercises, because while the techniques and methods of spiritual exercises are fundamental to living better, it is above all a question of thinking about the stance we have regarding ourselves. We need to twist a common idea to understand this. The classic idea is that you have to have self-knowledge (see the famous aphorism “know thyself ”). However, it is not so much self-knowledge that is important, but self-care. This is what epimeleia heautou, caring for oneself (a concept that is essential for all Greek culture), consists of.

Self-care is the act of taking care of yourself. This notion has been obscured by that of gnôthi seauton, “know thyself” (Foucault 2001d, pp. 3–20). Michel Foucault and Jean-Pierre Vernant, among others, agree that aphorism may not even have had a philosophical meaning in antiquity, but only a request for self-knowledge for all those who came to consult the Apollo and his oracles. This expression had to be understood as a rule, a recommendation related to the very essence of consultation. This formula meant that people had to remember that they were only mortal and not a god and one should neither overestimate the self nor the divinities. But that was as far as it went. Self-care on the contrary, is a way of being, a way of life.

Nevertheless, we can establish a link between “self-knowledge” and self-care (Foucault 2001d, pp. 3–20). This connection is made regarding self-care. Concern for oneself is not self-knowledge, it is not introspection; it is constituting oneself as a subject of action in the face of events and one’s environment. Self-care is not disengagement from the world and from others, but rather action and responsibility. Thus, Epictetus demonstrated self-care when he explained the need to question his duties as a father of a family or the duties he had to perform as a citizen (Foucault 2001d, p. 56). Here we see both the importance of self-knowledge as an actor, as a participant in the life of an organization and of self-care to carry out one’s missions.

Self-care in antiquity was a way of life, a form of life followed all throughout one’s life, because, for ancient philosophers, “one must be for oneself, and throughout one’s existence one’s own object” (Foucault 2001c, p. 1175). Epicurus therefore advocated a lifelong philosophy of self-care and the Stoic Musonius Rufus or even Galen also explained that: “To become an accomplished man, everyone needs to exercise for most of his life [even if it is better] to have looked after his soul from an early age” (Foucault 2008, p. 44). It is this last point that we note in Socrates’ work when he recommended that Alcibiades take care of himself while he was still young, because at 50 years old it would be too late9. Indeed, Socrates was someone who encouraged others to take care of themselves, to care for them more than to know them; thus he said: “O my friend, why do you […] care so much about laying up the greatest amount of money and honor and reputation, and so little about wisdom and truth and the greatest improvement of the soul, which you never regard or heed at all?” (Plato 2009).

Self-care did not appear spontaneously or conceptually in Greek philosophy. It was regarded as a common principle. This self-interest was at the center of ancient Greek culture from a Lacedonian maxim, as Plutarch reports. It was Alexandride, a Lacedonian, who was once asked: “Anyway you Spartans are a little strange. You have a lot of land and your territories are huge, or at least very significant. And why don't you grow them yourself, why entrust them to the Helots?”, resulting in the reply: “Well, simply to be able to take care of ourselves” (Plutarch 1988, pp. 171–172).

It should be noted that epimeleia heautou was fundamental in all Hellenistic and Roman philosophy, whether among Epicureans who advocated that every person, night and day, and throughout their life, must take care of their own soul (Epicurus 1977), as among Cynics or Stoics, like Seneca for whom the Latin notion of the cura sui was essential throughout the Entretiens. Self-care therefore generates a certain number of acts that one exercises on oneself: meditations, memorization, the examination of the conscience – with a view to self-modification, purification or transformation.

The philosophy of spiritual exercises must be at the center of the city, at the heart of organizations in all the forms they can cover. The question of self-care is then a demonstration of this. Indeed, the philosophy of yesterday and today is not only in gardens and the acropoles, nor in high schools and academies. It must be permanently present in all segments of society. Epicurus, Musonius and Socrates clearly alerted us to the importance of self-care, caring for ourselves, whoever we are, whatever we do. Because if you don’t take care of yourself, then the possibility of developing is limited, there is no reflection on what is being done and this can have dramatic consequences on society. This disposition to self-care must be a permanent activity throughout one’s life. Through spiritual exercises, practices such as meditation, self-examination, memorization, among many others, it is possible to begin to exercise self-care. And as Epictetus pointed out, the idea is not at all the extraction of the world, but on the contrary to understand the role to be played in the world. What are the duties that the innovator must take on and carry? This question is only possible with the awareness of self-care, only if the person questions and practices spiritual exercises daily, both at home and at work, alone or with teams, and if the examination of consciousness about what one is doing, for example, becomes a reflex.

4.1.2.1. Caring for others

Self-care does not always have a very positive connotation; this is because it places the individual self at the center of his or her own existence. The individual clearly exists in the group and the collective, but the group must not destroy him/her. This is reflected in the words of the Cynic Diogenes: “When you care about someone else, then you begin to neglect yourself” (Paquet 1992, p. 114). The aim is to highlight the individual in the sense of the existence of singular entities, which, by accumulating, end up forming a group. This is very different from the selfish person who only defends his/her own good. Taking care means becoming aware of your individuality and developing it. As such, we could bring “self-care” closer to the notion of individualism. Contrary to what the notion might suggest, individualism is not selfishness, and this can be understood with the American philosopher Emerson, who preached individualism without claiming the individual against the community, and instead incited us to make it the expression of the other (Laugier 2010a, p. 368). The challenge is indeed to improve the individual, but in an iterative construction with others and with a collective concern. This improvement of the individual is at the heart of Emerson’s proposal for whom everyone must develop in order to exist, to live, to create, to do. This requires a fundamental concept of self-confidence. Emerson proclaimed that “self-confidence is an aversion to conformity”10, and thus stands against the conformism that destroys the individual. For him, it is society that is responsible for this conformism, which is only averse to self-confidence. By conformity, people become for Emerson bugs, small fry, the masses. With conformity, individuals do not exist, they join dead churches and vote for major political parties (Laugier 1999, p. 94), and this he regularly specifies in his essays and conferences.

Epimeleia is also about taking care of someone. It is a certain solicitude and this applies to both the shepherd and their family. This is the case of the doctor who is epimeleisthai in giving prescriptions, in their advice, in their attention. It also means making sure that you take care of yourself. This is the objective of Socrates, who teaches that people should learn to take care of others so that they learn to take care of themselves (Plato 2009).

It is above all in dialogue that the concern of others emerges, because there is then awareness of a point of view other than one’s own. The interlocutors must go beyond their vision to submit to the requirements, to the objectivity of reason that emerge from the exchange. Because it is a question of seeking, as much as possible, a common truth that is neither partisan nor subjective. What is fundamental in dialogue, and therefore in interactions with others, is not so much the result obtained as the progress made by the different actors, between the disciple and the master, as between two interlocutors of the same status. The main challenge of dialogue is to achieve common progress, based on debates and possible disagreements. It is a question of trying to argue, but also understanding the other and to aim for successive agreements in the discussion between the interlocutors, as Socrates did (Foucault 1984).

It should also be noted that there may be a shift from dialogue with others to carry out dialogue with oneself. Speaking to yourself, aloud for example, as the skeptic Pyrrhon did. In doing so, he said he was practicing being useful (Diogenes Laërtius 1999, p. 1101). This is also the case with Cleanthes, who reproached himself aloud (Diogenes Laërtius 1999, p. 894). Epictetus, for his part, proposed walking alone as an exercise where one could converse with themselves (Epicetus 1962a, chapter III, p. 990). In this practice, here again, the aim is to achieve objective universality, to distance oneself from oneself, to speak to oneself in order to better understand oneself.

What the relationship with others and concern for the other shows, is the requirement to have self-care in order to establish a relationship with others. Without the first principle, the relationship with others cannot be true or good. This has daily consequences, for example the Stoic Musonius questioned the concern for the other on the occasion of marriage, because in this event the concern for oneself triggers the concern for the other; it is a process of extending one’s relationship with oneself to the other. If we do not regularly care about ourselves, then establishing a relationship with others will be all the more complicated.

4.1.2.2. An innovator who takes care of themselves

Even if the innovator might be alone, solitary in his/her desire to change the world, he/she will not be alone when it comes to actions. Any innovation has consequences, as we have pointed out with responsible innovation. If he/she must therefore take care of himself/herself, it is also because he/she must take care of others: his/her own community of human beings, his/her ecosystem in the broad sense. It starts with those around him/her: customers, employees, all stakeholders who will be directly or indirectly affected by his/her innovation, and with whom he/she must converse. It is because he/she will exchange with them that he/she will understand their demands, their needs, but also their risks and fears. The innovator must constantly be in a Socratic process of discussion, of dialogue with others. Here again, not to be right, but to seek agreement, mutual consent, between risks and opportunities. The absence of dialogue today between the innovator and civil society results in contempt, a lack of attention, when on the contrary there is a need for a shared path to ensure the best innovations for all, for the benefit of everyone.

4.1.3. Knowing how to prepare
4.1.3.1. Learn to prepare in ancient philosophy

The aim of the spiritual exercises is to make it possible, through discourses, techniques and methods, to help people live better in the face of the obstacles that may present themselves. This is entirely consistent with the objective of self-care, because self-care is also intended above all to prepare oneself, the paraskhuê, which Seneca translated as instructio. The idea is to prepare for external events, for the vagaries of life. “What is it, to be a philosopher?” asked Epictetus. “Is it not to be prepared against events?” (Epictetus 1962a, chapter III, p. 982)

Whether we are in one philosophical school or another, we will “prepare” ourselves by following several principles, which is strictly speaking the philosophy of the school to which we belong. Among Stoics, one of the main challenges is self-control in all circumstances: learning to control one’s passions is like accepting everything that happens as conforming to a universal order that belongs to nature, in other words, accepting that some things depend on us and others do not. Epictetus expressed it in these terms: “Seek not for events to happen as you wish but rather wish for events to happen as they do and your life will go smoothly” (Epictetus 1962b, chapter VIII). For the Stoics, it is necessary to be prepared for what may happen so as not to be destabilized, as Marcus Aurelius announced: “When you wake up in the morning, tell yourself: the people I deal with today will be meddling, ungrateful, arrogant, dishonest, jealous and surly” (Marcus Aurelius 2002, p. 91). This is of course a preparation for death, having it before your eyes every day to tame it, not to fear it and remember that we are going to die.

For Epicureans, “preparing” to take care of one’s soul is a question of leading a better life. To do this, several proposals needed to be followed. One of the most fundamental states is that life is based on pleasure and the avoidance of displeasure, ataraxy – dietary frugality in particular. For the Epicureans, pleasure is easy to obtain, because it is a question of having very few needs: to provide only for the natural and necessary desires to live happily – to eat and drink with simplicity, to have a modest home, to dress with sobriety. According to them, this is in contrast to natural and unnecessary desires – wanting to consume luxurious, expensive food – and unnatural and unnecessary desires – such as the search for power, for example. Another important proposal in Epicurus’ work was tetraphamarkos, the “quadruple cure”. He stated that four principles are to be retained in order to live happily: the gods are not to be feared, death does not exist, pleasure is easy to obtain and pain is easy to bear.

Finally, for Cynics, self-care is self-sufficiency. For them, pleasures and passions are misleading, harmful and ephemeral. It is therefore a matter of being wary of them. We must also be wary of wealth, power and property, which are elements to be handled with caution to ensure a life that limits worries. For the Cynics, the aim is apathy and not happiness. Apathy lies in the desire to find oneself in a state of serenity that is sufficiently serene to face the dangers of life, of everyday life without suffering. To achieve apathy, Cynics invite us to conform to two orders: the animal world and the divine world. The gods have no needs and it is quite useful to copy this attitude. The same is true for animals, because their very limited needs must be a source of inspiration.

Once these foundations have been laid out, the disciples must train themselves to follow these principles so that everyone can incorporate, understand and practice them. To do this, we need methods and exercises that are varied: asceticism and meditation, correspondence and reading, writing and physical exercise, examination of conscience and attention to diet and, of course, the support from a master. It is these practices that must be developed among innovators.

4.1.3.2. The innovator’s necessary preparation

Preparing for the innovator is key: not preparing for the failure of the idea that is being implemented, but preparing for the effects of innovation. To put it differently, it is a matter of the innovator thinking about future action. It is not about thinking innovation on the one hand and implementing it on the other, it is about continuously putting yourself in a position to think about action. This is underlined with responsible innovation, where one of the challenges is to consider the consequences of innovations. However, the spiritual exercises that we see developing with the three ancient schools mentioned also bring about fundamental wisdom that underlines the importance of accepting destiny, a destiny that can bring glory like death, success like failure. The different schools each provide a different way of approaching these different aspects. It is not necessarily a question of selecting one school over another. In our contemporary space, it is preferable to make use of these schools, to have an overview of their proposals in order to adapt them as best as possible to modern problems.

Spiritual exercises in these three schools should help the innovator to think about why he or she is doing what he or she is doing. Of course, we have described an innovator who wants to change the world, who wants to improve it, but the question is also at what cost? Is he/she able to moderate himself/herself? Is he/she able to ask himself/herself what to do or not do and why? What does the innovator actually want? Money? The glory? This situation is ephemeral, as Marcus Aurelius said (2002), but at what cost? One of compromises, deals, betrayals? – explained the emperor-philosopher again. To use the Epicurean classification, are there not unnatural and unnecessary innovations that are not worth developing in the end? Especially since they can be harmful to the environment and to individuals? This may be the case for some sports cars or off-road vehicles, for example. Isn’t a natural and necessary innovation such as a vaccine a priority in terms of human and financial resources? What could make this happen if it is not the desire, the spirit of the innovator? Does it not have an obligation to draw on the cynical philosophy of apathy, inspired by animals and gods?

The problem here is therefore clear: innovation as it is today increasingly challenges the foundations on which humanity has been built, whether through transhumanism, posthumanism or the exploitation of nature, for example. The choice of a humanely sustainable future as we have developed it requires, and this is the only way, to rethink who we are, what we do and what we want. This requires us to question the life we want to lead here and now, and what we want to transmit. This forces us to give up what we have learned, to give up what we usually do, by reflex. This forces us to cut the branches that made the innovator what they are today in a new way.

We are the fruit of innovators from the 1960s, 1970s, 1980s, 1990s and even 2000s, when the possibilities for innovation had nothing to do with those of today. We are acting to innovate as when DNA sequencing was just starting, organ transplants too, the Internet did not exist, robotization was in its infancy. The speed of information itself was not comparable, like globalization, which has continued to develop. In other words, today’s innovators act with a mind formed by those who have not been confronted with exponential innovations that could shift human beings from one situation to another. These paradigmatic innovations are profoundly and sustainably changing people, if once again this has been the case in the history of the human species, never has it been so profound and so quickly. Should innovators continue to let themselves be overwhelmed or should they initialize their “processor”, that is, the innovator’s mind?

Innovation methods, laws, legislation and sanctions will not change this. Innovation comes before the law and obligations are regularly circumvented, so nothing can be done in a guaranteed way unless it comes from the innovator themselves, and spiritual exercises are possibly a path (otherwise what else?). There is a pressing need for the innovator to question his/her “self”, what he/she is and what he/she does. He/she must have a concern for himself/herself to constitute himself/herself as an “ethical subject”, to use Michel Foucault’s expression11. In other words, an individual who must question his/her own conduct, who works for his/her own transformation while knowing how to take care of himself/herself and others. No law, sanction or framework allows this. This need is imperative, because it concerns the one who shapes the world. It is certainly important that everyone can act as a philosopher and make the effort to practice spiritual exercises, but for him/her, the inventor of the world, even if only partially, this approach is fundamentally a priority and a decisive factor for all, to constitute a more responsible world.

4.1.4. The conversion obligation
4.1.4.1. Conversio, the change of orientation required

Self-care and caring for others, practicing spiritual exercises and preparing oneself requires that the individual concerned is ready to change radically, to provoke in themselves a radical transformation that can be called a conversion, that is, a new way of being. The objective of a new way of being, a new way of thinking that we do once in our lives to move away from the evils that trouble us, from the passions that prevent us from being free, is simply to trigger a new way of acting. Otherwise, in other words, it is not possible to act differently if we are the same, if we think in the same way. There is therefore a need for a strict change. The notion of conversion is certainly the most appropriate, because it conveys the idea of profound modification, of moving from one state to another.

Etymogically speaking, “conversion”, conversio, has two meanings in Latin: it means a “change of orientation”, implying the idea of a return to oneself rather than a look at the outside, and a “change of thought”, including the idea of transformation and rebirth.

Conversion is initially linked to political conversion as Plato could have imagined in his desire to change the City by transforming people (Hadot 2002b, p. 225). Indeed, more than religious, conversion in antiquity was above all political and the challenge was to ensure that the soul of one’s political opponent was modified and changed through discussion and methods of persuasion. It is not uncommon for rhetorical techniques and the arts of persuasion to be used to change another person’s mind. It is a question here of changing someone’s mind, of going towards the good, of striving towards the best for oneself, for others and the City. The one who can allow this change is the philosopher. For Plato, only the philosopher is capable of transforming people, because the philosopher themselves is “converted” (Plato 2002). They have managed to turn their gaze away from the shadows of the sensitive world and turn towards the Good, as Plato explained with his cave theory12. Plato’s general idea was that, if the City is allowed to be governed by philosophers, they will convert the City to the idea of the Good. This proposal is less common among Stoics and Epicureans whose desire is essentially the conversion of individuals rather than the ultimate conversion of the City (Hadot 2002b, p. 225).

Conversion is achieved by radically changing a way of being, whether on the moral, nutritional or clothing level – Socrates was known to wear only his Roman pallium, the Cynics known for their almost total destitution. Conversion takes place in the individual’s immanent structure, in the here and now and not in the perspective of a possible post-mortem salvation, as may be the case for Christian-type religious conversions. Because, although Christian conversion is also that of a return and rebirth, the perspective is very different from philosophical conversion since it is a question of entering into the people of God, following them, putting their faith, their future in them. This conversion, which is often considered as logical, has a complete and totalitarian aspect, and could not be confused with philosophical conversion. Religious conversion is guided by the exclusive faith in God and requires from its faithful a total adhesion, without appeal; certainly, this cannot avoid the believer’s interpretation. Moreover, today’s time is for interreligious dialogue, which complicates visions that are too monistic and absolutist. It is a brutal mutation towards God, a division of the self that will have to die in order to be reborn; religious doctrine even demands a renunciation of the self, since it is the divine that is targeted and not the human being (Foucault 2001c, p. 203).

However, since antiquity, philosophical conversion has been above all a return to oneself, to one’s essence. A self that is not without transcendence and that is able to work for a purpose that is here and now. If philosophers insist that the only possible transformation of a person is philosophical conversion (Foucault 2001c, p. 234), it is because it is the only way to make the individual, their soul, pass from one state to another, whether it is from uneasiness to well-being, from anxiety to serenity, from fear to control, from darkness to light. Paradoxically, it is perhaps with the words of the theologian Clement of Alexandria that we can understand what conversion is. When discussing Plato, he said: “on the soul taking a turn to what is better, and a change from a kind of nocturnal day” (Clement of Alexandria 2002, p. 820). In other words, the conversio seeks to lead the person who is uneasy, worried, stressed and anguished, to build a place of peace, serenity, a place that is secluded in itself, that is protected from the outside.

This return to self through conversion is achieved through spiritual activity, which aims first of all to get away from everyday life. But this uprooting has as its finality a return to the world, but a world that has now been converted, that is, a world that is authentic, not tainted by futile passions, a world where glory and power are no longer a search, a world where fear of death, uncertainty and evil no longer hold a place. Between this tearing away from the common world and the return to the true, conversion takes place, which is made possible on the occasion of elevation. This elevation is implemented by techniques found in the great schools of antiquity, whether among Stoics, Epicureans or Cynics. These methods are the spiritual exercises mentioned above: the acceptance of the Epicurean tetrapharmakos, the experience of Socratic dialogue, the desire to know oneself; it is also the follow-up of principles such as understanding what depends on us and what does not depend on us; understanding that passion is to be fought or that pleasure is neither a useful thing nor a good. These dogmas, techniques and methods that aim to transform us while elevating us must be implemented, experienced and proven. It is the practice of spiritual exercises that allows self-transformation; and for philosophers in search of wisdom, the only true transformation is only possible by practicing those exercises that make conversion possible (Pavie 2012a, Pavie 2012c).

The exercises lead us to the final objective, which is conversion. We convert to a philosophy in the literal sense, we become someone else. The conversio seeks to build a place of peace, serenity, a place that is secluded in itself and protected from the outside, a feeling of immensity. It is a transformation of the self through the practice of the different spiritual exercises, it is these exercises that make it possible and that allow us to move in a world that is no longer completely identical, since it is now “converted”. That is why conversion leads us to a state from which we do not return. This is how the spiritual exercise has something elitist about it in a certain way, because, if it is available to all, only a small number actually access it. Their apparent simplicity actually conceals the need for an extraordinary willingness to implement them in order to benefit from their effects. Similarly, the wide dissemination of philosophical proposals, whether in a market, under a Stoic Portico or in an Epicurean Garden, does not mean that spiritual exercises have become popular, far from it. On the contrary, it is because they are demanding, difficult and elitist that the Ancients sought to be heard by as many people as possible, the idea being to seek out those who were capable. If the desire for access to wisdom and a better life is shared by the greatest number of people, the paths requiring an extraordinary effort that lead to it discourage the vast majority. When asked how many individuals Socrates had succeeded in converting to philosophy, the answer was: not even one in a thousand13. Consequently, there is a need to convert as well as possible, as quickly as possible, those whose conversion has an effect on the greatest number of people: the rulers for Plato, and today they are the innovators, but also the shareholders, the decision-makers and to a certain extent the customers.

4.1.4.2. The innovator’s conversion

What should the innovator convert to? And why should he/she do so? The philosopher wanted to convert the rulers in antiquity, those who ruled, those who made and acted in society. He/she wishes so, because the philosopher is aware that politicians can act according to what is right or wrong, using democracy or authoritarianism. Since the leader does not know how to do this, as they are caught in the nets of the stultitia, the philosopher will help him/her get out of it.

It is the philosopher’s challenge today to help the innovator act according to what is good, to convert him/her to something other than what he/she is used to doing, to direct him/her towards other types of behaviors and actions. The goal for the philosopher is not to change the innovator for himself/herself, as with rulers, the goal is to ultimately change the City. As an actor in the world, the innovator has the power to manage it and this is precisely what concerns the philosopher, that the City as a whole, the world in the broad sense of the term, is moving towards benevolence and wisdom rather than exploitation and degradation. That is why, moreover, it is indeed the philosophical conversion that must be followed, as the other types of conversion do not lead to “man as a man” in the here and now, they can lead to a transcendence, but what we need is conversion to the individual here and now and his/her environment.

To convert, the innovator must first of all tear themselves away from daily life, through the practice of spiritual exercises. It is a question of breaking away from the habits that the innovator may have, changing their reflexes, those they have always applied. They must leave the ordinary world to start thinking differently. Faced with a large number of competitive pressures, their shareholders, their ecosystem, their management, their partners, their customers, their members, their supporters, their patients, their suppliers, the innovator never has the opportunity to leave their sphere exclusively dedicated to the production of offers, new ideas and new services intended to survive and, let us say, at any price. In other words, when changing the way you perceive things, acting differently cannot be changed from one hour to the next, cannot be done in a few hours, a few days or a few weeks. It is a real asceticism that the innovator must implement in order to achieve a new way of being. And so it involves this tearing away from everyday life, from what makes up their world today. This is made possible through the practice of spiritual exercises, meditation, preparation for what may happen, consideration of the tetrapharmakos, but also through the specific exercises of the Ancients in their reading, writing and recollection approaches. If the innovator exercises their mind, he/she will change it. Through the mind’s work, the exercise of the consciousness and of introspection, the innovator will succeed in becoming other, he/she will become converted to philosophy as a way of life and its attributes of seeking wisdom and benevolence. The challenge is obviously the return to the world, the necessary involvement for daily life, and the practice of spiritual exercises is not the goal in itself. If it leads to conversion, the innovator must continue to act in a different way. In other words, the converted innovator must have learned to behave differently. And it is important to stress that this is a conversion that must take place, not just a behavior to adopt. This is why the notion of “ethics” seems inappropriate, the Greek origin reminding us that ethics refers to the idea of a correct behavior. This could perhaps make sense in the context of innovation, but it is not so much a question of acting ad hoc, in a temporal way in regards to a question, a problem, a precise point, a particular issue. It is a way of being, of living according to the wisdom that it is a question of reaching, a way of life that only conversion to philosophy through spiritual exercises can bring.

In a concrete way, an individual who practices spiritual exercises, who wonders about the interest of glory and power, for example, what depends on him or her, who practices meditation, who practices introspection to question himself or herself, who remembers their actions and instructions in the form of hupomnêmata14 – those little personal notebooks that ancient philosophers always had on them and which were used to take notes, to record quotations including excerpts from books and stories, to write anecdotes, aphorisms and reflections to be read and contemplated – became a person who not only seemed different, but who also acted differently. However, this does not mean that a person excludes himself/herself from the world; if he/she has been able to escape it out of necessity, to change himself/herself, then they should return to it better. And it is not a question of abandoning one’s functions because of the risk of not being able to do so, by rejection in the end, after the established conversion, far from it, because others, certainly more malicious, will take your place. What is needed is not the absence of innovators, but another form of innovator, one who is caring.

Emperor Marcus Aurelius, whose reign was marked by complexity from both a political and an individual point of view, being a philosopher, never gave up despite the difficulty of making battles and wisdom coexist. As soon as he took power, he found himself faced with an upsurge in wars on all fronts. For the emperor, reigning consisted above all in trying to close the gaps that opened up within the borders of an immense empire under attack from all sides. He fought and he killed, and his reign was marked in particular by violence against Christians who suffered severe persecution. At the same time, he wrote Meditations, which would become a work of wisdom, with a universal scope, in which he contemplated, philosophized on Stoic techniques and exercised his mind. In addition to carrying out important legislative work, he also carried out many actions in the field of education, notably with the opening of the first Chairs of Philosophy. Ancient and current historians are unanimous in praising his character and admit his great moral rigor without denying the many difficulties of his reign (Grimal 1991). It was spirituality, complexity, responsibility in action.

Similarly, the innovator must continue to fulfil his/her mission, but in what way? By practicing this philosophy of spiritual exercises, he/she will certainly continue to innovate. No one can prevent – and perhaps it is not necessary to do so – a political leader from launching a new innovative proposal, a doctor from bringing a new form of protocol, an association leader from finding a new way to attract his/her members, an entrepreneur from formulating services or products that his/her competitors had not imagined. That being said, perhaps this leader, this doctor, this entrepreneur, this person experienced in the practice of spiritual exercises, will consider his/her innovation in a different, benevolent way, and if risks can be prevented, for him/her as a person, for his/her ecosystem, he/she will rethink it at new costs. Perhaps he/she will even give up on a planned innovation that could have put him/her and his/her environment at risk, perhaps he/she will postpone it to improve it in the meantime?

The innovator must convert to humanity, as part of the humanity he/she represents, to the citizen in him/her, and not just to his/her role as a manager. If the innovator must convert to humanity, it is because he/she is in charge of it, and through what he/she does, he/she must take care of it. Are there any choices other than this conversion, this practice, if the choice is to preserve a humanly sustainable future? This innovator’s conversion through spiritual exercises is not a simple path, but it is necessary, fundamental if not mandatory, because no other way seems to allow a benevolent consideration of humanity's purpose than the one that rethinks for today’s society, with its actors, its codes and its ecosystem, of the fundamentals of philosophy as a way of life.

4.2. Urgency of the spiritual exercises
4.2.1. Spiritual exercises for the contemporary world

From its origins, philosophy has been a spiritual exercise: its predominant challenge is to work, to exercise one’s soul, one’s mind, to live as well as possible in the face of the obstacles that life necessarily brings. When practiced, spiritual exercises enable one to take care of their soul, not in the manner of psychoanalysis, which, although it seeks to take up the Ancients’ techniques, is practically only concerned with neuroses, works exclusively with the unconscious and considers that any disorder is of sexual origin through a restriction of the libido (Pavie 2012c, pp. 378–385). Spiritual exercises are truly medicine, a form of therapy, so that the person who carries them out can live as well as possible, or, perhaps more accurately, as best as possible. As we can see, self-care is neither solitary nor selfish in the end; it is done with, by, and for the community. While this practice is reduced here to the population of innovators, it is nevertheless important and fundamental for all.

In both theories, discourses and practices, the spiritual exercise of the Stoics, Epicureans and Cynics crosses the whole of Hellenistic and Roman philosophy, even if, as we have mentioned above, these exercises were sometimes taken up by Christianity and abused or misinterpreted. These very particular exercises to develop one’s spirituality remain beyond Antiquity, the discourses of the Ancients as a whole have a universal scope. It would be naive to misunderstand the relevance and necessity of spiritual exercises for our time. Whatever the school – Stoic, Epicurean or Cynical – the proposals still resonate with contemporary needs. As Pierre Hadot clearly pointed out: “In my opinion, the ancient philosophy model is still relevant, which means that a quest for wisdom is still relevant and possible. I would only say that there are, it seems to me, universal and fundamental attitudes of human beings when they seek wisdom…” (Hadot 2002b, p. 376).

It is a mistake to interpret Pierre Hadot only for the reserved domain of philosophy. Philosophy is not only for useful in the advance of philosophy. Some philosophies do, but clearly not those of antiquity and certainly not philosophies whose essence is to find the best way to live life. If the universal and fundamental attitudes that Pierre Hadot refers to here are only addressed to philosophers, then philosophy has no purpose in the end. Its practice must be where the world is. And one may even wonder whether philosophy has not been outdated in the last few decades. Indeed, its discourse is not widely heard, it has no influence on questions related to: artificial intelligence, massive database management, DNA sequencing, and modifications on the human genome.

We can even wonder if philosophy has not deserted the fields of innovation and progress. Thus, when in November 2018, a Chinese researcher claimed to have completed a twin pregnancy involving embryos whose genomes had been edited15, what were the criticisms, observations and warnings from philosophers? More broadly, where are philosophical discourse and action today in the face of these challenges that are paradigmatically changing the human species?

In other words, by abandoning actions that change lifestyles, we can wonder what philosophy is all about today. Any comments on miscellaneous facts? Any political comments? And it is not a question of saying that no philosophy, that no philosopher, is interested in the profound changes that are taking place in society with relevance and rigor, but only in universities, only among young followers. What about the rest of the population? It is indeed imperative that philosophy reinvests the field of everyday life, the citizen’s space, and the field of innovation.

As we have seen previously, spiritual exercises were born with philosophy in antiquity, but they then evolved and developed beyond this phase (Pavie 2012c). They persisted, in the philosophy of the Middle Ages, in the Renaissance, the Classical Age and the Modern Age. This is fundamental, because, in a more or less marked and recognized way, Montaigne and his Essays, Descartes in his Meditations on First Philosophy, Shaftesbury with his book Exercises, but also Kant particularly in the The Metaphysics of Morals – or Rousseau especially in Reveries of the Solitary Walker – all have an impact on contemporary philosophies. Obviously, this relationship with the spiritual exercises of the Ancients does not end there. The contemporary space, from the end of the 19th Century onwards, was no less affected by an influence, or even a presence, of ancient spiritual exercises. Thinkers who range from Wittgenstein to Peirce, Foucault or Thoreau contributed, in their own way, to prolonging spiritual exercises. Emerson, whom we have already discussed above to understand the development of entrepreneurial thinking in the United States, is no less the one who can be described as the founding father of spiritual exercises in contemporary philosophy. Whether it concerns reading, writing, the aesthetics of existence or meditation, Emerson took up the philosophy of the Ancients and transmitted it to Thoreau and in his wake to American thinkers as far as Hilary Putnam, Stanley Cavell and Richard Shusterman, among others (Pavie 2012c). This means that the contemporary relevance of spiritual exercises must take root in the contemporary relevance, and innovation with its daily consequences and implications is certainly one of the preferable grounds for this. The powerful desire of the ancient spiritual exercises that survived to find themselves present in our present world requires at the very least that we pay tribute to them by using them. And there is no better way to use them than to confront them with a certain situation where wisdom seems to be lacking at the moment.

4.2.1.1. The choice to innovate

So, the question is not whether or not to innovate, but rather how to innovate. And the path to practicing spiritual innovation exercises seems to be a possible one. That being said, this is not the easiest way, it is always easier to be content to innovate without looking at the consequences of your actions or those of the users, without taking care of others and being content with yourself in doing so. To what extent will today’s innovator, who has the need to transform himself/herself radically, have the courage, the strength, to take on this need to rethink? It needs to be the paragon of a new world and must carry enough courage of thinking to act, even if it is a challenge to several centuries of blind innovation. Sapere aude! says Horace in Epistles (Horace 2005). Kant in his text on the Enlightenment in 1784 explains that Sapere aude! is:

Enlightenment is man’s emergence from his self-incurred immaturity. Immaturity is the inability to use one’s own understanding without the guidance of another. This immaturity is self-incurred if its cause is not lack of understanding, but lack of resolution and courage to use it without the guidance of another. The motto of enlightenment is therefore: Sapere aude! [Dare to be wise!]. Have courage to use your own understanding! (Kant 1784)

The innovator must have the courage to understand what he/she is doing, through understanding, reason and intelligence, in order to act with a view to a humanly sustainable future. The innovator is the only one who knows what he/she is doing, why he/she is doing it and how he/she is doing it, so he/she is the only one who has the courage to use his/her own understanding to know what to do. For without excluding them, neither legislation, nor processes, nor sanctions have any real relevant effects. The law chases innovation, processes do not think, sanctions are always a posteriori, when it is too late. Would there be no choice but to rely on the innovator?

The innovator now has a choice – either he/she decides to change in order to change the world, or he/she continues as if nothing happened, and thus makes an end to a humanly sustainable future. The innovator is faced with this choice that the Ancients called the bivium. In Antiquity, in his poem Works and Days, Hesiod (2017) referred to these life choices that are open to us: “Badness can be got easily and in shoals: the road to her is smooth, and she lives very near us. But between us and Goodness the gods have placed the sweat of our brows: long and steep is the path that leads to her, and it is rough at the first; but when a man has reached the top, then is she easy to reach, though before that she was hard.” In other words, it is easy to innovate as we have been doing for decades, but much more complicated to choose a path that presents new obstacles, that forces us to question ourselves, that requires a new way of acting.

The Pythagoreans symbolized this alternative between two choices of life, between decisions to be taken with the letter Y (De Ruyt 1931, pp. 137–145); it was even the sign of a cult. This Y represented the crossroads, the choice that each follower had to overcome in order to enter the cult, to follow its rules, in order to make him/her into a wise person. This idea of life paths was also taken up by Prodicos the Sophist, who said that at the threshold of adolescence “with young people already becoming independent, let us see if they will move towards life by the path of virtue or by that of weakness” (Xenophon of Athens 2011). Thus, since at least the 8th Century BCE, this conception of the crossroads of life, complex but fundamental choices for human existence, has been formalized, between on the one hand a road that is wide, easily accessible, but leads to shame, and on the other hand, the steep and difficult path, where honor, glory, rest and freedom are found.

The allegory of the Pythagorean letter Y reappeared among calligraphers of the Middle Ages (Saint Girons 2000, pp. 135–173). This time they drew the left branch of the Y with a long fine line and the other branch with a short, wide line. The idea was the same: on the one hand, the narrow path of virtue, the one that promises glory, but which is not without sinuosity, without difficulty; on the other hand, the easy path of pleasure in which the life of the spirit is extinguished. Many artists, Carrache, de Matteis, Soggi, and among others, sought to materialize this life choice, this dilemma, this letter Y in paintings representing “Hercules’s choice”, between a life of debauchery and easy pleasures, without examination, or a life of working on oneself, of honors and meaning.

It goes without saying that the idea of the bivium in ancient philosophy was intended for the life choices one wished to have and the spiritual exercises were intended to advance on the complex path leading to wisdom. However, this proposal was not so far removed from the idea developed here for all kinds of innovators. What life choice do they want to follow? Will they be more inclined to choose the ease of innovation with the consequences that we can imagine or will they prefer a way of life adapted to the continuity of a humanly desirable development, even if this is particularly complex in the pluralistic society in which we live? The challenge is that the innovator who becomes aware of their actions, of the risks they consciously or unconsciously incur for society, will decide to choose the sinuous path of spiritual exercises that will lead them to conduct a policy of benevolent innovation. How do they do it today? What enables the innovator to conduct a responsible innovation policy? How do they know that? How do they wonder? Nothing, no tools, no methods, no support, no guidance, no care for the innovator’s actions. If there is a need to propose robust content, explicit about what it “must” do, taking into account its constraints (competition, profit organization), it cannot avoid the contribution of spiritual exercises. It goes without saying that the innovator has the choice to innovate by freeing themselves from the philosophy of spiritual exercises, as they have done for centuries, by assuming their acts of “man as a man”. Because they also have the choice to practice spiritual exercises that allow them to question themselves, to know how to control themselves, in particular to control their passion to do at all costs, to question themselves on the glory or the success that they seek and for what purpose. The long and winding road will certainly discourage many, and even the vast majority of innovators, because the practice of philosophy discourages most people, which is why Socrates could only convince one in a thousand people to convert to philosophy. The effort required discouragement, rejection, making most of those who nevertheless had the greatest need renounce it, simply because they were in charge of the City and its future. It is for this reason that it is certainly essential to first integrate these issues into education.

4.2.1.2. Spiritual exercise education for innovators?

Plato attested that no one is evil on purpose (Plato 2012) , justifying that if someone acts with malice towards others, it is because of a lack of education, a lack of instruction and of knowledge. For knowledge is the key to the world, if we can access it. The acquisition of knowledge is not the goal in itself. A normally informed individual knows about the global warming that is spreading, has an idea of the acceleration of the disappearance of animal species, is aware of the consequences of human activities on the ozone layer, for example. However, what is important is not so much the acquisition of knowledge, whether scientific or normative, but its use.

Not to mention that most of the time, it is possible to think that we are doing the right thing when this is not the case. In other words, the use of knowledge must enable us to act as much as we can to question what we think we know, to modify what we believed to be certain, to come as close as possible to the truth. We have been forging certainties since the first hours of our birth, when we arrive in a pristine state. It is up to us to work to undo them. The infant is certain that he or she must continue to take milk despite the risk of being overweight, just as the young child is certain that video games are not harmful even if he or she spends hours playing them. Whether it is during our adolescence, in adulthood, in middle age, we are constantly developing certainties, even if they are of different kinds. Because we can be convinced, because we find this argument attractive, because it is easier not to dig deep into the question and sometimes to hear what we don’t like, because this argument may change our minds. Only knowledge, only education, can challenge our most persistent certainties. That is why, if education is to be present throughout our lives, it is during the young phase of intellectual “kneading” that this is more obvious and necessary. It is from the earliest age that education is provided, but also education towards education; learning to learn, learning to approach knowledge. The Socratic mindset of saying that the only thing we know is that we know nothing must dwell in us until we die. The one who is considered the “father” of continuing education, Nikolai Grundtvig, a Lutheran pastor and Danish pedagogue from the 19th Century, was convinced in the same century that everyone should enjoy meaningful instruction throughout life, including not only notions, but also civic responsibility, and aimed at personal and cultural achievement. Two aspects must be closely examined: the teaching of spiritual exercises and innovation.

While the practice of spiritual exercises seems complex, abstruse, hazy, even inappropriate or useless, it is because of a lack of knowledge of its advantages and interests despite its 3,000 years of history, considering Homer’s first spiritual exercises (1955, p. 673), but especially because it is unusual. From one hour to the next, it is certainly complicated for an adult to decide to meditate, to put pen to paper, write their thoughts and those of others. It is not common practice to think about what depends on oneself and what does not depend on it – especially since innovations include more and more stakeholders and will have to be composed of several – or to prepare for the evils that may arise – given the uncertainty and lack of information, especially when radical innovations are involved. Caught in habits that are rarely those of introspection, the common man often rejects of this kind of practice that can be described as “useless”, “theoretical” or “speculative”. Thus, it is with the youngest that this habit must be acquired.

The innovator, let us repeat, is the one who brings about an idea, develops it with some success, whatever his/her field of activity, whether in the business world, in health, in the voluntary sector, in politics or even in education. Not everyone is an innovator, far from it, but innovators can come from all sides, which is why education for caring, self-respect and respect for others must begin among the smallest, in the youngest school years where learning about relationships with oneself and others begins and must continue throughout the school period.

Children are potential innovators, they are the ones who will create the world of tomorrow, so teaching and education must take this dimension into account. The traditional teaching we know glorifies those who have the highest marks in discipline-based teaching rather than those who care most for others, for example. Of course, it is easier to score a good result in mathematics, French or sports than to evaluate good behavior. Thus, a student who helps a classmate, but who does not have time to finish his exercise, for example, is not valued at all. By focusing exclusively on grades, we encourage an overwhelming attitude from those who succeed in this form rather than those who behave best towards others.

Silence in the younger classes is common, often at nap time, so that the younger ones can rest and work better afterwards, and not be suffering from fatigue. Without excluding this important moment, teaching children to meditate, just for a few minutes only, simply to think about their bodies, the sensations they experience, thinking of nothing else – without falling asleep – is no less important. Why reserve this precious moment for the younger school years, a schoolboy, a teenager perhaps has an even greater need to calm his mind and refocus on himself for a few minutes a day. However, a young adult of 17 years of age will not practice meditation if they have not had the reflex of this practice at least 10 years before. The same thing is true of higher education – an individual who has become accustomed to meditating for a few minutes at 5, 10 or 15 years of age will have no difficulty getting into this habit at 25 years of age and will not find it completely ridiculous.

This simple example with contemplation is no less true for all spiritual exercises, learning to accept what depends on us or not, learning to write out our thoughts, learning to control ourselves and balance what we call success and failure, glory and failure, the relationship with money; all this is acquired from an early age to hope for ease of use as an adult. This practice will allow the individual, throughout his or her adult life, to practice introspection and to ensure that he or she acts as wisely and justly as possible. The question is not: should we learn to philosophize from an early age? The answer is necessarily positive, but philosophy today is particularly far from spiritual exercises, it focuses on learning concepts and methods such as the dissertation exercise. It is therefore not a question of being too ambitious, but of being realistic and pragmatic in order to achieve a goal that concerns us all. If, from the age of three, the criteria for success are defined by excluding vanity and accumulation of goods for example, if we learn to act by questioning the preservation of a humanly sustainable future, the reflexes will undoubtedly change. There is no doubt that there will remain individuals who are always eager for money and a futile and ephemeral notoriety. Nevertheless, this “success” will now be relativized by the disdain of a part of the population, since they have been trained differently.

We can obviously doubt this proposal, an education in spiritual exercises to better innovate in the face of the globalization of education and innovation may seem dangerous. This could lead to a loss of appetite for competitiveness, productivity, the necessary gain in market share and profits (in the business sector). However, the question can no longer be asked in these terms, because these quests were those of recent decades with the harmful consequences that we know. Moreover, a caring innovator is not necessarily an innovator of “poorer quality” in terms of performance. Many organizations succeed by taking care of themselves. The innovator does not necessarily have less relevant ideas because they respect their ecosystem. On the contrary, perhaps its way of being will even make it possible to bring together a larger number of actors around it, a larger number of partners who will trust it more, who will prefer to work with it rather than with an innovator eager for money and glory.

Without additional costs for students, without expensive training for teachers, it is therefore a question of rethinking what we are broadcasting as a way of being with the youngest. It is learning introspection, writing to oneself, building up one’s hupomênatas from an early age; it is learning to speak to oneself aloud as the philosopher Cleanthe did to listen to oneself; it is learning to enter into dialogue and that dialogue is not necessarily being right about the other person, but being right together. It is learning that we must act only on what depends on us; it is learning to read not through a “simple” concern to increase our knowledge, but to contemplate on readings, for example those of the Ancients; it is learning to consider what we eat and not by reflex; it is learning to take care of our body by exercising it, feeling it, experiencing it (Pavie 2012c, p. 165). There is no shortage of activities for the little ones to begin the spiritual exercises, they are rich, varied and allow them to understand the world, the environment, themselves and others. The acquisition of these reflexes will become a habit and, like the philosophers of antiquity, a way of life. It is likely to be a path that will allow potential innovators to acquire a way of being respectful, caring for themselves and others.

4.2.2. The need for a master

While spiritual exercises seem to be an important path for the education of innovators. It is still necessary to help this change, this conversion, and this is the role of the teacher. It should be noted that if the term “master” can today sound “anti-modern”, it is certainly not in spirit, because this “position” is still as necessary. Having someone around who can open our eyes without being a parent, a spouse, a “leader”, a representative of public order is not an obvious thing. Who in society can take care of us, speak truthfully, help us objectively? Whether they are referred to as a “supporter”, a “guide” or a “counsellor”, we need someone to help us escape the state of stultitia, that state of blindness that we have of ourselves and that does not allow us to change our relationship with the world. Entering into our certainties from an early age, our education, our environment, only the intervention of others can help us change our vision. This external individual will allow us to highlight our confinement and its limits, our obstinacy and its risks, our ignorance and its dangers.

If we have to confront others to guide us, to enrich us and, ultimately, to help us see the world differently, others can be much more than that for us. It can also be the one that leads us to conversion, the change we must make. It is also a necessity to have a guide, someone to guide us in our conversion, someone who is interested in the universal good. The master in Antiquity is the one who helps us sort out what is good for us and what is not: what readings are favorable to us? What arts should we confront? How can we meditate in order to improve ourselves? What bodily practices or dietetics are important to follow? What education should be followed? From Plato to Montaigne, from Aristotle to Marcus Aurelius, the great philosophers all had masters (Marcus Aurelius 2015). And not only in the ancient period, nor exclusively in philosophy, the question of having a master to help us see “the light” in mentoring is a common principle. If it is necessary to have a master, and all the more so when we decide to change our position, it is because we agree, consciously or not, that we find ourselves in a context that requires us to change. It is not necessarily clear; we cannot always formulate precisely what we do not like, only the effects are felt: situations that we experience badly, relationships that cause us stress, difficulties that we cannot overcome, obstacles that hinder us in our daily lives. When an innovator finds himself/herself under strong pressure from his/her shareholders and management, whose obsession it is to make a profit as quickly as possible by launching non-compliant products, it is understandable that the innovator may not be able to cope well with the situation. And he/she is not necessarily aware of this, he/she too can be locked in his/her environment and he/she then ensures that he/she responds to the shareholders’ request without considering what he/she does in his/her daily life, without the discernment that it would be necessary to have. When an innovator at an automobile manufacturer violates the Clean Air Act16, he/she is caught in a downward spiral which he/she cannot escape from on his/her own. He/she needs someone from the outside to allow him/her to see reality, to help him/her look objectively at what he/she is doing, to make him/her realize that he/she is blinded by the system in which he/she finds himself/herself and that he/she must find both wisdom and truth for the common good.

Unable to see for ourselves our limits, the certainties which we are locked in, unwilling to step back and question our beliefs, we need an external, experienced and caring eye to help us. Stakeholders cannot be of much use given their possible subjectivity. Perhaps it is a question of looking at associations, non-governmental organizations, for example. They can play this role of a “master” by advising, analyzing and offering a relevant point of view.

The teacher’s role is to lead the way and this is only possible because he/she has experienced similar situations or knows how to solve this difficulty through his/her experience. It shows a path that allows us to heal ills that prevent us from acting for the good of ourselves and others. In other words, being supported by a teacher is a personalized education method in which the teacher suggests a behavior model to the follower. That is why the masters are the elders, and not necessarily philosophers. In ancient times, a master could sometimes be a simple middle-aged man, a friend or a lover. The challenge remains the same: the master transmits knowledge, principles, know-how, in order to make someone pass from an ignorant status to that of the enlightened.

To establish a relationship with a master is to have the opportunity to give oneself up, to free the word of our anxieties, our weaknesses, and the desire to solve them. It is about building an intimate and unique relationship that does not have the commitment of the couple, that is not confronted with the judgment of the family or childhood friend, that is not as intimate as psychoanalysis. He/she is simply someone other than himself/herself to whom we can tell everything, so that he/she can help us direct our consciousness, understand our feelings and impressions. This relationship is not limited to discussions; the teacher’s role with his/her follower is to encourage, show, explain and influence. The follower however confides in himself/herself so that he/she can be changed. The innovator is alone in the face of his/her responsibilities and doubts, especially since there are many phases in the development of an innovation where the main actor discovers something alone: a molecule, the original use of a database, a singular genetic modification, a way to circumvent a law, to name but a few. Alone, the innovator does not necessarily know how to act and cannot easily confide in colleagues, let alone competitors, customers or shareholders. All these stakeholders will only judge by their own interests or disinterests.

Marcus Aurelius had decided to confide in his master about all aspects of his life, as much about the food he ate as about his reading in class, his dreams, his exchanges with his mother (Cassan 1830, pp. 249–251). By confiding in each of these subjects, he exposed himself to the objective criticism of his master, Fronton, and waited to receive an opinion. Does what he has eaten allow him to be healthy? Are his readings relevant to the missions he is to carry out? What interpretations should be given to his dreams? It is not a question of relying blindly on someone – nor, moreover, of following all the advice – but of having a benevolent eye near you.

The fusional relationship that is expressed in the exchange is translated into a true word towards the master, and Marcus Aurelius went straight to his master. He told him everything, confessed everything to him in minute detail. By committing himself to this task, he told himself the truth, he did not hide anything from himself and, consequently, he could work on improving himself.

To accept having a master is to accept to listen; a decisive attitude for spiritual exercises. We talk, we communicate, we exchange, but listening is perhaps the most valuable behavior. Good listening practice is ancestral; its Latin etymology is auscultare, which means “to examine”, “to hear”, “to be careful” or “to listen”. Listening is crucial to acting with kindness as it requires a real commitment. It is a manifestation of the listener’s desire to come and find something, a path to follow, a voice to hear and eventually follow. As soon as you get involved in an exchange with someone, you have to consider this objective of modification by listening, and therefore set up the conditions for it to work: attention, concentration, application. The challenge of listening is to grasp and memorize what you hear (the message), so that it is definitively integrated into itself. It also means hearing what we need to do and doing a quick self-examination to know where we stand in relation to the word we hear. We then take a look at ourselves to measure the gap between the uttered word and our own situation.

For the innovator, listening must be his/her daily spiritual exercise. Of course, listening to the master’s word, listening to those for whom he/she is sending his/her own message, but not only this. Listening to his/her ecosystem, environment, or people who are indirectly affected by his/her message, his/her partners, those with whom he/she works daily or less regularly. The innovator is a sponge that must succeed in absorbing all the messages for their own profit, and to ensure respect for others. He/she cannot succeed alone and associations, academics and non-governmental organizations are examples of structures that can support him/her in this process, even if he/she remains the one who decides and remains responsible.

We learn only a little by speaking, by listening to ourselves speak. We learn above all by listening to the one we have chosen to hear and who can be, like the master, the holder of a certain knowledge that allows us to progress. It is a stance of the mind that we are not necessarily used to having, because it is a matter of accepting to receive advice without contesting it, of letting go of a discourse that penetrates us because it is good for us and intended to change us. When we know how to listen correctly – among the Pythagoreans, the followers had to remain silent for five years, thus practicing the art of listening – we create within ourselves a disposition of mind that opens up to others. However, we must be very careful with hearing, because it is the most passive organ we have. Plutarch, in his On Listening to Lectures, specifies that hearing is also the organ that is the only one leading to virtue (Plutarch 2018), because the other senses can mislead, whether it is an error of taste, sight or touch. But, to reach virtue, we must train our listening, teach it to sort the wheat from the chaff. We must refine our listening by confronting it with reason and make sure that we train it to listen to things that are good for itself, because it is easy to listen to things that are completely useless given the passive nature of hearing. Practicing listening means confronting ourselves with what will be said to make us grow and change, and for this reason it is a question of hearing as many great discourses as relevant conferences, modern courses as well as classical texts. The possibilities are varied to shape our ear to listen to reason as well as wisdom. And the choice of who we listen to, what we listen to, is obviously important. As such, the choice of teachers is important, the choice of who will influence us is crucial and the innovator must keep in mind that whoever trains him/her must be ethical and aware of his/her responsibility towards society. What is his/her experience? What is his/her background? What vision of society does he/she have? In other words, the innovator should not listen so much to the one who promises glory, success, money and power as to the one who leads the way in a society as prosperous as it is benevolent. If it is not the same individual, it is up to the innovator to confront the glances, to constantly shift his/her gaze to ensure that he/she covers the points of view that will allow him/her to forge his/her own.

4.2.2.1. The innovator’s master

The innovator must ask himself/herself about his/her master to know who he/she should be, where to find him/her. Is he/she already near me without me seeing him/her? What can I expect from him/her? And of course, am I ready to listen to him/her? Will he/she allow me to see my limits, my defects and to overcome them? These questions are necessary for those who wish to innovate by being fully aware of their actions and not only with a master – for whom rigor, moral awareness and rectitude are the pillars – but with all that makes up the formation of our mind. That is why the quality of an individual’s listening skills makes him or her a “great” innovator. By listening to patients and voters, customers and members, students and professors, scientists and philosophers, colleagues and fellow citizens, the innovator forges his/her mind by absorbing the needs, expectations and behaviors of the world. By listening, he/she puts himself/herself at the disposal of others and puts himself/herself in the saddle to respond to requests (thought not to all of them, of course), and must also work to have a just discernment – a pillar of philosophy – to accept only some of them, and never at any price, all whilst taking care of the rest of the community.

4.3. The spiritual innovator of the 21st Century

This third and final phase focuses more on the innovator than on innovation, as we discussed in the first two parts. Focusing on the innovator is fundamental, and today’s cannot be tomorrow’s for the many reasons we have mentioned. And it is at the very root of the problem that we must tackle: the innovative individual. No one other than the innovator can imagine, build and develop the world of tomorrow. It is therefore essential that the latter adopt a philosophical way of life based on spiritual exercises. And this is precisely the point we have tried to make in this last part, to look at what way of life, what ways of being, what attitude, the innovator must follow.

While the philosophy of spiritual exercises seems to us to be most appropriate, it is because since its constitution, which is at least 2,500 years ago, it has been interested in the obstacles that an individual faces and in the way in which, thanks to this philosophy, he/she will govern their life. The obstacles encountered here are of two kinds, on the one hand the obstacles of his/her ecosystem (shareholder, client, target, competitors, legislation) and on the other hand himself/herself. In the first case, the innovator must find ways to overcome these obstacles using the tools of spiritual exercises. Meditation, reflection on what depends on oneself and what does not, knowing how to prepare for what may happen, self-care and caring for others, learning not to succumb to the calls of glory or fortune, are the axes that will allow, through exercise, to extract oneself from the harmful influences of one’s ecosystem. Second, we have to understand that the innovator’s major obstacle is definitely themselves. Overwhelmed by the powers of his/her ecosystem and a lack of education, he/she is no longer able to be himself/herself. Innovator by day, citizen by night, without knowing it, the innovator is constantly working at his/her own loss. Because the effects that he/she causes on the environment, the most vulnerable people, the economy, the future of humanity, does not exclude him/her. The innovator breathes the same air, he/she is a stakeholder in the economy as a citizen, he/she is himself/herself human as his/her children will be. However, unable to think about his/her different roles when faced with the innovations that he/she will create, there are no options other than to convert. Few alternative ways seem conceivable to make the innovator profoundly change, and to make him/her become another himself/herself. What would be the other methods, the other processes to bring about a new innovator? Laws, obligations and rules are short-term and innovation always comes before the law, so the law will always be after bad practices. That is why the source of evil is to be found at the root, the innovator’s personality; it is to be tackled and it seems that spiritual exercises can help in this. This will require effort, education, acceptance of complexity, and resistance as well, but the choice to innovate, as we have seen, obliges us to make this passage a standard, a rule concerning the “who should we be” when we decide to be innovative.

1 Part of this chapter was published in French in the book (Pavie 2018). We discuss these elements again with the kind permission of the publisher. The subject covered here is quite relevant and even essential for the original triptych that we wish to develop for this book.
2 First published in the Annuaire de la Vème section de l’École pratique des hautes études, vol. XXXIV, 1977, pp. 25–70, then published in the journal Études augustiniennes, 1981, pp. 13–58. This article was then published in Pierre Hadot’s book (2002b, pp. 19–74). See also Hadot 2001, p. 149.
3 Dictionnaire Littré, entry “Exercice”, Le Livre de Poche, 1990, p. 660.
4 Many articles head in this direction, see Esprit magazine, “Le temps des religions sans Dieu”, no. 233, June 1997.
5 Seneca, Peace of Mind.
6 See the various reports of the L214 association [Online]. Available at: https://www.l214.com/les-rapports-denquêtes-de-l214.
7 See the report by Changing Markets, How pollution in the global textile supply chain is making viscose toxic, 2017 [Online]. Available at: http://changingmarkets.org/wpcontent/uploads/2017/06/CHANGING_MARKETS_DIRTY_FASHION_REPORT_SPREAD_WEB.pdf.
8 Green stocks phase II report, Strong-related risks for listed companies, 2014 [Online]. Available at: http://wwwoa.ipe.org.cn//Upload/IPE-Reports/Green-Stocks-Phase-II-EN.pdf.
9 Plato, Alcibiade, 133c in (Plato 1943).
10 Cited by Laugier 1999, p. 151.
11 Michel Foucault, “Usage des plaisirs, techniques de soi” in (Foucault 2001a, vol. II, p. 1365).
12 Ibid., 515c.
13 Seneca, Entretiens, III, 1, 18–19 cited by Foucault 2001c, p. 115.
14 Foucault studies this notion among the Ancients in many articles, very well in “Les techniques de soi”, “Usage des plaisirs et techniques de soi”, in (Foucault 2001a, vol. II, p. 1602) as well as in “L’écriture de soi” (2001a, vol. II, p. 1234) and “À propos de la généalogie de l'éthique” (2001a, vol. II, p. 1443).
15 “Des bébés génétiquement modifiés seraient nés en Chine”, Le Monde, November 26, 2018.
16 https://www.epa.gov/clean-air-act-overview.

===== FILE 12/17: b01.xhtml =====

Conclusion: Philosophy and Education, the Ultimate Help for Innovation

“I think the role of a philosopher is to disturb.”

Interview with Michel Foucault on April 21, 1971 on Radio Canada

“Man can only become man by education. He is merely what education makes of him. It is noticeable that man is only educated by man – that is, by men who have themselves been educated.”

(Kant 2015, Introduction)

C.1. The latest news on innovation in contemporary space

Innovation has become the toy, the means and the end of capitalist actors, too often without thought or morality, most of the time without value for the common good and rarely deploying reflections to take care of others. The challenge is above all to attain wealth and power. However, it is a form of capitalism that has become such, but which has not been just that, and which could be quite different. In other words, it is not capitalism itself that is bad, it is not this economic system that promotes free trade and free competition, fair and undistorted, that is to be condemned. Rather, it is the extreme development of this system over the last 50 years or so by a number of individuals. During this period, moral safeguards, whether religious or political, were particularly reduced. Left to themselves, the individual has not succeeded in building a way of life where profit can go hand in hand with altruism, economic success with benevolence, except for a few philanthropic initiatives that are often supported by ultra-liberal private organizations. What would the powerful Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation be without Microsoft?

Education, health, food, the environment and mobility alone sum up the themes that concern the future of humanity, no more and no less, and there can be no question of leaving these five sectors in the hands of unconscious innovators, let alone under the yoke of organizations unsuited to think of the common good1. And the concrete problems of global warming, access to knowledge, transhumanism, genetically modified organisms and intensive agriculture are only examples, if not evidence or consequences of these five fields, which are already being explored through many initiatives. Indeed, on a daily basis, dozens of initiatives and new forms of innovation are developing all over the world, but we can only observe that, very often, this is often local or regional, still in the form of inventions rather than innovations. If, of course, they must be promoted, encouraged and duplicated, we must face the facts; they remain quite a minority2.

The capitalist machine is not 50 years old, it is at least two centuries old, perhaps even older if we consider that it is a question of supply, demand and a competitive situation that leads to it. However, its development in recent decades is unparalleled and this is probably due to a single thought coming from the West, which has spread internationally as the only possible path to development and the future. Capitalism has nourished itself, constantly opening up opportunities that have made it grow: new markets, increased competition, tax differentiation, unbridled globalization. While communist policies and their collectivist proposals in a number of countries still had a significant influence at the beginning of the 20th Century, they all collapsed, leaving room for the single thought of finding happiness in entrepreneurial freedom and private economic development. This is not to say that a communist policy would have been preferable, far from it. We are simply trying to highlight the rise of capitalism. And this take-off could only be achieved with the help of innovation, especially in these “new” emerging countries in the capitalist world. These countries did not want, with good reason, to continue to depend on proposals from the Western world in terms of services and products, and as a result they had to rush headlong into liberalism with innovation as the spearhead. The example of China is certainly the most symbolic3.

Finally, two other elements must be highlighted to understand the contemporary context of innovation. On the one hand, the evolution of science, and on the other, the role of religions. Disinterested, concerned with the common good, seeking public benefit, the purpose of science – especially its financing – has clearly evolved in recent decades to be the source of capitalism. With States facing financial difficulties, science has become partly outsourced, sponsored, no longer used for common human progress, but for the benefit of some for the benefit of private organizations. Thus, Amazon spends on average between 15 and 20 billion dollars on R&D each year with the objective of developing techniques and technologies such as artificial intelligence and machine learning for its own products (the voice assistant Alexa, Prime Music, Prime Video). At the same time, the budget of the Centre national de la recherche scientifique in France, a public organization, is around €3 billion. The Institut national de recherche dédié aux sciences du numérique, a French specialist in computer science and artificial intelligence research, is endowed with approximately €200 million each year. France is investing €9 billion in public research.

Finally, as we mentioned briefly, we must also point out the loss of the moral landmarks in which science was struggling. Until recent decades, Churches and religions have had a look at scientific developments and have not hesitated to take concrete action on the direction of research or even on the cessation of some of them (in particular everything to do with living things). The control of the Churches, at least in this field, has almost disappeared and all scientists can act as they see fit without worrying about an institutional morality that would hinder their discoveries and initiatives. While we can only rejoice at the secularization of science, scientists have nevertheless found themselves without a framework, without standards, which has given free rein to unbridled innovations not without risk for the environment and for humanity.

This is the contemporary context of innovation: the end of moral frameworks, the development of private science, globalization without borders and increased competition. It is this context that opens the doors to uncomplicated innovations, and the consequences on education, health, food, the environment and mobility are irrefutable with the exploitation of resources, an elitism that persists with power confiscated by the most educated, and ever-increasing inequalities.

C.2. Philosophy, the ultimate assistance for innovation

A benevolent world to which we can aspire is not emerging: international political organizations are constantly creating summits and conventions, agreements and treaties attempting to reduce the negative consequences of human activities in the context of economic growth are not powerful enough; nothing is being done about it all, and for one simple reason: political organizations and national governments have relative influence over large private organizations that are much more powerful than many States. Moreover, the means to be implemented to stop the damage are not adequate to seduce an electorate who refuses to consider the necessary fundamental changes.

From a local or sectoral point of view, the authorities are just as outdated and laws and regulations are constantly being diverted and thwarted, not to mention, let us remember, that innovation often comes before the law. The fines, which can amount to billions of euros, are not a deterrent for firms whose revenues are much higher in the medium or long term.

How can the right thing be done when legislation, regulation and deterrence have no effect? What tool should be put in the hands of innovators to ensure that they act in the common interest? By taking care of yourself and others? The bias of the theory developed here is that philosophy must play a role. Disinterested, seeking wisdom, making sure to understand and take care, it seems to be the last possible recourse for a better world. Though it is sometimes mocked, despised, caricatured, considered useless or theoretical, it could well be the key to our future.

This discipline, which has been able to withstand the test of time, is essential for thinking about complexity; it is fundamental for making people think about what we do. Its methods and processes, its proposals and its know-how are to be heard in order to solve the problems of a world that no longer hears itself and does not listen to itself. The history of philosophy is a history intended to look at the obstacles, the difficulties, to understand what has happened, what is happening, what will happen. Philosophy knows how to examine things from a necessary distance in order to question, problematize and make intelligible a complexity – if one is willing to make the effort to confront it.

C.3. Three philosophies for two paths

Philosophy does not exist as a single school, it is better to say that there are philosophies. It is necessary to be precise, as not every philosophy is appropriate for every problem. As far as we are concerned, no less than three philosophies have been necessary. Three thoughts that did not seek to chart the same path but to highlight two decisive dimensions: innovation on the one hand, and the innovator on the other.

Non-standard philosophy is certainly the one that has most affected innovation as a discipline, going so far as to disqualify the term, which itself suggests “non-standard innovation”. This philosophy, created by the contemporary philosopher François Laruelle, allowed us to ask the question about the very use of the term “innovation”. Since this one is the bearer of so many evils, perhaps it is time to stop using this vocabulary.

We are aware of the limits of this approach, on the one hand we have used non-standard philosophy as a tool adapted to our problems, without necessarily respecting all the biases of this school – if any – which may pose a problem; on the other hand there is a particularly dense theoretical dimension in this proposal which makes its daily application somewhat complex. However, if we have chosen to enter this intellectual field, it is precisely because innovation is sorely lacking in intellectual space and there is no doubt that there is a need for thoughts, reflections and distancing for innovation from its daily life. As such, non-standard philosophy is relevant because through this non-standard innovation, it offers new materials, new spaces, and conceptual density to think about innovation in a different way.

We cannot say that the principles of phenomenology are also perfectly respected in Chapter 3 and that we are sometimes in dissidence. But when were the foundations of phenomenology truly followed? Isn’t phenomenology a philosophy of disagreement, as we have pointed out? It turns out that, here too, the phenomenological tools are relevant to our purpose. The stakes of suspension, linked to going to the very things themselves, of varying the experiences, of questioning the ego, are necessarily essential to think about innovation as it is done today. The aim of this second chapter was to show how we could better “see” innovation, how to look at, observe and even anticipate its phenomena. It turns out that phenomenology offers the techniques to “see” better, to “see” exactly, to “see” things differently. Throughout the book, we have seen that innovation is only viewed in a certain way, only with an approach that is one of performance and often of financial interest. The contribution of phenomenology is to underline that other perspectives are possible, if we want to focus on discovering them, and by looking closely at things, we realize that they are not always as they appear at first sight. For this reason, and more particularly with regard to innovation. It is important to learn to “phenomenalize”, to learn to look at things differently.

By first questioning the discipline which is ultimately the final transaction, then the way it operates – its operating mode – the rest of our journey is only interested in the operator, in other words the innovator. This is the whole purpose of our third and last part, which focuses on possible spiritual exercises for the innovator. Spiritual exercises are the backbone of philosophy, and have been since ancient times, because their purpose is simple: to bring about a better life despite the obstacles we may encounter in our lives. And the method is no less simple. It is, as we have seen, about taking care of ourselves and others, about fighting against what depends on us and what does not, about fighting against passions, and deceptive and ephemeral pleasures. Through meditation and dialogue, writing and reading, or even through an exchange with a master, spiritual exercises help to tell us how to behave in order to aim for wisdom, to try to create a more just world, to live as best as possible. Today, this disposition of mind escapes the innovator altogether. And yet it is the only key to a necessary and radical transformation of innovation. The paradigm shift must be made to survive, and only a true conversion will make this change possible and effective.

This is how we can interpret two paths in our proposal, one to (re)think innovation, to get to know it, to be wary of its misleading meanings, to question it, to challenge it, and finally to learn to look at it with rigor; the other, to (re)think it as an innovator. By (re)thinking the discipline, by (re)thinking one’s way of approaching what they produce, we help the innovator to (re)think what they do. But more fundamentally, we have sought to (re)think the individual who makes, the one who produces, the one who invents and the one who innovates. We humbly wanted to give some suggestions so that the innovator could (re)think themselves as an individual, a citizen, and therefore an innovator, so that they can become a follower of spiritual exercises.

C.4. (Re)thinking innovation through teaching

(Re)thinking the individual, converting him/her, as we have defined him/her, is only possible by educating him/her in the “right” way, and this is certainly the first step we must take. We have noted above the risks of the lack of innovation education. We have understood that innovation is present everywhere in every corner of humanity and that we all have to make it happen, all of as potential innovators. Thus, certainly, we need to teach innovation methods and techniques, but we need to teach how to be an innovative citizen. Today, innovation education has remained stuck on questions concerning methods and processes. From the emergence of ideas to placement on the market via various filters, whether they are marketing, financial, commercial or technical, classical innovation education is sometimes close to project management methods. It is less about content, about the type of ideas, than about the method.

Moreover, innovation education does not contain a chapter dedicated to the innovator’s “qualities” as an individual or courses explicitly devoted to the question of introspection that the innovator should regularly practice. It is implied that everyone can be innovative, if they succeed in surrounding themselves well (creative, technical, marketing, financial, commercial) and follow processes that have already been tested. Of course, many innovators wonder what they are doing and it is even the essence of responsible innovation to help them ask themselves questions. However, this remains a very small minority. Nothing is really being done to question the purpose of the innovation that we, as innovators, want to promote in order to guarantee a humanly sustainable future.

There is a need to rethink innovation education, not through the process of innovation, but through individuals. The process is indeed efficient, it is constantly improving, especially in recent years with the integration of responsibility issues, as we have noted. But the challenge now is to return to innovation education by helping those who are or will question themselves, their practices and their motivations. Helping students question why they want to be innovative is an important first preliminary question. Is it to achieve money and/or glory? Do they want to innovate to help poor people? Is their willingness to innovate linked to issues already encountered in their life experience? What are the relationships between these students and innovation? Does the slightest innovation become for them the thing to achieve quickly? Do they have an attitude of letting innovation grow in the market before they buy it? Also, how do students understand innovators? For them, are they representatives of the business world, or can innovators come from sport, associations, politics? And with whom can they identify? Is there a glorification of the innovator, are they a hero you want to follow, or does the innovator come after innovation? These first questions must initiate an education in innovation, because their objective is to bring about a reflection on what one wants to bring to the city, to be passive or active, to accompany innovation or to propose it. And beyond innovation, these initial questions help students situate themselves in their own professional paths as well as their life paths, even if they are evolving. In other words, these questions help the student to position themselves on the bivium and to choose between a life as a pioneer, an innovator, an entrepreneur and a life as an innovation user, a supporter or even a resister. And one of the challenges of these questions is to understand why. Without value judgments, it is important to position innovation issues based on the fundamental motivations of individuals.

C.4.1. Learning to engage in dialogue

Beyond these questions, a new teaching of innovation must make it possible to practice the spiritual exercise of dialogue. As mentioned above, dialogue as a spiritual exercise is not so much about persuading, or convincing the other person, as it is about being an opportunity for an exchange in order to be right together. This is the Socratic approach. Through the succession of questions, Socrates led his interlocutors to acknowledge their ignorance, but also, and above all, to provoke in them a disturbance sufficiently significant to call into question all their knowledge, sometimes even their whole life4. This crucial moment in Plato’s Socratic dialogues occurs when Socrates’ interlocutor loses confidence and, as doubts arise, becomes discouraged. The dialogue could even almost end with the departure or abandonment of the Socratic listener. But the latter systematically identifies this moment and maintains tension, where he shows that he is taking part in the possible failure of the discussion. He reverses the dialogue so that his interlocutor does not feel humiliated, but rather supported in adversity, which is ultimately not the Socratic individual, but a fight against pseudo-knowledge, false beliefs, or even mistakes.

When the interlocutor leaves, he possesses a knowledge that is that of the activity of the mind, a method of access to knowledge, which is not, however, knowledge itself. It is maieutics that allows the interlocutors to access the questioning of knowledge in order to acquire a different, methodological and new knowledge. Paradoxically, it is in this tension of dialogue that Socrates takes care of the other. Dialogue is a common progress, through successive agreements between interlocutors. They thus submit to the requirements of rational coherence and thus raise themselves to a point of view, which is no longer that of their individuality alone, but a common point of view (Foucault 1984). It is in dialogue that the concern of others emerges. There is an awareness of another point of view than his own. The actors must go beyond their visions to submit to the requirements, to the objectivity of reason. Taking care of oneself here means going beyond one’s own individuality to achieve objective universality (Foucault 1984).

This is exactly what today’s student must learn: to talk to others to overcome his/her own subjectivity. Talking with others is a fundamental exercise that every innovator must learn to do. And it is not a question of talking to a customer or a future customer, whoever they may be, to recognize their needs and propose an innovation. It is a question of meeting those who will experience innovation directly or indirectly. When an innovation such as that of nanotechnologies, genetically modified organisms or artificial intelligence emerges, it is more than necessary to ask the question about the perception, desire and interest of such proposals, which will undoubtedly change the world in the more or less long term. And in this dialogue, it is obviously not a question of convincing others of the merits of innovation, but, in a Socratic, collective approach, of seeking how it can be beneficial for all and how. A possible innovation such as universal income should not be decided unilaterally by a person or a political party, but after an exchange with representatives of the population, with the people concerned as well as with those who are not directly concerned. In the same way, it is not a question of forcing, of imposing the idea of universal income, but with interlocutors to imagine who should benefit from it, how, how long, why, and to measure its consequences, interests and risks. In other words, it is through dialogue that we succeed in developing a society towards a common desirable horizon, even if it takes time and requires pedagogy to ensure a broad understanding. When a doctor decides to take stem cells at the time of a birth and implant them in another child to allow him to survive, the questions this raises about practice and the consequences for society are extremely important. This leads to questions of cost, problems of equity that cannot be resolved simply between a doctor and a patient. The whole of society is affected by the initiative, not just a few experts who are in charge of the decision, or a few lobbyists, and it must be discussed whether the initiative is accepted, modified or rejected. This should apply to recent discoveries about past initiatives and innovations. Society as a whole must be able to become aware and decide whether or not a useful but harmful product can continue to be used. Let’s take the example of glyphosate, which farmers find difficult to do without, because it combines unparalleled advantages: it is simple to use, efficient and inexpensive. While research is ongoing to find alternative plant-based solutions, in the meantime, citizens remain exposed to the product’s toxicity.

Dialogue is a social skill to be learned. It also requires learning time and listening. The innovator must have a role as a mediator between academics, discoverers and inventors, scientists, engineers and civil society, where financiers, insurers, etc. are located. They must also play a role of conciliation, so that they no longer leave those who do things on one side and those who receive on the other. The society in progress is made with a set of varied actors that are necessary to bring together, and if everyone practices dialogue, few people are really trained and know how to set it up correctly: to characterize the dialogue to be implemented, take the time to listen and exchange, learn empathy to better understand the other’s position, know how to reformulate to ensure good understanding, and finally know how to help the other person as well as how to be helped by them in order to reach an agreement that seeks consensus as much as possible.

C.4.2. Learning to meditate

The new innovator will only have the choice of being a practitioner of meditation. The term “meditation” can have different meanings, especially today when the term is increasingly used and covered. The meditation to be considered here is that of “philosophical mediation”. The term “meditation” originates from the Greek word melête, which means “to practice”. Thus, philosophical meditation can mean very simply practicing to love wisdom. However, in the context of spiritual exercises, meditation has a singular place in its desire to be in the moment, in the present, in everyday life. Philosophical meditation can and must be applied for the here and now, which can be seen as contradictory to innovation and research whose challenge is to look to the future. However, shouldn’t we focus on the present in order to better think about the future? The challenge of this spiritual exercise of meditating is to ensure our well-being in the face of our environment, in the face of difficulties that may arise, in the face of the complex situations that we constantly encounter. Philosophical meditation sometimes helps us deal with the complexities that arise, by working in two ways. First, by meditating on the known acts that we need to perform or potential actions to be taken. The point here is to anticipate future behavior according to the way we want it to be. The preliminary meditative question is therefore: how do I want to behave in the face of this action that is about to happen? In other words, meditation precedes action, whether it takes place in the very near or distant future.

It is important for the student to learn to think about the actions he or she wants to take before doing them. Whether he/she learns, by meditating, to think about the innovation he/she is developing or that he/she would like to develop, to imagine its uses, its consequences, the reaction of individuals, how they would feel about this innovation if they were in the place of the users, customers, people concerned by it. The idea is close to a phenomenology of innovation that we have seen since it is a question of succeeding in thinking about it, suspending one’s judgment, analyzing it in all its dimensions to better understand it. It is also an opportunity to apply another spiritual exercise that is that of doubt. To question again, and constantly, the benefit and relevance of innovation through doubt. What if we don’t launch this innovation? What if we postponed it to include improvements? What if we get closer to our competitor to set some standards that are less polluting? What if we explain to customers, partners and members that this need must not be satisfied for good reasons? Doubt is a pillar of meditation, because it is during its practice that we can, with time and kindness, question the certainties we had.

The second path of philosophical meditation consists of putting into perspective the acts performed. Meditation is here a posteriori. It is a reflection that concerns an action that has taken place, a past experience that is necessary to come back to analyze what was really at stake, and to learn from for the next time. The meditative act a posteriori will seek the chronology of events, rethink the attitude, the reflexes we have had. For example, in our relationship with others, we must ask ourselves if there has been a loss of self-control. Has there been any denigration of self or others? This form of meditation has only one objective: to analyze the consequences on our profound self, our consciousness, our mind.

For the innovation student, it is then a question of reflecting on the innovations that they themselves may have undergone, or lived through. Did he/she feel disturbed by a new innovation? How did he/she experience a change brought about by the arrival of an innovation, regardless of whether it was technological, in the field of the sport he/she practices or in the school curriculum? The challenge is to make the student reflect on the perception of innovation as a recipient of innovation. This position allows us to acquire a more humble perspective where we are no longer in the active proposal, but we are subjected to innovative decisions made by others. And so, what does the student get out of it? Was it a good thing to act like that? What are the points of friction, discomfort experienced, and what are the sources of satisfaction?

The purpose of philosophical meditation is nothing less than to change the behavior towards the actions we accomplish by questioning them, by stopping at them, and that is why it is a question of being initiated into them as future innovators. This meditation is a direct modification, before the action, to better anticipate it or to better understand it just afterwards. It is also an indirect modification since, as meditations progress, the individual naturally becomes ready, in the face of certain reactions, to understand what he/she must do. In a way, he/she acquires a reflex.

C.4.3. Learning about what depends on you

While dialogue and meditation are probably key spiritual exercises to be shared during innovation courses, other spiritual exercises would be equally relevant. The fact students learn from Marcus Aurelius that glory is ephemeral, that taking care of oneself is the first concern, that it is necessary to take care of what depends on oneself and not what does not depend on it. The latter concept is particularly relevant for innovators. It is in the doctrine of Epictetus, which takes up the classical Stoic categories, that the famous one is found: “There is what depends on us, there is what does not depend on us” (Epictetus 1962b, p. 1111). It is essentially the beginning of this sentence that must be not only understood but accepted by students. We must work on what depends on us through the innovation to be put in place: the environment, the caring of others, the future of humanity, respect for others. Innovation depends on the innovator even if he or she is intentionally misused. This is the classic case of firearms, where the innovator must understand that a very large number of situations depend on him or her; and he or she cannot ignore that the uses to which they will be put can be devastating, even if he or she certainly does not want to. If this type of tool is to be put on the market – which the innovator may question – to what extent should it not be accompanied by the sale of training courses, regular psychological follow-up, electronic chips to trace the weapon, that is, a large number of elements designed to guarantee as much as possible an “acceptable” use, such as sports shooting for example? It is up to the innovator to consider the life of the idea they are marketing. Only meditative introspection, questioning one’s role, dialogue with others as well as with oneself can make it possible to have an intimate relationship with innovation, a relationship with their role in society, in everyday life and in everyone’s life.

Only these techniques make it possible to understand the innovator’s role and they will only succeed in applying them if they are trained in them, if they receive instruction where the learning of the innovation process is approached with an introduction to spiritual exercises. The classroom must become a place of vigilance and caring for these innovators. The precaution they must learn for this desirable future, they must live and feel during their studies. And the only way to have the ability to question their actions in relation to this future, which must be benevolent for them and for their entire ecosystem, is through the practice of spiritual exercises. At the same time, the understanding of the world they need to acquire must not remain in shackles, in the disciplines they know and are used to understanding. In other words, the innovator must understand that transdisciplinarity in and outside the classroom must be part of his or her daily life. And if the innovator must be nourished by managerial techniques, they must also be confronted with politics, philosophy, art and physical education.

C.5. (Re)thinking innovation beyond the West

For the final words, let us go beyond our usual view of innovation and its future. Innovation has been broadly defined by Europeans and has often been illustrated by examples from North America’s great successes from the late 19th Century to the present day. It is the norm, the standard, the way of thinking and the reference. The eyes have been on Silicon Valley for several decades with a blissful admiration for what is being done in terms of innovation. Yet the famous American firms are a formidable demonstration of irresponsibility: exploitation of the weakest for production, rare earths for high-tech products, private data, not to mention that rarely are the products placed on the market recyclable.

This Western control is weakening and perhaps even on the verge of disappearing. Korean, Japanese, and especially Chinese organizations have an increasingly equal weight to their counterparts in the West, but above all their current investments, especially in research and development, will lead them to surpass them in the near future. For example, between 2007 and 2015, that is, in less than eight years, Asia became the continent that spent the most on research and development ($166 billion for 2015 alone)5. Between 2017 and 2018, China increased its spending on research and development by more than 34%6. So-called “unicorn7” companies are seen as much in Asia as in the United States and patenting has never been so important in China as in recent years8. India and China represent a third of the world’s population9, and this population, more broadly in Asia, will grow exponentially by 2030, mainly among the middle classes. This segment of the population will begin to be able to access what the middle classes of the West already have at their disposal: telephones, refrigerators, cars, air conditioning, that is, a large number of objects that are often polluting and not recycled (Horni 2010). How can we cope with the increase in this demand? What tools and techniques do we need to develop to meet needs without stifling the planet?

These indices show very clearly that if innovation must be (re)thought, it is obviously not at the level of a country or a continent but in a global way; and this by questioning the asperities of civilizations, traditions10. This means in concrete terms that if we think it is necessary to (re)think innovation with non-standard philosophy, phenomenology and spiritual exercises, shouldn’t Confucianist philosophy, for example, which is dominant in Asia, be a fourth avenue to follow?

Confucian philosophy is interesting, because if it still resonates today, it is because its constitution, 25 centuries ago in China, was made in a context very close to ours with significant technological and social disruptions. Many inventions at that time were spreading like wildfire and challenging traditions and rules that had been established for decades11. On the other hand, one of the major pillars of Confucianism is self-improvement, and the challenge is not in the search for performance, but in the search for a progressive development of this ability that pushes humans towards good, for themselves and for others. We obviously find the words we have developed on “taking care of yourself and others”, which must be a basis for future innovations.

Self-improvement is about changing, transforming and learning to change one’s mind, and for Confucius, it was important to know how to change one’s mind according to circumstances. It is even a sign of appreciation for the speed at which the world is changing (Javary Cyrille 2010, p. 120). Thus, the main belief of the Chinese philosopher was in the individual and their ability to develop. He was convinced that the individual can improve, and that self-help is essential for a better society (this is not without resonance with Greek philosophy and the importance of taking care of oneself, which includes taking care of others). That is why Confucius believed that laws are not necessarily the best way to ensure harmony in a State. What is needed is a strong trust in human morality and its continuous and always guided improvement. This principle is important for our purposes because, knowing that innovation comes before the law, regulation is always too late and not always effective in the medium or long term. It is therefore much more relevant to work on the morals of those who do rather than to run in a legislative manner after something that can never be caught.

Behind Confucian philosophy there is a great relationship with individual responsibility. We can improve, we can comply with what is right, so we are responsible for what we do. For him, a mistake is never a real mistake. What is a mistake is not improving. As he says, “to make a mistake and not to correct it, that’s what I call a mistake” (Javary Cyrille 2010, p. 135). If this point is important to us, it is because we know that innovators necessarily make mistakes; to innovate is to make mistakes, conscious or not. Therefore, what is important for the innovator according to Confucianism is to learn from mistakes, not to repeat them. As a result, it is possible to learn from them, to improve, both for oneself and for society.

Whether it is of European or Asian origin, philosophy has a decisive role to play, and is obviously essential. Today’s innovation and innovators will not give it the opportunity to take an interest without resistance, arrogance or indifference. It is therefore up to it to impose itself, because it has the role and duty to enlighten, even if it must again, as it has done many times in its history, disturb the systems in place, and fight preconceived ideas. This critical philosophy of innovation and the innovator that we propose has no ambition other than to disturb the systems in place and the ways of thinking in order to help change our views on what we do, to design other practices to make the world, and, finally, to (re)think lifestyles.

1 Examples with GAFAM (Google, Amazon, Facebook, Apple, Microsoft), NATU (Netflix, Airbnb, Tesla, Uber) and BATUX (Baidu, Alibaba, Tencent, Xiaomi) for whom, in relation to the common good, responsibility is secondary compared to the issue of profitability and profit generated for their shareholders.
2 The 100 companies responsible for 71% of global greenhouse gas emissions are not the ones that have demonstrated the most initiatives to limit their impact on the environment. See the report from the NGO Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP) carried out in collaboration with the Climate Accountability Institute (CAI): The Carbon Majors Database CDP Carbon Majors Report 2017.
3 See (Aglietta and Guo 2012).
4 Pierre Hadot, “La figure de Socrate”, in (Hadot 2002b, p. 111).
5 Strategy and 2015 Global Innovation 1000 analysis.
6 Capital IQ data, Thomson Reuters Eikon data, Strategy and analysis.
7 A type of start-up business, mainly in Silicon Valley, valued at more than one billion dollars.
8 1.8 million patents were filed in 2018. By way of comparison, in the United States, there were 0.3 million. Cornell University, INSEAD, and WIPO (2018): The Global Innovation Index 2018: Energizing the World with Innovation, Ithaca, Fontainebleau, and Geneva.
9 World Population Prospects 2017, United Nations.
10 See Virgil Lenoir’s books (2015 and 2019).
11 China, at that time, was the source of many innovations: the manufacture of silk and paper, waterwheel mills, the first device to detect earthquakes (Zhang Heng’s seismograph), a measuring and observation instrument for astronomy. These innovations were also found in agriculture, navigation (rudder) and medicine.

===== FILE 13/17: b02.xhtml =====

References
Aglietta, M., and Guo, B. (2012). La voie chinoise : capitalisme et empire. Odile Jacob, Paris.
Alter, N. (2003). L’innovation ordinaire. Presses universitaires de France, Paris.
Aristotle (1970). Métaphysique. Vrin, Paris.
Bacon, F. (2006). Of Innovation. Kessinger Publishing, Whitefish.
Balaudé, J.-F. (2010). Le savoir-vivre philosophique. Grasset, Paris.
Barbaras, R. (2004). Introduction à la philosophie de Husserl. Éditions de la Transparence, Chatou.
Bayle, B. (2011). Bébé-médicament : entre eugénisme et assujettissement. Cerveaux et Psycho, 44.
Bégout, B. (2003). Edmund Husserl. In Introduction à la phénoménologie, P. Cabestan (ed.). Ellipses, Paris.
Bensaude-Vincent, B. (2001). Histoire de la chimie. La Découverte, Paris.
Bergson, H. (1998). L’évolution créatrice. Presses universitaires de France, Paris.
Bernstein, R.J. (1977). William James, a Pluralistic Universe. Harvard University Press, London.
Blanco, J.D. (1977). Initiation à la pensée de François Laruelle. L’Harmattan, Paris.
Brown, T. (2009). Change by Design: How Design Thinking Transforms Organizations and Inspires Innovation. HarperCollins, New York.
Bustan, S. (2006). Levinas et Husserl : dépasser l’intellectualisme philosophique. Revue internationale de philosophie, 1(235), 35–59.
Cassan, A. (1830). Lettres inédites de Marc Aurèle et de Fronton 1 : livre IV, lettre 6, A. Levasseur, Paris.
Chan, K.W., and Mauborgne, R. (2004). Blue Ocean Strategy. Harvard Business Review, October.
Chesbrough, H. (2003). Open Innovation: The New Imperative for Creating and Profiting from Technology. Harvard Business School Press, Boston.
Choplin, H. (2000). La non-philosophie de François Laruelle. Kimé, Paris.
Christensen Clayton, M. (2003). The Innovator’s Dilemma: The Revolutionary National Book that Will Change the Way You Do Business. HarperCollins, New York.
Clement of Alexandria (2002). The Stromata, or Miscellanies [Online]. Available at: http://www.orthodoxebooks.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/The%20Stromata%20%20Clement%20of%20Alexandria.pdf.
Cometti, J.-P. (1992). La philosophie sans privilège. In Lire Rorty, J.-P. Cometti (ed.). Éditions de l’Éclat, Paris.
Dastur, F. (2004). Réduction et intersubjectivité. In Husserl, E. Escoubas and M. Richir (eds). Jérôme Millon, Grenoble.
Depraz, N. (1997). Le spectateur phénoménologisant : au seuil du non-être et du non-agir, Eugen Fink. Colloque de Cerisy-la-Salle, 1994, Rodopi, Amsterdam.
Depraz, N. (1999a). Écrire en phénoménologie. Encre marine, Paris.
Depraz, N. (1999b). Husserl. Armand Colin, Paris.
Depraz, N. (2000). La réduction à l’épreuve de l’expérience. Études phénoménologiques, 31–32.
Depraz, N. (2001). Écrire, résister. Encre Marine, Paris.
Depraz, N. (2006). Comprendre la phénoménologie. Une pratique concrète. Armand Colin, Paris.
Depraz, N., Varela, F.J., and Vermersch, P. (2003). On Becoming Aware: A Pragmatics of Experiencing. Benjamins Press, Amsterdam.
De Ruyt, F. (1931). L’idée du “Bivium” et le symbole pythagoricien de la lettre Y. Revue belge de philologie et d’histoire, X(1–2).
Descartes, R. (1992). Méditations métaphysiques. Flammarion, Paris.
Descartes, R. (2016). Discourse on the Method of Rightly Conducting the Reason, and Seeking Truth in the Sciences [Online]. Available at: https://www.gutenberg.org/files/59/59-h/59-h.htm.
Descartes, R. (2019). Meditation one: Of the things which may be brought within the sphere of the doubtful. From The Philosophical Works of Descartes, E. Sanderson Haldane and G.R.T. Ross (trans). TOTA [Online]. Available at: https://www.tota.world/article/ 1308/.
Diogenes Laërtius (1999). Vies et sentences des philosophes illustres IX. Hachette, Paris.
Dratwa, J. (2019). Dans quel monde voulons-nous vivre ensemble ? ISTE Éditions, London.
Drucker, P.F. (1993). Innovation and Entrepreneurship: Practice and Principles. HarperCollins, New York.
Epicetus (1962a). Entretiens. In Les Stoïciens, P.-M Schuhl (ed.). Gallimard, Paris.
Epicetus (1962b). Manuel. In Les Stoïciens, P.-M Schuhl (ed.). Gallimard, Paris.
Epicurus (1977). Lettres et maximes. Éditions de Mégare, Paris.
Epicurus (1994). Lettres, maximes, sentences. Hachette, Paris.
Esprit (1997). Le temps des religions sans Dieu. Esprit, 233.
Fink, E. (1975). De la phénoménologie. Éditions de Minuit, Paris.
Foucault, M. (1984). Histoire de la sexualité III. Le souci de soi. Gallimard, Paris.
Foucault, M. (2001a). Dits et Écrits, vols I and II. Gallimard, Paris.
Foucault, M. (2001b). Le triomphe social du plaisir sexuel : une conversation avec Michel Foucault. In Dits et Écrits II, M. Foucault (ed.). Gallimard, Paris.
Foucault, M. (2001c). L’herméneutique du sujet. In Dits et Écrits II, M. Foucault (ed.). Gallimard, Paris.
Foucault, M. (2001d). L’herméneutique du sujet, cours au Collège de France, 1981–1982. Gallimard/Le Seuil, Paris.
Foucault, M. (2008). Le gouvernement de soi et des autres, cours au Collège de France, 1981–1982. Gallimard/Le Seuil, Paris.
Ghisalberti, G. (2018). Soteriology and the End of Animal Sacrifice. Wipf and Stock, Eugene.
Gianni, R. (2016). Responsibility and Freedom. ISTE Ltd, London and John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Gianni, R., Pearson, J., and Reber B. (2019). Responsible Research and Innovation. Routledge, Abingdon-on-Thames.
Godin, B. (2008). Project on the intellectual history of innovation. Working document 2, Montreal.
Grimal, P. (1991). Marc Aurèle. Fayard, Paris.
Hadot, P. (1989). Le sage et le monde. In Le temps de la réflexion : le monde, Collectif (eds). Gallimard, Paris.
Hadot, P. (1995). Qu’est-ce que la philosophie antique ? Gallimard, Paris.
Hadot, P. (2001). La philosophie comme manière de vivre. Albin Michel, Paris.
Hadot, P. (2002a). L’histoire de la pensée hellénistique et romaine. Leçon inaugurale au Collège de France. In Exercices spirituels et philosophie antique, P. Hadot (ed.). Albin Michel, Paris.
Hadot, P. (2002b). Exercices spirituels et philosophie antique. Albin Michel, Paris.
Hesiod (2002). Les travaux et les jours. Les Belles Lettres, Paris.
Homer (1955). Odyssée. Gallimard, Paris.
Horace (2005). Horace: The Epistoles. Book II: Epistle I [Online]. Available at: https://www.poetryintranslation.com/PITBR/Latin/HoraceEpistlesBkIIEpI.php.
Horni, K. (2010). The emerging middle class in developing countries. Working paper no. 285, OECD. Available at: https://www.oecd.org/dev/44457738.pdf.
Houziaux, A. (2006). La mort de Dieu et le renouveau de la spiritualité. In Existe-t-il une spiritualité sans Dieu ? A. Houziaux (ed.). Éditions de l’Atelier, Ivry-sur-Seine.
Husserl, E. (1947). Méditations cartésiennes, Deuxième Méditation. Vrin, Paris.
Husserl, E. (1962). Ideas: General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology. Collier Books, London.
Husserl, E. (1976). La crise des sciences européennes et la phénoménologie transcendantale. Gallimard, Paris.
Husserl, E. (1982). Cartesian Meditations: An Introduction to Phenomenology, Dorion Cairns (trans). Springer Science+Business Media, Dordrecht.
Husserl, E. (1983). Collected Works: Volume II, F. Kersten (trans). Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, The Hague.
Husserl, E. (1985). Idées directrices pour une phénoménologie. Gallimard, Paris.
Husserl, E. (1989). La philosophie comme science rigoureuse. Presses universitaires de France, Paris.
Husserl, E. (1994). Méditations cartésiennes. Presses universitaires de France, Paris.
Husserl, E. (1996). Leçons pour une phénoménologie de la conscience intime du temps. Presses universitaires de France, Paris.
Husserl, E. (2001). Logical Investigations Volume 1. International Library of Philosophy, London. Available at: https://philpapers.org/archive/HUSLIV.pdf.
Husserl, E. (2006). L’idée de la phénoménologie. Presses universitaires de France, Paris.
Javary Cyrille, J.-D. (2010). Les trois sagesses chinoises. Albin Michel, Paris.
Kant, I. (1784). An Answer to the Question: “What is Enlightenment?” [Online]. Available at: http://cnweb.cn.edu/kwheeler/documents/What_is_Enlightenment.pdf.
Kant, I. (2015). On Education, A. Churton (trans). CreateSpace, Scotts Valley.
Lapied, A., and Swaton, S. (2013). Sélection naturelle ou volonté de puissance : comment interpréter le processus de destruction créatrice. Revue de philosophie économique, 14.
Lapoujade, D. (1997). William James, pragmatisme et empirisme. Presses universitaires de France, Paris.
Laruelle, F. (1989). Philosophie et non-philosophie. Mardaga, Brussels.
Laruelle, F. (1991). En tant qu’un. Aubier, Paris.
Laruelle, F. (1996). Principes de la non-philosophie. Presses universitaires de France, Paris.
Laruelle, F. (1998). Dictionary of Non-philosophy, T. Adkins (trans). Éditions Kimé, Paris [Online]. Available at: https://monoskop.org/images/2/2b/Laruelle_Francois_Dictionary_of_Non-Philosophy.pdf.
Laruelle, F. (2010). Philosophie non standard : générique, quantique, philo-fiction. Kimé, Paris.
Laruelle, F. (2015). Entretien par Vincent Citot et Alex Peltier. Le Philosophoire, 43.
Laruelle, F. (2019). Les trois ordres de la pensée [Online]. Available at: https://onphi.org/letters/11/les-trois-ordres-de-la-pensee.
Laugier, S. (1999). Recommencer la philosophie : la philosophie américaine aujourd’hui. Presses universitaires de France, Paris.
Laugier, S. (2010a). Emerson, la voix, le perfectionnisme et la démocratie. In La voix et la vertu, S. Laugier (ed.). Presses universitaires de France, Paris.
Laugier, S. (2010b). La voix et la vertu. Presses universitaires de France, Paris.
Lenoir, V. (2016). Ethical Efficiency. ISTE Ltd, London and John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Lenoir, V. (2019). Ethically Structured Processes. ISTE Ltd, London and John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Levinas, E. (2000). En découvrant l’existence avec Husserl et Heidegger. Vrin, Paris.
Lewis, M. (2006). Liar’s Poker: Rising Through the Wreckage on Wall Street. Hodder & Stoughton, London.
Lombard, P. (2006). Existe-t-il une spiritualité sans Dieu ? In Existe-t-il une spiritualité sans Dieu ? A. Houziaux (ed.). Éditions de l’Atelier, Ivry-sur-Seine.
Lowit, A. (1957). L’épochè de Husserl et le doute de Descartes. Revue de métaphysique et de morale, 4.
Lu, Q. (2013). Cosmic-ray-driven reaction and greenhouse effect of halogenated molecules: Culprits for atmospheric ozone depletion and global climate change. International Journal of Modern Physics B, 27.
Machiavelli, N. (2007). Le Prince. Folio, Paris.
Maesschalck, M. (2017). Reflexive Governance for Research and Innovative Knowledge. ISTE Ltd, London and John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Malm, A. (2017). L’Anthropocène contre l’histoire. Le réchauffement climatique à l’heure du capital. La Fabrique, Paris.
Marcus Aurelius (2002). Meditations [Online]. Available at: http://seinfeld.co/library/meditations.pdf.
Marcus Aurelius (2015). Marcus Aurelius Antoninus to Himself. Leopold Classic Library, Victoria.
Musonius Rufus, G. (2015). Lectures and Fragments. CreateSpace, Scotts Valley.
Nietzsche, F. (2003). Fragments posthumes sur l’éternel retour. Allia, Paris.
Nikolova, B. (2019). The RRI Challenge: Responsibilization in a State of Tension with Market Regulation. ISTE Ltd, London and John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Osterwalder, A., and Pigneur, Y. (2010). Business Model Generation: A Handbook for Visionaries, Game Changers, and Challengers. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Owen, R., Bessant, J., and Heintz, M. (2013), Responsible Innovation: Managing the Responsible Emergence of Science and Innovation in Society. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Pansera, M., and Owen, R. (2018). Innovation and Development: The Politics at the Bottom of the Pyramid. ISTE Ltd, London and John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Paquet, L. (1992). Les cyniques grecs, fragments et témoignages. Hachette, Paris.
Patocka, J. (2002). Qu’est-ce que la phénoménologie ? Jérôme Millon, Grenoble.
Pavie, X. (2008). Exercices spirituels dans la phénoménologie de Husserl. L’Harmattan, Paris.
Pavie, X. (2012a). Exercices spirituels, leçons de la philosophie antique. Les Belles Lettres, Paris.
Pavie, X. (2012b). L’innovation responsable, levier stratégique pour les organisations. Eyrolles, Paris.
Pavie, X. (2012c). Exercices spirituels, leçons de la philosophie contemporaine. Les Belles Lettres, Paris.
Pavie, X. (2015). Le choix d’exister. Les Belles Lettres, Paris.
Pavie, X. (2018). L’innovation à l’épreuve de la philosophie. Presses universitaires de France, Paris.
Pavie, X., and Boscher, B. (2018). L’innovation à l’ère du bien commun. Fondapol, Paris.
Pavie, X., Jouanny, C., Carthy, D., and Verez, F. (2014). Le design thinking au service de l’innovation responsable. Maxima, Paris.
Pavie, X., Scholten, V., and Carthy, D. (2014). Responsible Innovation, from Concept to Practice. World Scientific, Singapore.
Pellé, S., and Reber, B. (2016). From Ethical Review to Responsible Research and Innovation. ISTE Ltd, London and John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Plato (1943). Œuvres complètes. Gallimard, Paris.
Plato (2002). The Republic [Online]. Available at: http://www.idph.net/conteudos/ebooks/republic.pdf.
Plato (2009). Apology [Online]. Available at: http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/apology.html.
Plato (2012). Meno [Online]. Available at: https://marom.net.technion.ac.il/files/2018/09/Meno.pdf.
Plutarch (1998). Œuvres morales III. Les Belles Lettres, Paris.
Plutarch (2018). On Listening to Lectures [Online]. Available at: http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Plutarch/Moralia/De_auditu*.html.
Rabelais, F. (1964). Pantagruel. Gallimard, Paris.
Rabelais, F. (1973). Œuvres complètes 7. Champion, Paris.
Rajnou, N., Prabhu, J., and Ahuja, S. (2013). L’innovation Jugaad. Diateino, Paris.
Richir, M. (1990). La question d’une doctrine transcendantale de la méthode en phénoménologie. In Épochè, Le statut phénoménologique, M. Richir (ed.). Jérôme Millon, Grenoble.
Ricœur, P. (1995). Le concept de responsabilité. Essai d’analyse sémantique. In Le Juste 1, P. Ricœur (ed.). Le Seuil, Paris.
Saint Girons, B. (2000). Du caractère héroïque chez Shaftesbury et Vico : Hercule et le trouble de mémoire de Shaftesbury. In Shaftesbury, philosophie et politesse, M. Malherbe and F. Brugère (eds). Champion, Paris.
Schmid, A.-F. (2001). Que peut la philosophie des sciences ? Pétra, Paris.
Schmid, A.-F. (2012). Interdisciplinarité et philosophie comme expérience “en plein champ”. Natures Sciences Sociétés, 20, 75–81.
Schmid, A.-F., and Hatchuel, A. (2014). On generic epistemology. Angelaki, Journal of the Theoretical Humanities, 19(2), 131–144.
Schneider, S.H., and Mesirow, L.E. (1976). The Genesis Strategy: Climate and Global Survival. Plenum Publishing Corp., New York.
Schuhl, P.-M. (1962). Les Stoïciens. Gallimard, Paris.
Schumpeter, J. (1990). Capitalisme, socialisme et démocratie. Payot, Paris.
Schumpeter, J. (1999). Théorie de l’évolution économique. Dalloz, Paris.
Sophocles (1955). Antigone. Les Belles Lettres, Paris.
Spiegelberg, H. (1975). Doing Phenomenology. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, The Hague.
Steffen, W., Crutzen, J.P., and McNeill, R.J. (2007). The anthropocene: Are humans now overwhelming the great forces of nature? Ambio, 36(8), 614.
Tarde, G. (2001). Les lois de l’imitation. Le Seuil, Paris.
Thoreau, H.D. (1854). Walden, and On the Duty of Civil Disobedience [Online]. Available at: https://quotebanq.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/hdthoreau-walden-1854.pdf.
Thoreau, H.D. (2007). L’esprit commercial des temps modernes et son influence sur le caractère politique littéraire et moral d’une nation. Le Grand Souffle, Paris.
Tilliette, X. (2005). Petite initiation à la phénoménologie husserlienne. Médiasèvres, Paris.
Tousseul, S. (2010). Les principes de la pensée. La philosophie immanentale. L’Harmattan, Paris.
Vernant, J.-P. (1962). Les origines de la pensée grecque. Presses universitaires de France, Paris.
Voelke, A. (1993). La philosophie comme thérapie de l’âme. Études de philosophie hellénistique. Éditions du Cerf, Fribourg/Paris.
Von Schomberg, R. (2011). Prospects for technology assessment in a framework of responsible research and innovation. In Technikfolgen abschaetzen lehren : Bildungspotenziale transdisziplinaerer Methode, M. Dusseldorp and R. Beecroft (eds). Springer, Wiesbaden.
Von Schomberg, R. (2019). International Handbook Responsible Innovation: A Global Resource. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham.
Williams, B. (1990). L’Éthique et les limites de la philosophie. Gallimard, Paris.
Xenophon of Athens (2011). Memorabilla, A.L. Bonnette (trans). Cornell University Press, Ithaca/London.

===== FILE 14/17: b03.xhtml =====

Index of Names
A
Aglietta Michel, 141
Alter Norbert, xvi
Aristotle, 5, 68, 74, 132
B
Bacon Francis, 4
Barbaras Renaud, 61, 69, 72, 74, 80, 82, 88
Bégout Bruce, 68
Bensaude-Vincent Bernadette, 5
Bergson Henri, 38, 94
Blanco Juan Diego, 37
Brown Tim, 14
Bustan Smadar, 91
C
Cassan Armand, 134
Cavell Stanley, 125
Chan Kim, 14
Chesbrough Henry, 14, 86
Choplin Hugues, 32, 48
Christensen Clayton, xvi
Clement of Alexandria, 118
Cometti Jean-Pierre, 94
D
Darwin Charles, 12
Dastur Françoise, 85
Deleuze Gilles, 31, 47
Depraz Natalie, 62, 71, 75, 89, 92–105
Descartes René, 1, 16, 68, 72, 73, 94, 125
Diogène Laërce, 111, 112
Drucker Peter, xvi
E, F
Emerson Ralph Waldo, 111, 125
Epictetus, 103, 109, 110, 112, 113, 151
Epicurus, 5, 24, 25, 109, 110, 114
Foucault Michel, 27, 56, 103, 109, 112, 116, 118, 120, 121, 125, 139, 147
G
Gianni Robert, 87
Godin Benoît, 13
Grimal Pierre, 122
Guattari Félix, 47
H
Hadot Pierre, 30, 73, 74, 101–103, 105, 117, 118, 124, 147
Hesiod, 126
Homer, 129
Horace, 126
Horni Kharas, 153
Houziaux Alain, 104
Husserl Edmund, 59–66, 68, 69, 71–73, 75, 79, 80, 82–86, 90, 91, 94, 99
J, K
James William, 94
Javary Cyrille, 153, 154
Kant Immanuel, 31, 125, 126, 139
L
Lapoujade David, 38, 94
Laruelle François, 29, 31–34, 37, 40, 45, 49, 55, 56, 76, 143
Laugier Sandra, 111
Levinas Emmanuel, 61, 66, 71, 91
Lewis Mickaël, 106
Lombard Paul, 104
Lowit Alexandre, 73
M, N
Machiavelli, 4
Malm Andreas, 11
Marcus Aurelius, 114, 115, 122, 132, 134, 151
Musonius Rufus, 27, 109, 110, 112
Nietzsche Friedrich, 38
O, P
Osterwalder Alexander, 14
Owen Richard, 42
Paquet Léonce, 111
Patocka Jan, 71
Pavie Xavier, 3, 5, 7, 13, 16, 20, 23–25, 68, 74, 87, 101, 103, 119, 123, 125, 131
Plato, 38, 109, 110, 112, 117, 118, 120, 128, 132, 147
Plutarch, 110, 135
R
Rabelais, 2, 15
Rajnou Navi, 42
Reber Bernard, ix, xi, xvi
Ricœur Paul, 60, 80
S
Saint Girons Baldine, 127
Schmid Anne-Françoise, 2, 33
Schumpeter Joseph, 8, 12
Shusterman Richard, 125
Sophocles, 2
Steffen Will, 11
T
Tarde Gabriel, 4
Thoreau Henry David, 23, 24, 125
Tousseul Sylvain, 45
V, W, X
Vernant Jean-Pierre, 109
Voelke André-Jean, 24
Von Schomberg René, xvi
Wittgenstein Ludwig, 94, 125
Xenophon, 127

===== FILE 15/17: b04.xhtml =====

Index of Notions
A, C
Asia, 152, 153
capitalism, 10, 11, 18, 47, 49, 139, 141
care, 87
choice, 2, 37, 86, 116, 123, 125–127, 136, 138, 149
competitiveness, 131
consciousness, 150
contemporary, 23, 28, 31, 94, 115, 123, 125, 139, 141–143
conversion, 71, 72, 75, 77, 78, 92, 117–123, 132, 144
creation, 4, 32, 46, 47
creativity, 21
Cynics, 102, 110, 114, 118, 119, 123
D
destruction (creative), 7, 8, 28
dialogue, 74, 112, 113, 118, 119, 131, 144, 146–148, 151
disciple, 27, 106, 112, 127, 133, 134
discourse, 8, 36, 102, 113, 123, 124, 135
discovery, 5, 8
discussion, 112, 113, 117, 147
E
economy, 5, 7, 9, 10, 13, 18, 21, 35, 46, 52, 118, 137
education, 15, 28, 42, 43, 45, 50, 54, 60, 70, 77, 108, 122, 128–132, 137, 139, 140, 142, 145, 152
ego, 25, 43, 44, 64, 72, 73, 78, 84–89, 97, 98, 144
Epicurean, 27, 102, 110, 114, 117, 119, 123
epoché, 72–75, 78–80, 82, 85, 89, 92, 93
essence, 10, 14, 17, 28, 30, 34, 36, 40, 43, 49, 53, 61, 63, 67, 68, 71, 75–81, 83, 85, 88, 92, 93, 96, 97, 99, 100, 109, 118, 124, 145
ethics, 3, 13, 15, 16, 19, 20, 30, 33, 50, 116, 121, 136
exercises, 23, 31, 46, 63, 76, 84, 89, 90, 96, 100–104, 112, 114, 119, 121, 123, 130, 135, 146, 147, 149
spiritual, 28, 33, 90, 101–103, 105, 108, 110, 113, 115–117, 119–125, 128–132, 134, 137, 144, 145, 149, 151, 153
existence, 6, 7, 12, 16, 21, 40, 43, 47, 64, 66, 72, 73, 75, 76, 80, 83, 102, 104, 105, 109, 111, 125, 127, 144
G, H
good, 2, 6–15, 18–26, 30, 31, 35, 40–42, 45–53, 65–71, 76, 79, 81, 84, 86–91, 97, 99, 101, 106–111, 114–123, 126, 132, 133, 136–147, 151, 153, 154
hierarchy, 99
human, 2–4, 51, 77, 78, 87, 116, 118, 124, 137, 141
humanity, 3, 47, 123, 140, 142, 151
I
imagination, 21, 61, 65, 69, 80, 81, 82
individual, 2, 3, 27, 44, 45, 53, 62, 72, 76, 95, 98, 105, 111, 116–118, 121, 128, 130, 132, 136, 137, 140, 145, 147, 150, 153
innovation
care, 16, 87
non-standard, 34–39, 43–54, 56, 143
responsible, 16, 20, 33, 40, 113, 115, 127, 145
social, 20, 33, 40
intentionality, 61, 62, 68, 70, 71, 88, 89, 92, 93
interpretation, 31, 74, 95–97, 114, 121, 125, 144
invent, 47, 55
invention, 4, 7, 8, 12, 13, 31, 39, 60
K, L, M
knowledge, 2, 3, 5, 15, 16, 26, 28, 33, 36, 38, 45, 48, 50, 52, 60–63, 66–68, 72, 73, 80, 81, 84, 86, 94–98, 102, 105–109, 126, 128, 133–137, 140, 143, 146, 147, 153
loneliness, 25
master, 26, 27, 106–108, 112, 115, 132–136, 144
meditation, 67, 110, 114, 121, 125, 130, 137, 144, 149–151
method, 20, 30, 31, 38, 45, 46, 52, 59, 61, 63, 65, 66, 71, 72, 85, 86, 91, 94, 98, 127, 144, 145, 147
O, P
others (the other), 27, 64, 70, 79, 85, 86, 89, 94–96, 98, 111–113, 128, 130, 132, 135, 136, 147, 151
performance, 6, 8, 55, 63, 67, 77–79, 99, 131, 144, 153
phenomenology, 28, 59–63, 65, 66, 68, 70–74, 76–78, 82, 84–86, 89–97, 99, 100, 102, 144, 149, 153
philosophy, 5, 16, 18–34, 37, 38, 40, 41, 44–49, 55–57, 59, 61, 63, 72, 74, 85, 86, 90, 92, 94, 96, 98, 100–105, 108–110, 113, 115, 119–125, 127, 128, 131, 132, 137, 139, 142–144, 152–154
non-philosophy, 30–34, 37, 44, 76
non-standard, 28–34, 37, 38, 49, 56, 57, 59, 60, 100, 101, 143, 153
politics, 4, 5, 17, 20, 21, 30, 46, 50, 52, 54, 55, 107, 117, 122, 127, 129, 141, 146, 148, 152
preparation, 115, 121
principle, 10, 21, 39, 40, 45, 52, 110, 112, 132, 154
of sufficient innovation, 40
processes, 1, 4, 9, 11, 14, 15, 18, 30, 46, 52, 53, 56, 63, 70, 83, 89, 97, 107, 112, 126, 145, 151
progress, 2–4, 7, 20, 21, 25, 45, 51, 112, 124, 141, 147
Q, R
questioning, 6, 12, 13, 25, 32, 39, 62, 63, 66, 67, 73, 74, 96, 104, 151
reasoning, 10, 48
reduction, 18, 28, 35, 42, 63, 71, 72, 74, 76, 82, 84, 88–90, 96
research, 1, 5–9, 13, 16, 20–22, 25, 26, 41, 42, 45, 50, 53–55, 61, 62, 72, 75, 80, 88, 93, 97, 114, 115, 119, 121, 128, 141, 149, 152, 153
and development, 9, 152
resistance, 12, 13, 37, 39, 43, 53, 93, 105, 138
responsibility, 3, 98, 146
retention, 63, 74, 82–84, 93
S
schools, 13, 15, 52, 102, 115, 119
self-care, 26, 78, 108–111, 113, 114, 123, 137, 144, 151, 153, 154
self-control, 113, 150
spirit (mind), 2, 17, 20, 23–25, 27, 31, 51, 53, 54, 66, 73, 89, 91, 96, 103–106, 115, 116, 121–123, 127, 129, 130, 132, 135, 136, 144, 147, 150
spirituality, 104, 122
Stoics, 27, 102, 110, 113, 117, 119, 123
struggle, 93
T, W
teaching, 13, 14, 15, 50, 52–54, 129, 130, 132, 145, 146, 151
therapy, 22, 24, 123
training, 119, 129, 131, 136
way of life, 12, 78, 103, 121, 123, 124, 127, 132, 137, 140
wisdom, 25, 28, 101, 115, 119–122, 124, 125, 127, 133, 136, 142, 144, 149
writing, 93, 114, 121, 125, 144

===== FILE 16/17: b05.xhtml =====

2019

ANCORI Bernard

The Carousel of Time: Theory of Knowledge and Acceleration of Time

BOULEAU Gabrielle

Politicization of Ecological Issues: From Environmental Forms to Environmental Motives

GAYON Jean†, interviewed by PETIT Victor

Knowledge of Life Today: Conversations on Biology

KHATCHATOUROV Armen, with the collaboration of CHARDEL Pierre-Antoine, FEENBERG Andrew, PÉRIÈS Gabriel

Digital Identities in Tension: Between Autonomy and Control

(Innovation and Responsibility Set – Volume 5)

LENOIR Virgil Cristian

Ethically Structured Processes

(Innovation and Responsibility Set – Volume 4)

NIKOLOVA Blagovesta

The RRI Challenge: Responsibilization in a State of Tension with Market Regulation

(Innovation and Responsibility Set – Volume 3)

ZEMBRI-MARY Geneviève

Project Risks: Actions Around Uncertainty in Urban Planning and Infrastructure Development

2018

LOISY Catherine, COULET Jean-Claude

Competence and Program-based Approach in Training: Tools for Developing Responsible Activities

(Innovation and Responsibility Set – Volume 1)

PANSERA Mario, OWEN Richard

Innovation and Development: The Politics at the Bottom of the Pyramid

(Innovation and Responsibility Set – Volume 2)

2017

MAESSCHALCK Marc

Reflexive Governance for Research and Innovative Knowledge

(Responsible Research and Innovation Set – Volume 6)

PELLÉ Sophie

Business, Innovation and Responsibility

(Responsible Research and Innovation Set – Volume 7)

2016

GIANNI Robert

Responsibility and Freedom: The Ethical Realm of RRI

(Responsible Research and Innovation Set – Volume 2)

GRUNWALD Armin

The Hermeneutic Side of Responsible Research and Innovation

(Responsible Research and Innovation Set – Volume 5)

LENOIR Virgil Cristian

Ethical Efficiency: Responsibility and Contingency

(Responsible Research and Innovation Set – Volume 1)

PELLÉ Sophie, REBER Bernard

From Ethical Review to Responsible Research and Innovation

(Responsible Research and Innovation Set – Volume 3)

REBER Bernard

Precautionary Principle, Pluralism and Deliberation: Science and Ethics

(Responsible Research and Innovation Set – Volume 4)

===== FILE 17/17: eula.xhtml =====

WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT

Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.