TITLE: Pixel Art for Game Developers
ISBN: 9781482252316
FILES: 57


===== FILE 1/57: chapter-01.html =====

K23868
“Pixel Art and Pixel Art games are very popular and the technique is a great
way for independent creators to create very good-looking games with limited
resources. It’s frankly shocking that there hasn’t been a resource like this
before ... a very timely book.”
—Chris Totten, George Mason University, Washington, DC, USA
Uncover the secrets to creating stunning graphics with Pixel Art for Game
Developers. The premier how-to book on Pixel Art and Pixel Art software,
it focuses on the universal principles of the craft.
The book provides an introduction to Pixel Art, its utility, foundational
elements, and concepts such as light and shadow. It offers tutorials on
creating animations and serves as a functional guide for the most common
methodology in 2D game development.
Gamers love the retro feel of Pixel Art, and lucky for you it is easy to create.
You'll love the tiny file sizes that will reduce compile times and help your
game run faster. Providing you with the skills to create the characters and
environments needed for 2D games, this book will help you:
• Create tilesets to build game environments
• Understand light and shadow
• Work efficiently with pixels
• Use atmospheric and linear perspective
• Create professional-quality Pixel Art
This book has chapters dedicated to theory as well as step-by-step tutori-
als, both of which describe the process explicitly. Whether you are an artist,
programmer, indie developer, or certified public accountant, after reading
this book, you'll understand the steps necessary to create production-qual-
ity Pixel Art graphics.
Computer Science & Engineering / Computer Graphics
ISBN: 978-1-4822-5230-9
9 781482 252309
90000
CRC Press is an imprint of the
Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
Boca Raton London New York
CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2016 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Version Date: 20150618
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4822-5231-6 (eBook - PDF)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable
efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot
assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and
publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication
and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any
copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any
future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced,
transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or
hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information stor-
age or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copy-
right.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that pro-
vides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photo-
copy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are
used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com

===== FILE 2/57: chapter-02.html =====

Contents
Preface: What the Crap Is Pixel Art?, xi
Acknowledgments, xvii
C
HAPTER 1
▪
Why Pixel Art? 1
1.1 PLAYERS LOVE PIXEL ART 1
.. Sweet Nostalgia 
.. Contemporary and Relevant 
.. Pixel Art Is Iconic 
1.2 IT MAKES YOUR LIFE EASIER 4
.. Smaller File Sizes 
.. Anyone Can Create Pixel Art 
.. Spend Less Time Doing Boring Stu 
.. It Works Well on Very Small Screens 
.. Pixel Art: It’s Better than D 
.. All Your Friends Are Doing It and It’ll
Make You Cool 
CHAPTER 2
▪
Pixel Art: The Technology of
Yesterday…Today! 9
2.1 WHY NOW? WHAT’S IN IT FOR YOU? 9
2.2 WHO THIS BOOK IS FOR 10
.. Artists 
.. Programmers (Fire Your Artist and Do It Yourself) 
.. Pixel Hobbyists 
.. Indie Developers 
2.3 HOW TO USE THIS BOOK? 11
v
vi Contents
CHAPTER 3
▪
WhoAmIandWhyDoIKnowSoMuch
about Pixel Art? 13
DISCLAIMER(S) 15
CHAPTER 4
▪
Software: Set Up Your Working
Environment 17
4.1 WHAT NOT TO USE 17
4.2 MY SOFTWARE RECOMMENDATION 18
4.3 OTHER OPTIONS FOR PIXEL ART SOFTWARE 18
4.4 A BRIEF GLANCE AT GRAPHICSGALE 18
CHAPTER 5
▪
Making Pixel Art: Doing Lines 23
5.1 STRAIGHT LINES 23
5.2 DIAGONAL LINES 24
5.3 CURVED LINES 25
.. Avoid the Lone Wolf 
.. Make Each Segment Length Progressively
Longer or Shorter 
.. Beware the Circle Tool 
.. Make Love with the Cut and Paste Features 
5.4 LINE WIDTH 27
5.5 ANTI-ALIASING 28
EXERCISE 5.1: CREATING A LINE DRAWING SPRITE 29
Step : Download and Install GraphicsGale or Other
Pixel Art Soware 
Step : Create a New Project 
Step : Draw a Head and Face 
Step : Draw the Body 
CHAPTER 6
▪
Coloring inside the Lines 43
6.1 4-BIT PALETTE 43
6.2 FILL TOOL 44
6.3 CREATING GRADIENTS 47
6.4 PALETTE SWAPPING 51
Contents vii
6.5 PALETTE SIZE AND TIME CONSIDERATION 57
6.6 CHOOSING COLORS 58
6.7 TRANSPARENCY 64
EXERCISE 6.1: COLORING THE SPRITE
(FROM EXERCISE 5.1) 66
CHAPTER 7
▪
Drawing Secrets Revealed: It’s All Smoke
and Mirrors 71
7.1 SHADING 71
7.2 CAST SHADOW 74
7.3 SHADOW DIRECTION 76
7.4 ATMOSPHERIC PERSPECTIVE 77
7.5 LINEAR PERSPECTIVE 80
EXERCISE 7.1: SHADING THE SPRITE
(FROM EXERCISE 6.1) 84
CHAPTER 8
▪
Animating Pixels: The Shock and Horror
of Being Flashed by a Pixel 89
8.1 USING THE PROGRAM FOR ANIMATION 90
8.2 ONION SKINNING 91
8.3 PIXEL FLASHING 93
8.4 CORE ANIMATION CONCEPTS 95
.. Anticipation and Follow-Through 
.. Squash and Stretch 
8.5 GAME-SPECIFIC CONCERNS 102
8.6 SUMMARY 104
EXERCISE 8.1: CREATE AN IDLE ANIMATION
(FROM EXERCISE 7.1) 104
Simplify the Sprite (Suggested but Optional) 
The Simplest Path 
CHAPTER 9
▪
Tiled Backgrounds 109
9.1 TILE SIZES 110
9.2 SETTING UP THE TILEMAP WORK AREA 111
viii Contents
9.3 TEXTURES THAT REPEAT ON YOU 112
9.4 CREATE A TILE LIBRARY 118
9.5 DITHERING AND OTHER PATTERNS 118
.. How to Create Organic Dither 
.. Patterned Dither 
EXERCISE 9.1: CREATING A TOP-DOWN TILE SET 121
Step : Create a New Project, Get a History Lesson 
Step : Turn on Your Grid 
Step : Prepare Your Palette 
Step : Create Our First Tile 
Step : Create a Grass Variation—As well as a
Blend Tile 
Step : It Isn’t Easy Being Green—Moving on
to Sand 
Step : Variation Elation for the Game’s Duration 
Step : Rocking Out 
Step : Water 
Step : Put It All Together 
EXERCISE 9.2: CREATING A SIMPLE SIDE-VIEW
TILE SET 167
CHAPTER 10
▪
You’re Doing It Wrong: Things to Avoid 207
10.1 BANDING AND “SUPER PIXELS” 207
10.2 TOO MUCH ANTI-ALIAS 209
10.3 POOR LINE QUALITY 210
10.4 WEAK PALETTE CHOICES 211
10.5 TOO MUCH COMPLEXITY 212
10.6 FLASH SHADING 213
10.7 NO TEXTURE 214
CHAPTER 11
▪
Interviews with Game Developers 217
11.1 AN INTERVIEW WITH JAMES PETRUZZI
OF DISCORD GAMES 217
Contents ix
11.2 AN INTERVIEW WITH JOCHUM SKOGLUND OF
CRACKSHELL 220
11.3 AN INTERVIEW WITH DAVE PRESTON OF HEART
MACHINE 223
CHAPTER 12
▪
Resources 227
12.1 ONLINE RESOURCES 227
12.2 BOOKS 227
12.3 PIXEL ART SOFTWARE 228
CHAPTER 13
▪
Afterword: Some Thoughts on Why
I Wrote This Book 231
INDEX, 233

===== FILE 4/57: chapter-04.html =====

Preface: What the Crap Is
Pixel Art?
A
  , did you ever get right up close to the TV despite your
parents’ warnings that it will make you cross-eyed and turn your eyes
into bloody stumps? If you did, you would have noticed that the images
were created with tiny dots of bright color. Those tiny dots are called pixels.
PixelscomposetheimagesthataredisplayedonTVs,computermonitors,
tablets, phones, and most other digital devices.
Computer graphics were originally built by manipulating those dots of
coloronepixelatatime,whichbecametheearlyhistoryofPixelArt.In
some cases, those pixels were controlled through cumbersome program-
ming scripts but over time computer art programs became more common
and the quality of representation improved.
Pixel Art grew out of technical restraints from a generation ago. Game
systems had much less memory and worked with much smaller pixel
dimensions than today, so it was a technical necessity to work within tight
restraints on size and color.
As games grew in quality and sophistication, it became important to
make the most out of the aesthetics within the technical restraints. Out of
this era, some “best practices”grew out of the process and have evolved into
what we now think of as Pixel Art.
Before starting to rant on the many useful aspects of Pixel Art in games
and applications or even explaining what Pixel Art is, I want to give
examplesofwhatitisnot.
D graphics are not Pixel Art (Figure F.), despite that they are being
created by pixels on screen.
xi
xii Preface: What the Crap Is Pixel Art?
FIGURE F.1 D graphics are not Pixel Art.
Vector graphics (Figure F.), the type commonly built in Adobe Illustra-
tororAdobeFlash,arenotPixelArt.
FIGURE F.2 This is vector art, not Pixel Art.
Preface: What the Crap Is Pixel Art? xiii
FIGURE F.3 Also vector art.
FIGURE F.4 Yet more vector art.
Vector graphics (Figures F. and F.) are built by laying out points (called
vectors) and the shape of curves that create the lines that connect those
curves (called the speed of the curve). Then gradients can be generated to
ll in those lines. It is a lovely style but built with a methodology markedly
dierent from Pixel Art.
Traditional art that has been scanned into the computer is not Pixel Art,
despite that it is now visible by the use of pixels on screen. This would now
be considered a bitmapped graphic (Figure F.). Even when reduced to very
small pixel dimensions, as done in Figure F., this would not be considered
Pixel Art. Although once reduced, we are getting a little bit closer.
xiv Preface: What the Crap Is Pixel Art?
FIGURE F.5 Hand-drawn art scanned
into the computer are considered
bitmapped art.
FIGURE F.6 Bitmaps that have been
reduced are still not Pixel Art.
AlsoofnoteisthatnotallDartthatwaspaintedonthecomputeris
considered Pixel Art. A painting created in Photoshop or Corel does not
usuallyfallintothiscategoryeither.TakealookatFigureF.,andyoucan
see that although this piece was clearly built in the computer, the individual
pixels are not really visible without looking very closely.
FIGURE F.7 Still not Pixel Art.
Preface: What the Crap Is Pixel Art? xv
I’ll now dene specically what I mean by “Pixel Art.”
Pixel Art: An image where each pixel visible on screen is
placed intentionally.
Fortunatelyforus,thisdoesnotmeanthateverypixelhastobeplaced
by hand. Large areas of the same color can be lled in with a “ll” tool, and
a “line” tool can place dozens of pixels at once. The important thing is that
each pixel that shows up on screen was intended to be where it is.
Some examples are shown in Figures F. and F..
FIGURE F.8 Screenshot from Pixel Guy’s Quest. This is Pixel Art.

===== FILE 5/57: chapter-05.html =====

xvi Preface: What the Crap Is Pixel Art?
FIGURE F.9 Another example of Pixel Art.
It may sound tedious, but there are many tools and methods we can
usetomaketheprocessfastandeasy—andfun!Andasyoucanseefrom
the examples, there is plenty of opportunity for detail using this suite of
techniques.

===== FILE 6/57: chapter-06.html =====

Acknowledgments
W
 I       by writing bits and pieces
in my kitchen, I had the very false expectation of being a lone
wolf—putting together the various parts in isolation. As it turned out, this
was not at all the case and the book could not have come together without
thehelpandguidanceofmanyincrediblepeople.
This bookwould have sueredinquality (if itwas nished atall)without
the assistance of these wonderful people. I relied heavily on these folks in
entirely unexpected ways.
First and foremost, I’d like to give a huge, gigantic thank-you to my pub-
lisherand editor. You are thebestand Iintendtobuyyoucocktails whenever
I see you next!
RickAdams—executiveeditoratCRCPress
Joselyn Banks—project coordinator and editor on my project from
CRC Press
Suzanne Lassandro—project editor at CRC Press
Scott Hayes—prepress manager at CRC Press
Rick was extremely patient with me and managed to talk to me kindly
even when I was at my most anxious. Josie, thank you for taking my ugly
manuscript and turning it into this amazing nal product!
I would like to express my appreciation to the initial reviewers of the
book whose input early on in the process was invaluable:
Chris Totten—professor of game design at American University
Chris Kaplan—senior multimedia developer at GP Strategies
Corporation
Callen Shaw—CEO at The Unallied
xvii
xviii Acknowledgments
Special thanks to the incredibly talented developers that contributed to
the book:
James Petruzzi and the ne folks at Discord games
Jochum Skoglund and Niklas Myrberg of Crackshell games
Alex Preston of Heart Machine
Theinputgivenbythe followingpeoplewas greatly appreciatedandwent
alongwaytowardhelpingtogivebirthtothenalproduct:
Josh Jennings—game developer and artist
Francis Coloumbe—Pixel Art guru
My wonderful family—the coolest people I know!
I would also like to extend my thanks to Ron Cyran, who tolerated
my wonky work schedule throughout this crazy process. Although listed
earlier, I want to give a special nod of appreciation to Professor Chris Totten.
This book would likely never have been written without his contributions.

===== FILE 7/57: chapter-07.html =====

CHAPTER 1
Why Pixel Art?
N
    we’re talking about when we say Pixel Art, but
why would we use something that grew out of technical restraints?
There are a lot of motives for using Pixel Art, but we can basically break
them into twoprimary categories: the reasons that have to do with the play-
ers’ enjoyment and the jubilant blissful euphoria of the developer that uses
this methodology.
1.1 PLAYERS LOVE PIXEL ART
The Pixel Art aesthetic is loved and revered by many players, and there are
some very good reasons! The style triggers warm feeling of nostalgia for
many of us older gamers, yet is contemporary and found in some of the
best games made today. There is something about the simplicity of the style
that lends itself to memorable and iconic imagery. Let’s take a moment to
discuss why players are so drawn to Pixel Art.
1.1.1 Sweet Nostalgia
The most obvious way that Pixel Art connects with audiences is through its
connection to earlier times in video/computer gaming history.
The kids who grew up playing games in the s and s have an
intrinsic anity for this aesthetic. For many in this generation, the style
taps into warm feelings of nostalgia. When I play a game with tight Pixel
Art, it unconsciously tickles memories of being nine years old and trading
Nintendo cartridges with friends. For me personally, the look brings me
back to a simpler time…A time before getting beaten up by a bunch of
members of the Cobra Kai dressed in skeleton costumes.
1
2 Pixel Art for Game Developers
1.1.2 Contemporary and Relevant
This generation has seen game genres fracture into more and more dif-
ferent types of experiences. Today we have computer games ranging from
FPStoRPStoMMOs,mobilegamesfromcasualtotactical,FP,subscrip-
tion based, art games, experimental games, arcade games, console games,
downloadable content,and dozensof other genres and subgenres. Thereare
more types of experiences available than ever before, and equally numerous
aesthetics.
Therehavebecomeagreatmanyacceptablestylesthroughoutthevarious
categories, anditappears that Pixel Art has remained strong through the test
of time.
In recent years (at the time this book is written), there have been far too
many games using Pixel Art to list them all, but here is a list of some of the
highlights of current gen games either built or being built with Pixel Art
(Figures. and .):
Chasm by Discord Games
Superbrothers: Sword and Sworcery EP by Capybara Games
Super Dwarf Madness by The Unallied
Super Crate Box by Vlambeer
Tiny Barbarian by StarQuail
Crawl by Powerhoof
ShovelKnightbyYachtClubGames
FIGURE 1.1 Screenshot from Chasm.
Why Pixel Art? 3
FIGURE 1.2 Screenshot from Hammerwatch.
And there are, honestly, so many other quality games built in this style that I
wouldn’t ever try to create a comprehensive list. I couldn’t possibly manage
to list them all!
1.1.3 Pixel Art Is Iconic
Because Pixel Art is created from little squares and genuine curves are
not available, it lends itself to exaggeration. Features become somewhat
iconic versions of whatever they are intended to represent, which can be
surprisingly useful.
Pixel Art is a clearly stylized representation, and it is easy to use this
aspectto your advantage. The Mario character that weall know andlovewas
built as an exaggeration of a nose and mustache simply to make the char-
acter stand out. Shigeru Miyamoto explains in an interview with Popular
Mechanics from December of :
With the technology back then, you had very limited palette
in which you were able to draw a character. If you look at the
original Mario face, you had just  pixels to draw his face. My
goal within that limited palette was to create a character that
4 Pixel Art for Game Developers
wasasdistinctaspossible.Becauseofthat,hehadsomeofhis
now-distinct features such as his big nose.
∗
Another wonderful aspect overlooked by most is that you almost com-
pletely circumvent the “uncanny valley” by using this simplied style. The
uncanny valley is the concept that as characters look more and more like a
real human they look more appealing—with one very large exception. If a
character looks almost human but not exactly—if there aresmall deviations
from reality—the character looks “uncanny.” Some examples of this would
be wax dummies, some humanoid robots, and D characters where anima-
tionmakestheirjointmovementappearunnatural.Theeectiscalledthe
“uncanny valley” because of the dip in the graph that is used to show this
eect.
Good Pixel Art looks intentional and timeless. The quality D video
games of the s can stand side by side with the quality Pixel Art games
of today. So Pixel Art is well received by many audiences, but the more
fundamental truth is that it can make your development process much
smoother.
1.2 IT MAKES YOUR LIFE EASIER
So Pixel Art may be considered an “acceptable style” to players…But why
would you want use Pixel Art?
1.2.1 Smaller File Sizes
I wanted to start with the most measurable and pragmatic fact: the le sizes
for Pixel Art can be extremely small. Using a tiled background thoughtfully,
it would be quite feasible to have the background data for an entire game t
on one ×imagewithareasonableamountofvariation.It’snotthat
this would always be the best choice, but that it is possible to work within
that restraint and still have a quality product is somewhat amazing.
This also gives the opportunity to have more objects on screen without
performance issues. Of course, that aspect is somewhat hindered if there
arealotofsemitransparentpartsofeachsprite.Thatmeansthatyoucant
more content into a single game.
∗
Popular Mechanics, New York. http://www.popularmechanics.com/technology/gadgets/video-
games/.
Why Pixel Art? 5
Another more subtle luxury that small le sizes create is that the game
willcompilefaster.Asthoseofyoufromtheprogrammingdisciplineknow,
a slow compile can be a huge lag on development time and somewhat mad-
dening for the developer. You’ll be loving life with your speedy compile
times!
1.2.2 Anyone Can Create Pixel Art
This may be an exaggeration, as there, very well, may be people who would
notbeabletocreatePixelArt…Blindpeople,perhapssomeonewithno
arms or legs…But in most cases people can learn to become reasonably
skilled with the medium if they choose. That is a big advantage of using
PixelArt—itisveryaccessibleasadevelopmenttool.It’seasytolearn,the
soware is cheap, and it’s easy to integrate into games.
Almost anyone can learn to create Pixel Art, and, what’s more, the pro-
cess is fun! The relative simplicity of the style heavily limits the amount of
work that is needed to create production quality artwork. This dramatically
lowers the bar to entry to the graphics side of game development.
What’s more, once the basics have been learned, you can gradually add
small bits of detail to your scenes—which have the potential to make the
nal outcome of your eort rather dazzling. Although the individual parts
aresimple,PixelArtcanbelayered,whichcanbecomequitecomplexand
visually stunning.
It’s also a good option for your wallet, as there are many good soware
packages available for free or cheap. My favorite Pixel Art program at the
momentisaprogram calledCosmigoPro Motion.At thetimeofthewriting
of this book, it costs roughly . There are many tools within the program
such as a tile environment editor that makes it an excellent investment if you
want to excel with this skill. And so far as I can tell, that is the upper-end
price for Pixel Art soware! There are in fact many other great programs
thatareavailableforfreeorforcheaponline.
Therelativepriceofthesoware,thepainlesslearningcurve,aswellas
the general ease of creation and integration with code all make it a super
accessible development tool.
1.2.3 Spend Less Time Doing Boring Stuff
Notonlyisiteasytocreate,butitiseasytoworkwithtoo!Whendone
properly, the les sizes are almost comically small. This makes all of the
le management very fast and easy. The small le sizes make the work

===== FILE 8/57: chapter-08.html =====

6 Pixel Art for Game Developers
fast and easy to import into game engines…And as mentioned earlier, the
compile timesforgamesof thisilk becomeveryshort (unlessa largeamount
of music is slowing down the process).
Having smaller le sizes means the game will download faster, making
for much easier le management. What’s more, the fast download time will
improvethegameexperiencefortheplayer.
In most cases the nished art can be exported in many dierent formats:
png, gif, spr, etc. Since image les are so common, almost any engine or
programming language will be able to make use of the art assets.
1.2.4 It Works Well on Very Small Screens
Because each pixel is in its place, it lends itself to very small resolutions.
The term resolution refers to the actual number of pixels that a particu-
larscreenhastodisplayanimageandisusuallywrittenaswidth× height
like this:  ×  (which incidentally is one of the standard DVD reso-
lutions). Most HD televisions are either 1280 × 720 (p) or 1920 × 1080
(p)…Butmanyphonesandmobiledevices commonly havearesolution
much smaller. Consider the Nintendo DS, where each screen has a resolu-
tion of 256 × 192—thatposesasubstantialdierenceinthewaythatthe
image is interpreted by your eyes.
When working with other sorts of graphics, the nal output of the image
is still created with pixels. This is relevant because whenever an image is
reduced to a smaller size, the nal outcome will only have the available res-
olution to “draw” the image. To give an example, Figure . is a painting
that was scanned in at 1756 × 2259. Looks pretty good, but let’s say you
want this as a sprite in your game—when we drop this guy down to a reso-
lution of 75 × 97 (a decently large size for most sprites in a D game), then
we get the abomination seen in Figure ..
Why Pixel Art? 7
FIGURE 1.3 Ascannedimageat
1756 × 2259 pixel resolution.
FIGURE 1.4 The same image reduced
to a 75 × 97 pixel resolution.
1.2.5 Pixel Art: It’s Better than 3D
I didn’t mean it! Call o the threatening goons—I love D art also! I’m
talkingonlyofeaseofthecreationpipeline.
In truth, many people are surprised when I tell them that the ability to
place pixels aesthetically is actually one of the most useful skills to have
in development today. For some reason when people think of games they
immediately think of complicated D graphics and seem surprised when
told that there are thousands of current generation games being made with
Pixel Art.
So let’s take a moment and compare the workow of creating a character
animation in D against building the same game asset as Pixel Art.
Building a character animation using D technology:
•Modelthecharacter
• Lay out the UVs
• Create a texture
• CreateazBrush,mudbox,etc.,hi-polyversionandcreatenormalmaps
• Create a skeleton and setup a rig
8 Pixel Art for Game Developers
• SkinthecharacterandpaintUVweights
•Createanimation
• Import all assets (model, animations, textures, etc.) into the game
environment
• Make sure that the model, texture(s), and animations link up properly
within the game engine
Building a character animation using Pixel Art
• Create character animation
•Importintogameengine
You can easily see the advantage of a shorter pipeline method. Of course,
neither is really “better” any more than screwdriver is better than a
hammer—I’m just being a rabble-rouser to make sure you haven’t entirely
fallen asleep. It’s obvious that these are simply dierent tools that can be
used in dierent contexts.
But it may be fair to say that, on the whole, Pixel Art is usually far faster,
less expensive, and more reliable than building in D.
1.2.6 All Your Friends Are Doing It and It’ll Make You Cool
It’shiptobesquare(Iamsosorryforthatpun).Thepixelaesthetic
hasaretrochicfeelandahugefollowingthroughoutthegame-playing
community. And it’s free the rst time too!
In truth, there aresome great communities online where people chatand
give critique on each other’s work. I’m a member of several forums and they
have all been super welcoming and helpful.
In a world where smartphones have become commonplace, working
within tight visual constraints has become a utilitarian skill. The aesthetic is
widelyusedingamestoday—playersloveitbecauseofthenostalgiaaswell
as it’s iconic nature.
There are so many ways in which this style is practical and functional to
developerslike you.The small le sizes, accessibility, pipeline,and awesome
communitymakeitasuperfunwaytocreateartforyourgame.

===== FILE 9/57: chapter-09.html =====

CHAPTER 2
Pixel Art
The Technology of Yesterday…Today!
2.1 WHY NOW? WHAT’S IN IT FOR YOU?
Pixel Art has been around a long time—more than 30 years. Why would
anybody want to use such an antiquated style?
Wejusttalkedaboutalotofthevalueincreatingyourgamesusingthis
style... But don’t feel bound by all of the utility that Pixel Art oers. You may
just like the look of Pixel Art and simply want me to validate the purchase,
but in this book you will learn a solid foundation for building graphics.
This book will teach you how to create Pixel Art with a particular focus
on creating art assets to be used in video games. You can expect to learn
how to create professional quality imagery within the constraints that guide
soware development.
Specically, you will learn:
• The principles of drawing with pixels
• How to eectively use color palettes
• Tocreateandusetiledbackgrounds
• The essentials of building for speed and consistency
•Introductiontoanimatingwithpixels
• To build graphics that will meet a game’s technical requirements
• How to connect with game developers who need Pixel Art
9
10 Pixel Art for Game Developers
Throughout this book there are tutorials to give you experience applying
the various principles discussed, with screenshots to document the steps of
the creation process.
2.2 WHO THIS BOOK IS FOR
Artists, programmers, hobbyists, and indie developers. If you’ve picked up
thebookincuriosity,it’sprobablyforyou.
2.2.1 Artists
You already know how to make things look good, so you have a natural
advantage in some aspects of Pixel Art creation. I say only some aspects
because a large part of working with pixels has to do with trading o real-
ism for eciency and that can be a dicult choice for some artists (myself
included).
This book will help you to systematize your process so that the work will
owout faster and with moreconsistency. There are also idiosyncrasies that
are unique to this medium, with useful tricks to help you make top quality
work. I wish to also make you aware of potential pitfalls and what you can
do to circumvent those problems.
For some this may bridge the gap between being able to draw and hav-
ing the skills to landing a job within the game industry (which can be
notoriously dicult to break in to).
2.2.2 Programmers (Fire Your Artist and Do It Yourself)
PixelArtatitsnestborrowsmanyconceptsfromprogramming:reuse,
inherence, and dynamic information—just to name a few.
Aer reading and completing the exercises in this book, you should fully
understand the process necessary to build production-quality work. You
may nd yourself more at home within this medium that you expect.
Even if you continue to outsource your art production, this will give you
a deeper understanding of the process—giving you tools to communicate
your needs more eectively, saving you eort (and money!) In truth there
is a good chance that you’ll hire your artist back on, eventually because the
pressure of trying to do both jobs on a game project will likely turn your
brain into tapioca pudding.
Pixel Art 11
2.2.3 Pixel Hobbyists
WhetheryouarelookingtobreakintogamedevelopmentorsimplyaPixel
Artenthusiast,thisbooklaysitalloutforyou.Evenifyouhavebeenbuild-
ing with pixels actively for years, you are likely to nd techniques within
that will help you build faster and more eciently.
2.2.4 Indie Developers
It is for you, more than anyone else that I have written this book.
As an indie developer, you are involved intimately with every aspect of
your product. This book will help raise the quality and consistency of your
aesthetic, reduce the le sizes of your art assets, and improve your bowling
game. Except it won’t improve your bowling game. I just got a little excited.
2.3 HOW TO USE THIS BOOK?
This book lays out foundational concepts in each chapter that build upon
the last. Perhaps more signicantly, the exercises become less and less
focusedongivingstep-by-stepinstructionsthroughoutthebook.Soby
the end I’m hoping to cover more high level concepts without needing to
show where to place each individual pixel or which buttons to press in the
soware.
To get the most out of your experience, I encourage readers to read
straight through—completing each tutorial as they appear in sequence. I’ve
broken Exercise 1 into four subsections, having each subsection follow the
chapter explaining how to do the relevant set of tasks.
That being said, you bought the book and have the unique privilege to
do whatever the heck you want with it—aer all, you bought it. You may
choose to skip around to sections relevant to what you are working on or
ignore everything except the tutorials. You may choose to read it from back
to front or use the pages of this book to create origami swans. I will say that
itmakesagreatgiforyourfriendsandfamilyandhighlyencourageyou
to buy several copies.

===== FILE 10/57: chapter-10.html =====

CHAPTER 3
Who Am I and Why Do I
Know So Much about
Pixel Art?
W
IWamIandwhatwasIdoingagain?Cometothink
of it, how the hell did I get here? Where did I leave my keys? Brace
yourself for the backstory. Maybe you want to get some chamomile tea or
something to help settle you in for this heartwarming tale.
Many years ago I was an art student with the intention of becoming a
painter. I studied all about how to use traditional renaissance techniques
to create niy artwork and avoided anything about how to apply what was
learned practically (i.e., how to get a job). So focused were my passions that
I convinced my academic adviser that it was in my best interest to postpone
all of myprerequisite classes and take only art and music courses (for a while
I was considering a music major before realizing that I had paralyzing stage
fright). Among my courses was a D graphics course at the Art Academy of
Cincinnati that indirectly altered my professional course for ever aer.
Aer school I found that my myopic focus on art had le me at a slight
(readmajor)disadvantagewhenenteringthejobmarket.Theonlyskillthat
I could isolate as directly marketable was my new familiarity with D mod-
eling. So I took classes and bought a computer to build work to improve my
D portfolio.
At some juncture, due to my D work, I landed an interview at a game
company in Virginia. Before that moment I had never realized that game
13
14 Pixel Art for Game Developers
development could be a profession and was enamored by the marriage of
technology and creativity. Although I did not get the job, I had decided that
this was going to be my profession. This seemed like something I could
studymywholelifewithouteverrunningoutofnewinformationorhaving
it get stale. Although at that point I didn’t really have enough experience to
beveryvaluableinthegameindustry,soIresolvedtogobacktoschool.
Several years later I loaded my wife, dog, two cats, and -month-old
daughter into a plane heading toward Vancouver, BC to study art and ani-
mation for game development at the Art Institute of Vancouver. It was an
amazing adventure where I learned a lot more tricks and tools for creat-
ing D art and animation. At that point in time there really weren’t many
schoolsthattaughtgamedevelopment.Therewereafewoptions,buteach
ofthemhadsomeaspectthatwasnotidealformysituation.Thatparticular
Art Institute had a practicum where you actually build a video game as part
ofthecurriculum—andthatreallysolditforme.Iwasolderthanmostof
my classmates and a couple of them called me “Old Man Silber,” but it was
an incredible experience that transformed me professionally.
I believe that now a lot of the game development classes have cross pol-
linated across the Art Institute schools (as well as other schools) and there
are more options for studying game art and animation, so if you ever chose
that path you may not need to move across the country. So I studied a great
many aspects of game development, concentrating on D art because that
seemed to be the ticket to getting hired in the game industry.
Then aer school I landed my rst job in game development at Hand-
held Games, where I worked as a Pixel Artist and did no D work at all.
I loved it and fell in love with this idiosyncratic media. Over the next two
years I worked on more than a half dozen commercial video games. While
workingatHandheldGamesI’dbeencreditedonNintendoDS,Nintendo
GBA, Vmigo, and “plug and play” games with licenses that include Marvel,
Disney, Pixar, and Nicktoons.
DuringthattimeperiodIcreatedPixelArtanimationsandenvironments
for (+) hours a day, (+) days a week and learned the idiosyncrasies of the
medium while on the job. A few things were shared by my coworkers, but
mostly I learned the hard way—with lots of trial and error.
Since then, I’ve foundedthe game company Interstellar Tortoise LLC and
written some small “indie” games like Pixel Guy’s Quest. I love the Pixel Art
aestheticandwanttodowhatIcantoassistthedevelopercommunityin
gettingthemostoutofthismagnicentstyleofgraphics.
Who Am I and Why Do I Know So Much about Pixel Art? 15
DISCLAIMER(S)
Aswith any creative discipline, there is a large subjective component. There
are some techniques and explanations in which I expect some dissent—and
that is perfectly ne. I’ve tried my best to give guidance and examples that
will be useful, and don’t feel that these are the only strong solutions. Take
the principles that work for you and feel free to dump the rest.
I’ve also made some minor mistakes on some of the artwork in the pages
of this book. At times I had to intentionally sacrice some aspect of quality
inordertospendthetimetomakecleartherelevantexample.Theprocess
of writing this book was a huge eort and sometimes I didn’t have the time
to use best practices while creating examples. Work with me and look for
the point I’m trying to make.

===== FILE 11/57: chapter-11.html =====

CHAPTER 4
Software
Set Up Your Working Environment
Y
    what to use to build your Pixel Art creations.
Putaway yourgraph paperbecause there are a gaggle of soware pack-
agesthatareavailableforfreeorforcheapspecicallybuiltaroundcreating
PixelArt.Allofthesecanbesetupquicklyandeasilyandeachhaspositives
and negatives.
Thetoolsyouchoosetocreatewithareuptoyou,soI’vetakeneort
tomaketheteachingasubiquitousaspossible.Inthefast-movingenviron-
ment of the tech world, soware changes but underlying principles outlined
throughout the book should endure. That being said, I’ll give my two cents
on the soware that will turn you into a lean, mean, pixel machine the
fastest.
4.1 WHAT NOT TO USE
Braceyourself:Istronglyencourageyounot to use Photoshop or Gimp.
This suggestion may trigger an anaphylactic shock in some, but let me
prefacethatIabsolutelylovetheseprograms—buttheyarenoteasilysetup
to create Pixel Art. You are the one aected most by your choice, so what
you choose is completely up to you—but some choices will lead you down
a road to heartache, leaving you unemployed in Greenland.
Do not use any program built for creating Vector Art. This would
include Illustrator, Incscape, or virtually any piece of soware with the work
“vector” in the name.
17
18 Pixel Art for Game Developers
4.2 MY SOFTWARE RECOMMENDATION
My strong suggestion for most of you is a program called GraphicsGale.
This program is very well rounded for creating Pixel Art and the free
version has everything you need to start rocking out with Pixel Art.
Navigate to the following webpage and download GraphicsGale:
http://www.humanbalance.net/gale/us/download.html
Note:Besuretoclickthe“GetFree”buttonratherthanthe“Try
Shareware” so that you will avoid needing to make changes later.
4.3 OTHER OPTIONS FOR PIXEL ART SOFTWARE
Although GraphicsGale if fabulous, there are many other options depend-
ing on your needs and preferences.
If you know you are going to be spending a lot of time on Pixel Art, you
should consider spending the  (at the time of this printing) to buy Pro
Motion(currentlymyfavoriteandwhatIusemostofthetime).PyxelEdit
is an excellent tool specically for creating environmental tile maps where
you can lay out your entire scene and any changes made to one tile will
automatically update all of that time of le within the scene. Piq is a tool
available and usable online—where you won’t need to install any soware
on your computer—if that is something that appeals to you. There are also
mobile phone options for Pixel editing on the go, such as Pixel Art editor,
Pixel Create, or Pixelesque.
There are also many others, including Grafx, Asprite, Paint.NET, and
toomanyotherstolistthemall.Manyofthemhavebothgoodqualities
and drawbacks so feel free to try a few and you maybe surprised that certain
techniques are easier or more dicult to do in various programs.
At the time of writing this, GraphicsGale does not run on Mac, so those
of you eating Apples will have to investigate one of these other options—
there is a long list of Pixel Art programs discussed in Chapter .
4.4 A BRIEF GLANCE AT GRAPHICSGALE
Although this is not intended to be a book about soware, I wanted to
point out some of the tools used most commonly throughout our Pixel Art
journey—and where to nd them within the GraphicsGale program.
In Figure., I’ve labeled some of the more important tools you’ll need
in GraphicsGale. I am pretty condent that even if you aren’t using this
Software 19
soware you’ll nd something similar in the program you’re using. That’s
what I like about you—you’re resourceful.
FIGURE 4.1 The GraphicsGale main interface.
A. Drawing tool
B. Straight line tool
C. Fill tool
D. Rectangular marquee
E. Show grid
F. File save
G. File open
H. New le
And one last important note—In GraphicsGale you should get familiar
with the magical “assign hotkey” tool shown in Figure ., accessible in the
“Preferences”menu(Figure.).Youcanevenassignahotkeytomakethis
menupopup(youcanseethatI’vechosenthecharacterAforthatpurpose).
20 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE 4.2 Set hotkeys for commonly used actions.
Software 21
FIGURE 4.3 GraphicsGale sets hotkeys in the “Preferences” menu.
Even if the program you are using does not allow you to set your hotkeys,
it is well worth the time to learn the default hotkeys and integrate them
into your workow. Don’t complain, just do it. You’ll thank me later. You’ll
probablyevenoertobuymeadrinkifyouseeme(whichisnotsounlikely
as you’d think as the game dev community is surprisingly small).

===== FILE 13/57: chapter-13.html =====

CHAPTER 5
Making Pixel Art
Doing Lines
P
   and razor, that stu will kill your brain.There are
a few idiosyncrasies of drawing with pixels that are easy to conquer if
youknow what toexpect. Curves anddiagonal lines canbe a bit challenging
to create when the available resource is nothing but squares.
I will now share one super helpful command in GraphicsGale that will
become a huge convenience. When using the pen tool, the right mouse but-
ton can be used as an eyedropper tool. That is to say that when the right
mouse button is pressed, it will pick up whatever color was underneath it
and make that currently selected color. Over time you will see that this is
super swanky.
5.1 STRAIGHT LINES
Youmaynotbeabletodrawastraightlineonpaper,butstraightlinesare
easy with Pixel Art! Click the “ConnectLine” button in yourtool window or
presstheappropriatehotkeytogotothestraightlinetool.Nottoohardto
beginwith,butyoucanalsopressthe“Shi”buttontohavethelinessnap
into vertical or horizontal position (Figure .).
23
24 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE 5.1 Use the SHIFT key to lock lines horizontally or vertically.
5.2 DIAGONAL LINES
Diagonal lines take a bit more attention but there are some best practices
that can be followed.
Use equal segment lengths whenever possible (Figures. and .):
FIGURE 5.2 Consistent step pattern gives better line quality.
FIGURE 5.3 Avoid using inconsistent step patterns.
Making Pixel Art 25
Whenequalspaceis notpossible,alternatebetweentwosegmentlengths,
and this will be the case from time to time because you may need to create
an angle that isn’t adequately described with equal line lengths (Figure .).
FIGURE 5.4 Sometimes you may need to alternate step lengths.
5.3 CURVED LINES
I’m not going to lie—curved lines are a major pain in the butt. Creating the
feel of a curve using nothing but right angles borders on lunacy—but we
can still make them look adequate if we follow some guidelines.
5.3.1 Avoid the Lone Wolf
When one pixel sticks out, it’s going to undermine the illusion of curve, and
look ugly. Avoid the lone pixel (Figure .).
FIGURE 5.5 Avoid the lone pixel.
5.3.2 Make Each Segment Length Progressively Longer or Shorter
This really assists the curviness of the line. Sometimes it won’t be possible
with a given shape, but it is something to strive for (Figures. and .).
26 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE 5.6 Curves are dicult.
FIGURE 5.7 Small adjustments aect line quality.
5.3.3 Beware the Circle Tool
Many programs have some kind of curve tool and/or circle tool, and I rec-
ommendthat youuseitwithtrepidation.Althoughitcanbehelpful,in most
cases you will want to go back and adjust the lines so they follow the guide-
lines we’ve been talking about. In Figure . you can observe that though
circular, the circle tool does not necessarily have fabulous line quality.
Making Pixel Art 27
FIGURE 5.8 The circle tool in most programs have mediocre line quality.
5.3.4 Make Love with the Cut and Paste Features
(That’s intended guratively, by the way.) Converse to the circletool,cutting
and pasting your work (oen aer rotating or mirroring it) will always be
up to your exacting standards and will get maximum bang for your buck.
Cutting and pasting work also allows you to expend eort once and get the
benets repeatedly.
5.4 LINE WIDTH
If you hadn’t noticed from the screenshots shown so far, each line is only
 pixel wide. This is usually the more desirable aesthetic for a line. In this
case, having a thicker girth does not work in your favor, no matter what the
ladies or lads say (Figure .).
FIGURE 5.9 One pixel line width is usually desirable.

===== FILE 14/57: chapter-14.html =====

28 Pixel Art for Game Developers
This idea of having a one pixel line width is not a hard rule so much as a
guideline that seems to be preferable in most circumstances. It’s really more
of a accid rule.
5.5 ANTI-ALIASING
Anti-alias is the expression used for when extra pixels are used to soen the
angular edges of a line, the result being a sharper looking edge. In many
soware packages this process is done automatically by a lter within the
program (this is why text looks so sharp in word processing programs).
Theprocessisactuallyquitesimple.Createacolorthatisablendbetween
the line color and the background color and use that color to soen some
or all of the steps of a line.
To give additional sharpness to the line you may choose to use a second
colorto blend between the midtone and the background and use it for more
than one pixel length.
Justbecarefulnot tooveruseanti-alias,becausetoo much willcauseyour
picture to look blurry. A little bit can go a long way and it is fairly easy to go
overboard.Onethingthatcanhelptremendouslyistozoomoutfromthe
picture occasionally to see how the image looks from far away.
FIGURE 5.10 Anti-aliasing shown on the right.
Figure . shows how a bit of anti-alias added to the lines adds a good
deal of crispness to appearance of the lines. The image on the le is the orig-
inal image of a skull drawn with two colors. Aer adding as few transition
colors between the black and the other colors, the line has a much more
natural and organic feel.
So, when working with lines there are a number of guidelines that help
to give desirable results. Avoid the lone wolf pixel, beware the circle tool, be
Making Pixel Art 29
mindful of pixel width, and get comfy with the cut and paste features and
you’ll do just ne. Use anti-alias when needed (but don’t overdo it) and try
to gradually use longer lines when you’re making curves.
EXERCISE 5.1: CREATING A LINE DRAWING SPRITE
FIGURE E5.1 The line
drawing we’ll build in this
chapter.
FIGURE E5.2 In later
chapters we’ll add light,
shadow, and color.
We have to get started building something, so we’re going to create a
character. More specically, we are going to build the character shown in
FigureE.. Later we’ll add some color to this dude so he looks more pol-
ished, so that he’ll end up looking like FigureE., but that will be over the
courseofafew exercises. Forthetimebeing,we’regoingtofocusonbuilding
this sprite with line.
You may be concerned if you are new to the art side of development, but
don’t get bentoutof shapebecausewe aregoingtobuild itinstages.Fornow
we are going to focus only on drawing the outline of the sprite, applying the
line techniques we’ve talked about up until this point.
30 Pixel Art for Game Developers
Step 0: Download and Install GraphicsGale or Other Pixel
Art Software
We covered this earlier, so if you are reading this book cover to cover, you
should already be ready for business. But in case you missed it, navigate to
the following webpage and download the soware:
http://www.humanbalance.net/gale/us/download.html
Step 1: Create a New Project
Go to File—New... or hit Ctrl+N to create a new le (FigureE.).
FIGURE E5.3 Create a new le.
A dialogue window will pop up with some options. We want the dimen-
sions to be  pixels wide and  pixels high with -bit color as shown in
FigureE..
FIGURE E5.4 Use -bit color for this sprite.
Choosing -bit color will give us a palette of only eight colors, which will
help to keep the le size small and our options limited so that we won’t get
Making Pixel Art 31
overwhelmed. You should now see a vertically oriented canvas similar to
what you see in FigureE..
FIGURE E5.5
Use the magnifying glass icon (or map hotkeys in the preferences menu)
to zoom in or out of the canvas so that the white rectangle takes up the
majority of the screen like in Figure E..
FIGURE E5.6 Zoom in so you can see what you’re doing.
Step 2: Draw a Head and Face
A quick bit of advice, before we get too far: don’t worry about the speed
of completion while trying to learn technique. Speed comes from a solid
mental concept of what to do, and that only comes with time. Since we’re
just covering the core concepts you may as well slow down and enjoy
the ride!
32 Pixel Art for Game Developers
Use the circle tool to draw a large circle on the canvas similar to
FigureE., which will be our character’s head. You may need to adjust the
bottom of the circle to make it appear more round as I did on Figures E.
through E., but don’t worry as much about the top half. The head area
canbeleasitisbecausethatpartwillbecoveredbyhairatsomepoint.
FIGURE E5.7 Use the circle tool to draw a circle.
FIGURE E5.8 Adjust as
necessary.
FIGURE E5.9 FIGURE E5.10
Theeyesshouldbeabouthalfwaybetweenthetopandbottomofthe
circle(FigureE.) and can be representedwithjust a couple pixelsfor each
eye like in FigureE..

===== FILE 15/57: chapter-15.html =====

Making Pixel Art 33
FIGURE E5.11 Eyes will be
halfway up the head.
FIGURE E5.12 Eyes without
aface.
Keep in mind that we are drawing this character looking straight ahead.
If we were to draw the character looking up or down, the line of where we’d
see the eyes in the context of the rest of the face would change as shown in
FigureE..Youcanseehowifthecharacterlooksup,theeyelineisraised
and when the character looks down, the eyes are lower within the circle of
the head.
FIGURE E5.13 The eye position changes if the character looks up or down.
As you can see in FigureE. about half way between the eyes and the
bottomofthechinisthenose.Abouthalfwaybetweenthenoseandthechin
is the mouth, as shown in Figure E.. Keep in mind that these are simply
guidelines and could change depending on the character or if the head were
in adierentposition. Next we’ll add eyebrows justa couplepixelsabovethe
34 Pixel Art for Game Developers
eyesasshowninFigureE..Youcanseethatthisspriteisalreadystarting
toshapeupalthoughforthetimebeingitlooksabitliketheRummyKub
joker tile.
FIGURE E5.14 The bottom of
the nose is about halfway
between the head and chin.
FIGURE E5.15 The mouth is
about halfway between the
bottom of the nose and chin.
FIGURE E5.16 Add eyebrows.
Rather than adding the hair and tightening the face, I want to get the
whole character roughed out. Aer drawing the rest of the body we may
decide that the head is too big or too small or simply doesn’t t—so it is
usefulnottospendtoomuchtimeondetailuntilwelayouttheentire
character.
Making Pixel Art 35
FIGURE E5.17 His torso is a
rectangle.
Step 3: Draw the Body
We’ll start by drawing the torso simply as
asquareasinFigureE..Laterwecan
do some rearranging if we choose, but most
likely we won’t need to. Working with pixels
should be simple. Sometimes I mess up that
part and make thingstoo complicated, but in
general it is better to KISS—keep it simple,
stupid!
Next we’ll draw one leg and foot as shown
in Figures E. through E.. Again notice
thatwereallydon’thavetodoanythingelab-
orate. That is one of the sterling qualities of
working with Pixel Art: we can really do a lot
with a simple drawing. Later, we’ll add some
detail in the form of texture and shadow but
I’ll iterate thatitis superuseful tokeep things
straightforward.
36 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E5.18 FIGURE E5.19 FIGURE E5.20
Now wecanstart ourjourneytowardbeing lazy. Instead of redrawing the
leg, we are going to duplicate the leg and then ip it to save us the eort of
doing this a second time.
FIGURE E5.21 Use the marquee
tool to select the leg.
FIGURE E5.22 Duplicate the leg.
Making Pixel Art 37
You’re still new so I’ll walk you through this process in GraphicsGale.
Firstwe’regoingtousetherectangularselectiontooltoselectthelegas
showninFigureE..NextusetheEdit dropdown menu and choose
Duplicate Image(s) as shown in Figure E.. It will likely put the new
section right on top of the old one so you may not see that it’s been
duplicated until it has been moved. Drag the extra leg to roughly the cor-
rect position as in FigureE. and go to the Image dropdown menu to
select Flip Horizontal as shown in FigureE.. This should yield a result
somewhat like Figure E..
FIGURE E5.23 FIGURE E5.24 Flip the leg horizontally.

===== FILE 16/57: chapter-16.html =====

38 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E5.25 Place the
leg.
FIGURE E5.26 Adjust as
needed.
This doesn’t save us a ton eort in this example but for a more com-
plicated image it would, and it will be good to get comfortable with this
process.Asagameartist,youshouldalwaysbeonthelookoutfortoolsand
techniquesthatwillgetthejobdonequicker.Thelesstimeyouspendon
any individual aspect, the more time you have to allocate toward polish or
overall quality.
You’llseeI’vealsodoneaslightadjustmenttothecrotchinFigureE.
tocomplete theimage—butyou canmakeyourownjudgmentas towhether
your crotch needs adjustment.
Now we are going to repeat the process with the arms and hands. First,
we’ll draw the outline of an arm (Figure E.) and then we’ll adjust the
pixelsso that the arm appearsto connectto thebody bydeleting thevertical
line as shown in Figure E.. And with only a few more pixels, we’ll give
the impression of hand as shown in Figure E..
Making Pixel Art 39
FIGURE E5.27 FIGURE E5.28 FIGURE E5.29
In screenshots in FiguresE. through E., we’re creating a sleeve for
thecharacter.I’veaddedafewpixelsasneeded,thenerasedouttheoneswe
don’t want in order to give an edge to the character’s sleeve.
FIGURE E5.30 FIGURE E5.31 FIGURE E5.32
40 Pixel Art for Game Developers
Now that we have an arm that looks pretty good, we’re going to select it
(Figure E.), duplicate it, paste it, ip it horizontal, and place it on the
other side (FiguresE. and E.). This should seem familiar, as it is
almost identical to how we handled the leg earlier in this exercise. If this
seems new, then I fear you may have fallen asleep for a couple minutes
back there.
FIGURE E5.33 FIGURE E5.34
Making Pixel Art 41
FIGURE E5.35 FIGURE E5.36
The last thing that we need to do is to erase the extra line(s) from the
shoulder as shown in FigureE.. Shazam! We’ve got the character’s line
drawing almost totally complete!
Hmmm... But we should probably give this character some hair. We’re
going to deal with this hair in a very particular way—by drawing the inside
line of where the hair overlaps the forehead, then the outside outline of the
hair creating the sides and top of the head. Itmay seem a bit unintuitive, but
stay with me—I’ve got a plan.
We’ll start by outlining where the hair will fall on the forehead. We
don’t have to be too anal retentive, just rough it out like in Figure E..
In FigureE., I’ve drawn out the general shape of the top of the hair and
put in nubbins that will become ears. Notice that the bottom of the ears are
moreorlessatthesamelevelasthenose.Thetopoftheearsareoenclose
tothesamelevelastheeyesoreyebrows.You’llnoticeinFigureE.how
messy the initial drawing can be, but that is okay. Just use the guidelines
discussedintheearlychapteronlinestocleanupthelinework,asshown
in FigureE..
42 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E5.37 FIGURE E5.38
FIGURE E5.39 FIGURE E5.40
Andviolà—fasterthanaspeedingturtle, we’redonewith theline drawing
of our sprite!

===== FILE 17/57: chapter-17.html =====

CHAPTER 6
Coloring inside the Lines
B
    may be getting sick of working only with lines
(I know I am!), so let’s get started with some color and tone. As with
most aspects of Pixel Art, we can learn to do a lot with a little, and color
choice is no exception.
Let’s get started with a new le toget comfortable with our palette options
before adding color to our character.
Go to File—New or hit Ctrl+N to create a new le (Figure .).
FIGURE 6.1 Ctrl + N to create a new le.
6.1 4-BIT PALETTE
A dialogue window will pop up with some options. For now I’m going to
make the dimensions to be  pixels wide and  pixels high, but it doesn’t
really matter what size the canvas is for this particular chapter.
Butbeforehittingthe“OK”button,let’stakealookatthelastdrop-down
option. It may be hard to notice in Figure . due to the available options,
but each bit doubles the number of colors.  bit is  colors,  bits would be
 colors,  bits would be  colors,  bits is  colors, etc.
43
44 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE 6.2 bits=colors.
We’re going to work in  bits ( colors) for now to make things as clear
as possible.
6.2 FILL TOOL
Start by drawing some sort of closed shape like the le image in Figure..
We will avoid open shapes like the picture on the right so that the “ll tool”
(alsocalledthe“paintbuckettool”insomeprograms)willcolorintheobject
without coloring the entire background.
FIGURE 6.3 Aclosedshapeisshownonthele.
The ll tool (or “ood ll” or “paint bucket”) allows us to add color to an
entire area ratherthantryingtoll inthe spaceonepixelat atime.Figure .
shows what the tool icon looks like in GraphicsGale, but it may appear
dierent depending on which Pixel Art soware you are using. Figure.
shows the nal result aer using the tool.
Cosmigo Pro Motion(another Pixel Art programdiscussed earlier inthis
book) has additional ll tool options like lling only the outline or lling in
agradientinadditiontollingasinglecolor.Theoutlinellhasbecomeof
my most commonly used tools.
Coloring inside the Lines 45
FIGURE 6.4 The ood ll tool.
FIGURE 6.5 A ood lled shape.
Figure. gives us a detail of the palette area, which has some pretty
important stu for pixel artists. On the top row is the list of available col-
ors. There are only  colors available to us because we are using a -bit
palette. If wewereusing an-bit palette, therewould be  colors shownin
this area.
46 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE 6.6 A -bit palette.
In Figure., we see a drop-down menu showing the various shapes
availabletobeusedasabrush.InGraphicsGalethereisalsoamethodto
createyourownbrushesandhavethemappearinthisdrop-downmenu.We
don’thavetimetogooverthestepsindetailbuttocreatethenewbrushyou’d
have to create an shape as a -bit (black and white) 32 × 32 image making
theshapeofyourbrushwiththewhitepixelsandthebackgroundasblack.
Thenyou’dneedtosaveitasa.bmpleanddropitintoGraphicGale’s“pen”
folder—found somewhere in the “AppData” folder. Unfortunately the path
to that folder is dierent in each operating system but you can easily nd
a tutorial explaining those last steps online. For the most part we will only
be using the one pixel brush anyway, so I’m not going to track down these
pieces of minutia.
Coloring inside the Lines 47
FIGURE 6.7 Brush selection.
Next to the drop-down menu there is a black square overlapping a white
square with an X in the lower le corner; this is showing the current colors
being used. The color on the top square is the color currently selected to
draw with. The color in the background is a second color that can be used
for creating patterns and if you click on the image of the X the two colors
will swap positions, which can be useful in some circumstances.
6.3 CREATING GRADIENTS
A gradient is a smooth transition between two colors. But with Pixel Art we
have a limited number of colors to work with, so the transition seldom tends
to be particularly smooth. The term “ramp” is commonly used in place of
“gradient” to describe the set of colors that blend together from one color
to the next like in Figure..
FIGURE 6.8 A color gradient or “ramp.”

===== FILE 18/57: chapter-18.html =====

48 Pixel Art for Game Developers
The palette in GraphicsGale defaults to something similar to Figure..
IndithelpfultomakethecolorsI’mworkingwithstandoutdramat-
ically from the unused ones, so usually begin working on my palette by
changing all of the unused colors to magenta. More on that later.
Every Pixel Art program is a little dierent, but in GraphicsGale, we’ll
want to quickly assign a hot key for the procedures needed to create
gradients:
We’ll need to copy the color, so in File—Preferences menu nd
Palette—CopyRGBValueandassignittheCkeyasshowninFigure..
FIGURE 6.9 Setting a hotkey to Copy RGB Value.
• Next, assign the V key to the Palette—Paste RGB Value on the line
below as shown in Figure ..
FIGURE 6.10 Setting a hotkey to Paste RGB Value.
Coloring inside the Lines 49
• And nally we’ll assign the R key to the Palette—Make Gradation
Line as shown in Figure..
FIGURE 6.11 Setting a hotkey to Make Gradation.
Frequently you’ll want to copy a color to a new location on the palette
and lighten or darken it to make the two ends of the gradient. Because this
is such a common practice, we’ll run through once as a very quick example
ofhowtousethesehotkeys.
Le click on the yellow color in the palette window to select it.
Press the “C” key on the keyboard to copy the color.
Le click on the light grey color and press “V” to paste the yellow color
into that palette position.
Figure.windowwillpopuptoconrmyourselection.Makesure
“Paste to rst color” is selected, and hit okay.
FIGURE 6.12 Pasting the color to a new palette location.
Now your palette should have two yellows in it, like in Figure..
50 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE 6.13 The yellow color has been duplicated.
Double click on one of the yellow palette squares to bring up Figure ..
FIGURE 6.14 Making one of the colors darker.
Dragthesliderontherightdowntomaketheyellowadarkershade
and hit OK.
Now to create a ramp between the two shades of yellow, le click on the
one of the yellows, then right click on the other yellow and clickthe “R” key.
The window shown in Figure. should pop up to conrm the action.
FIGURE 6.15 Conrm your action.
If everything worked as it should, your palette should now look like
Figure..
FIGURE 6.16 A gradient has been created.
Coloring inside the Lines 51
We now have ve shades of yellow that we can use to create texture or
shade in lemons, sunowers, bananas, urine, etc. Really you can use this to
create anything golden that showers your mind!
FIGURE 6.17 Lemon built from a ve color ramp.
6.4 PALETTE SWAPPING
At this point I will be using the terms ramp and gradient interchange-
ably, so be on your toes. Ramps are super useful when creating Pixel Art.
Gradients can be used on individual sprites to show texture and lighting as
shownonthelemoninFigure.buttheirrealutilitycomesintheform
of organization and ease of iteration.
It is actually extremely important to keep your colors organized, and
allow me to explain why. Let’s say we have a simple background as shown
in Figure..
FIGURE 6.18 A simple background.
52 Pixel Art for Game Developers
It’sanicebackgroundbutnowwedecidethatwereallywanttheskyto
be a sunset. If we have a neatly organized palette like this one does, then
we are set up to make changes speedy quick! The palette for this image is
shown in Figure .. The four colors on the le were created with a ramp
for the mountain colors, and the four-color gradient on the right make the
sky colors.
FIGURE 6.19 The four le colors make the sky.
To create our sunset, all you would need to do is to change the two end
colors ofthe skygradientto the desirablecolors likein Figure. andramp
them together so they look like in Figure..
FIGURE 6.20 Change the end colors of the sky gradient.
FIGURE 6.21 Changing the sky gradient.

===== FILE 19/57: chapter-19.html =====

Coloring inside the Lines 53
Andviola,we’vegotasunsetinjustafewmomentsasseeninFigure.!
FIGURE 6.22 Change the colors, change your scene.
To further illustrate the point, let’s say we want to keep both the rst
background and the sunset version of the image... And the producer wants
you to create a nighttime version of the environment as well. This is no
problem for you, the image is already built! You make some variations to
the palette so now it looks like Figure..
FIGURE 6.23 Easy background change.
54 Pixel Art for Game Developers
You simply use the three palettes to change the same picture to suit your
needs as shown in Figure..
FIGURE 6.24 An organized palette improves life.
This concept is called “palette swapping” and can dramatically expand
the content in your game. We’ve seen that for the creation of game environ-
ments, it is easy to change the appearance of the time of day. This gives the
possibilityofhavingalevelofyourgamereusedwithinyourgamewhile
giving the appearance of being unique art assets.
The beauty of this technique is that it works just as easily for compli-
cated scenes, so long as you have set up your palette correctly. Figures.
through . were all created from the same image with the palette being
swapped to create the dramatic dierences in the scenery.
Coloring inside the Lines 55
FIGURE 6.25 City scene.
FIGURE 6.26 City scene with palette adjustment.
FIGURE 6.27 City scene with another palette adjustment.
Thissametechniquecanbeusedforcharactersorenemiesinyourgame.
Your programmer can code some unique behaviors, but the sprite can be
reused with a simple palette swap. This means that you can potentially cir-
cumvent the process of designing and creating all animations for several
entire characters in your game.
If you are sneaky, you can entirely change a sprite by simply changing
the palette. In Figure ., you can see four characters—but in truth it was
literally built with only one image using a palette that changes drastically to
create each variation.
56 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE 6.28 Same head, dierent palettes.
The key to obtaining this kind of dramatic result is to have colors that are
dierenton one palette—such as the beard and the skin tone—bea duplicate
ofthe samecolor onthe next palette. Figure. shows the exact sameeect
but simplied for clarity. In this gure, we start with the bearded character
onthe le, usinga three-colorpalette.In the center imagewe’vechanged the
beard color to the same color as the skin tone—and I’ve outlined the shape
to show which pixels would change appearance. And to the right we see the
nal result of the eort. There are still three colors in the palette, but two
of them will be identical so that they can be swapped to create the bearded
version.
FIGURE 6.29 Sneaky palette tricks.
Coloring inside the Lines 57
6.5 PALETTE SIZE AND TIME CONSIDERATION
Whenitcomestocreatingapalette,therstthingyoushouldbeasking
yourselfishowfewcolorsyoucangetawaywithfortheimage.Keepingyour
palette as small as possible strongly works in your favor in terms of speed
andeaseofproduction.Themorecolorsyouuse,themorethereistokeep
track of and the harder it is to remain consistent. This becomes particularly
dicult when attempting to keep colors consistent while animating.
Of course, the more complex an image is, the more colors you’ll need to
give the desired eect.
Take a look at Figure.. This character’s head is built  ×  pixel large
in all three panels, but you can see there is a great volatility in the amount
of detail. The rst image uses only  colors to make the head, the second
image uses  colors, and the third image uses . As you can see, more colors
allows a higher degree of visual complexity.
FIGURE 6.30 More colors = more complexity.
It seems nice—and the resultscanbe lovely—but the extra colors come at
a price. Each of these images took exponentially longer to create as the last.
The rst image took me about  minutes to build, the second image took
about  minutes, and the third about a half hour. Consider the additional
time it would take to create the rest of the character (roughly double the
time). If you were to create an eight-frame walking animation, that would
end up being:
( minutes for the head +  minutes for the body) × frames
=minutesorhours
( minutes for the head +  minutes for the body) × frames
=minutesorhours
( minutes for the head +  minutes for the body) × frames
=  minutes or  hours

===== FILE 20/57: chapter-20.html =====

58 Pixel Art for Game Developers
Now if we consider that this character would likely need multiple anima-
tionssuchasajump,anidle,anattack,ananimationfortakingdamage,
etc.—you can see that the amount of time it takes to draw each frame
becomes a major consideration.
I’ll be honest—as much as I like the highly detailed version of the head,
Iwouldnotwanttoanimatethatdude(atleastnotonatightschedule).
One thing to note is that all of the characters and environments within a
game should have a consistent style. Now think reect on all of the sprites
in your entire game and consider the dierence in time to create them at
dierent levels of detail. It is worth your while to determine the size of your
palette early in your project before you become committed to creating an
onslaught of overly complicated character animations.
That extra time consideration at the onset of your project can quite lit-
erally be the dierence in completing or not completing your game. What’s
more, you can make one decision that saves you a lot of time and eort in
the months or years to come.
6.6 CHOOSING COLORS
The most common way of creating a palette that I see in Pixel Art is also
the most straightforward: to create a gradient from dark to light for each
object color used. Figure. gives a very simple example of this idea and
we’ll take a moment to talk about that palette.
Coloring inside the Lines 59
FIGURE 6.31 Sprite built using color ramps.
The palette for this sprite consists of four gradients and one extra color.
In this example, each gradient is used to describe exactly one sort of item.
The three blues are used to create the pants, the oranges for the hair, and
the four beige colors for the skin tones. One thing I’ve found is skin tones
benet from being a tighter gradient (meaning less change from one color
to the next) and having more colors. This seems to be true regardless of the
actual skin type you aretrying to create. The only reuse of color is the purple
used for the shoes and the eyes.
If we take a look at Figure., we see that the palette was built in the
same manor—with each ramp describing one thing, using dierent gradi-
entsforthe grass asthetreefoliage.Every colorgradientwas builtfromdark
tolightbutthatisnottheonlywaytocreateagradient.InFigure.,we
have taken the blue colors that are used in the sky and ramped them from
blueto pinkinstead ofdark tolight; andthe resultis quite lovely. This would
be described as a ramp that makes a change in hue rather than a change in
value.
60 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE 6.32 Sky ramps value. FIGURE 6.33 Sky ramps hue.
Let’s just take a moment to talk about hue and value...and saturation as
well. If we double click on one of the colors in the palette window, then we
get a window like in Figure. that allows us to manipulate the color in
more detail.
FIGURE 6.34
That large box with rainbow-esque colors has arranged the colors in a
particular way, which helps to get the colors you’re looking for once you
become accustomed to it.
Coloring inside the Lines 61
Figure. explains that as we move le to right the colors change hue,
andaswemoveupanddownthecolorschangesaturation.
FIGURE 6.35
Youcanseehowallthecolorsgetmoreintenseastheygethigherup
on the chart—for this reason, saturation is sometimes called intensity. Also
notice that the colors get more grey as they get to the bottom until they get
entirely desaturated and hit a neutral grey.
This chart allows us to pick exactly the hue and saturation level (orinten-
sity)ofthecolorwewant,butdoesnotgiveanydierenceinvalue—andthat
is why there is a slider bar on the right side of the screen in Figure . also
shown here.
Figure. shows a character sprite with two color palettes of dierent
saturation levels. The palette on the le is very high intensity or high satu-
ration. The character on the right is low saturation or low intensity. There
will be times where you’ll want colors to be high intensity and also situa-
tions where you want them to be low saturation, but frequently you’ll want
somethinginthemiddleformanyofyourcolors.Neitherthehighsatura-
tion nor the low saturation look as appealing as the rst appearance of this
sprite in Figure..
62 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE 6.36 High and low saturation.
There may be times where you want something to intentionally stand
out, which could be done by having everything besides that part very low
in saturation but having that one item be very high intensity.
As an example, we may want this character’s hair to stand out boldly as a
bright ery orange. In this case, we could use a very saturated orange for the
hair and mute the intensity of all the other colors like Figure .. Figuring
out the right balance for the context you are working in is the key.
FIGURE 6.37 Using saturation to make the hair stand out.

===== FILE 21/57: chapter-21.html =====

Coloring inside the Lines 63
FIGURE 6.38
By now you should be getting a good feel for satu-
ration,soletusnowmoveontotalkabitaboutvalue
and contrast.
The slider on the right side of the screen
(Figure.) allows you to alter the value of any
color youselect.Asyoucanseefromthecolorsavail-
able on the slider, the term value refers to how light
or dark a color is.
The amount of change from dark to light within
your image is called contrast.Theamountofcon-
trast between the values within your picture will
determine how much the image will “pop” and in
which places that will occur. Figure. shows our sprite built with very
low contrast on the le, good contrast in the middle, and very high contrast
on the right.
The palette on the le with low contrast is not ideal, as the colors seem a
bit homogonous. Thereisn’t very much “pop” to the picture, andit probably
could have been built adequately to this quality with less colors. The high
contrast palette on the right has too much “pop” in too many places and
looksabitharsh.Itmaybepossibletousethislevelofcontrastifthere
were more colors to blend the lights and the darks, but as it stands it is
sub-optimal to say the least. The value changes to the colors to do not read
smoothly and the viewer will struggle to gure out where the important
parts of the image are.
The middle palette is a much stronger solution for this sprite. The values
of the color gradients naturally blend into each other and the light part of
one gradient makes some contrast with the dark of another ramp.
FIGURE 6.39 Low, medium, and high contrast.
64 Pixel Art for Game Developers
6.7 TRANSPARENCY
It is common to reserve the rst color in your palette to be transparent;
I usually leave this color magenta, but it could really be any color you
choose. This is a necessity for sprites, as the actual shape of a sprite is always
rectangular and the space around the object is transparent.
As an example, imagine if you are running your game with a static back-
ground and a character sprite on it similar to Figure .. In constructing
thisscene, thespriteitselfwill berectangularbut notdisplayingthemagenta
pixels—as shown in Figure..
FIGURE 6.40 What the player sees.
FIGURE 6.41 Howthesceneisbuilt.
Coloring inside the Lines 65
The computer actually organizes the various objects on screen as layers
and runs some images at a higher “level priority.” This means that those
images will appear in front of the other objects on screen. You can use
Figure. to help conceptualize how the computer thinks about the sprite
in relationship to the background.
FIGURE 6.42 Gamesuselayerprioritytodrawitemsonscreen.
In this chapter we covered a lot of information about using color palettes
in your Pixel Art. We talked about the dierence between a -bit and -bit
palette, how to use the ll tool, and the utility of working with gradients.
We spent some talking about the amount of colors to use in your palette
and how it’s not the size but what you do with it that counts. We covered
saturation and contrast and how to avoid choosing colors that look crappy
for your artwork.
That chapter ended up being more saturated than I expected. My expec-
tation was in full contrast with the reality and I didn’t realize there was so
much to cover about color.
66 Pixel Art for Game Developers
EXERCISE 6.1: COLORING THE SPRITE (FROM EXERCISE 5.1)
FIGURE E6.1 Sprite from the Chapter  exercise.
Let’s take a moment to admire our nished line drawing in (Figure E.).
Ooh,ah...okaythat’sit,timetomovealong.It’stimetollthislittledudein
withcolortogiveabitmoresubstance.Thispartoftheexerciseshouldbe
very short and to the point. Please feel free to write me a strongly worded
email if I go too far into a tangential idea.
Now that we’re working with color, there’s one tool we’re going to need
togetcozywith:theoodlltool.Sometimesitiscalledthepaintbucket
tool or simply the ll tool. Whatever it’s called, this tool is the key to lling
large volumes quickly. In GraphicsGale the button to use the tool looks like
Figure E..
Coloring inside the Lines 67
FIGURE E6.2 Our beloved “ood ll” tool.
Although this book concentrates on GraphicsGale, I do want to draw
attention to another program called Pro Motion made by Cosmigo that has
some really great ll tool features. In particular, there is an “Outline” mode
that draws an outline around any pool of color which I’ve found to be par-
ticularly helpful. In this tutorial we’ve started with a line drawing and lled
in the color, but frequently I’ll start with blobs of color and use Pro Motion’s
special ll mode to create the outline aerward.
Next we’ll pick colors for the character’s shirt, pants, hair, and skin tone.
As you should recall from the last chapter, you need only to double click on
a color from your palette to bring up the color picker popup box.
I’ve used a very saturated but dark red for the pants (Figure E.) and a
verygrayishblueforthejeans(FigureE.).
FIGURE E6.3 Choose a shirt color. FIGURE E6.4 Choose a color for
the pants.

===== FILE 22/57: chapter-22.html =====

68 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FigureE.showsmepickingaskintonethatturnedouttolookabit
too much like plastic once I’d colored in the whole sprite in Figure E.. But
in addition to the dollish color I’ve decided that I wanted to make a minor
adjustmenttothedrawing.InFigureE.,I’vemadeabreakinthelinethat
was dividing the ear from the side of the head.
FIGURE E6.5 Pick a skin color—they’re all pretty good.
Coloring inside the Lines 69
FIGURE E6.6 Fill in the
sprite.
FIGURE E6.7 Adjust the
ears.
FIGURE E6.8 Organized gradients.
Atthisjuncture,let’stakealookatthegradientswe’regoingtobeusing
in Figure E.. The blue colors on the right will be used to create the denim
jeans and reds adjacent to them will be the colors for the shirt. Next overare
the three esh tones and on the other side of the purple are the dark browns
to be used in the hair. For now, we’re simply going to use the ood ll tool
to color in our line sprite so it looks like Figure E..
70 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E6.9 Alled-insprite.
Typically, I’ll use a color somewhere in the middle of the gradient as a
base color—this way I can build up areas of shadow as well as areas of
highlight. Alternatively, it is also a fairly common practice to start with the
lightest color and build in the shadows from there—which emulates shad-
ing with a pencil or a pen. Ultimately it is up to you, but using the middle
tone will set you up to easily follow along with the next exercise.

===== FILE 23/57: chapter-23.html =====

CHAPTER 7
Drawing Secrets Revealed
It’s All Smoke and Mirrors
T
      may seem like magic—and when
an artist makes something appear it can certainly feel like sorcery. Of
courseart isnotmagic but followsaseries ofrulesthatcanbetaught—much
like the principles that govern programming.
Some of the specic rules that make artwork look convincing are shad-
ing and cast shadow, light consistency, atmospheric perspective, and linear
perspective.
Note to artists: If you are already pretty condent in your art abilities, you
are likely to have been exposed to most of the material in this chapter... So I
won’t be heartbroken if you skip ahead (feckless hooligan). That being said,
if you want a refresher or simply enjoy my witty banter—read on!
7.1 SHADING
If you’ve worked in D you may be familiar with the idea of raycasting or
normals (although don’t freak out if you haven’t, I’m trying to connect with
my programmer brethren); drawing with shadow is done the same way.
Basically it works like this: Any surface that is perpendicular to a light
source reect back the most light and be the brightest part of an object.
As the surface angles becomes closer to 180
○
(being parallel to the light
source), the surface will appear darker. Let’s look at Figure.—notice how
the plane most closely facing the light source (the top) is lighter and the
side facing away from the light source is the darkest.
71
72 Pixel Art for Game Developers
We can see in Figures . through . how changing the relationship of
the light source changes the angle that the light hits each surface of the
cube. Note how in each case, the surface that most faces the light source is
the lightest.
FIGURE 7.1 Surfaces facing the light source will appear lighter.
FIGURE 7.2 Light sources don’t
always come from above.
FIGURE 7.3 The angled surfaces
reect diering amounts of light.
Drawing Secrets Revealed 73
This is the major concept that underlies creating the illusion of D form
in two dimensions. There are other ideas that get used in conjunction but
this is the big momma of concepts for drawing form.
For curved forms, the angle of the surface changes in relation to the light
source so we use a gradient to represent this, as shown in Figure ..
That wasn’t too bad, was it?
FIGURE 7.4 Curved surfaces
gradually change angle.
FIGURE 7.5 Light can bounce o
other surfaces.
Since we’ve started looking at the lighting of a sphere, I’m just going to
give a couple more concepts. Two lighting eects that will oen occur on a
sphere is a highlight (sometimes called a specular highlight or “spec hit” in
game development) and reected or “bounced” light.
Reected light is seen when an object gets light from a source other than
the primary light source. In the case of Figure ., thereis light bouncing o
thegroundthatmakesabandatthebottomofthesphereabitlighter.
Ahighlightiswherethisisa highconcentrationof brightareathatreects
o of an object, also seen in Figure ..
Onelastideaforyoutochewonisthatalloftheseexamplesarebuilt
in a neutral gray without much notable texture. In general, objects have
various dierent attributes that aect the way that light bounces o them.
Consider how much highlight you would observe on a freshly waxed wood
oor compared to a rug. Obviously a wood oor would give a much more
acute highlight, and perhaps even a bit of reection. Don’t get bent out of
shape with the potential complexity—just be aware that these things exist.
74 Pixel Art for Game Developers
7.2 CAST SHADOW
So keeping the concept of rays of light in mind—if one object is reecting
the ray of light, then those rays will not hit any objects behind. In the case
of our cube, we can imagine the rays of light continuing the path to map out
where the cast shadow will fall, as done in Figures. through ..
FIGURE 7.6 The edges of the object
block light.
FIGURE 7.7 Onewaytogurethe
shape of a cast shadow.
FIGURE 7.8 Cast shadow.
Since the object is bouncing those rays of light, they never reach the
surfacebelowandthatareawillbeinshadow.Forthisreason,itisalways
supremely important to know where the scene’s light source is—at least if
youwanttocreateacceptableshadows.
Drawing Secrets Revealed 75
The images with the cube in Figures . through . show the step-by-
step process of how to gure out where the object’s shadow will fall on the
ground.InFigure.,wecannotehowandwheretheedgesofthecubewill
cast shadow on the ground, and in Figure ., we see the nal outcome of
our eorts.
FIGURE 7.9 Edges that cast the
shadow.
FIGURE 7.10 Acubewithshadow.
The idea is straightforward but it can get complicated when dealing with
unusual surfaces. Fortunately for us, in most cases we can approximate and
the viewer’s eye will accept it within the context of the picture.
One last concept in regard to cast shadow is that in real life shadow is
notcastuniformly.Theshadowisusuallydarkestclosetowheretheobject
touches the surface and gets lighter as itgetsfatheraway.Thisisillustrated
in Figure .. Also of note is that the edges of a shadow tend to get blurrier
as they are farther from the casting object.
FIGURE 7.11 Shadows tend to get blurrier further away.

===== FILE 24/57: chapter-24.html =====

76 Pixel Art for Game Developers
Many times these aspects of light and shadow are ignored or simpli-
ed to make sense within an animation or game development context.
There are many times when these ideas simply won’t make sense in
production—that could be due to le size restraints, time constraints,
complexity when animated, or consistency.
But all in all, you are better o understanding the concept of light and
shadow and choosing for yourself what you want to exclude or simplify.
7.3 SHADOW DIRECTION
The one thing that the viewer will oen not accept is when the shadow is
outright inconsistent with the light source.
FIGURE 7.12 Which shadow is wrong?
Can you work out which block in Figure. has inconsistent shading?
It is easy to avoid shading accidents with individual objects but a com-
plicated scene can easily have an item that is inconstant with the rest of
the image. Perhaps you’ve ipped a sprite in your game on the x-axis and
the shading direction has changed. It slipped under your radar and looks
wrong—much like the second block from the right. The viewer may not
know why something looks awkward, but will likely notice that something
is o.
These accidents can be avoided fairly easily once you are aware of them.
Now you’ve been warned.
Ofcourse,itmaybeusefulforyoutoknowthatwe’llbebreakingthis
particular rule on a regular basis. But it is actually fairly important that you
Drawing Secrets Revealed 77
understand what light is supposed to do in normal circumstances. This way
you can intelligently weigh the tradeo between visual accuracy and ease of
production.
7.4 ATMOSPHERIC PERSPECTIVE
FIGURE 7.13 Acityscene.
Let’s take a look at Figure.. In particular, I want to break down why
the things in the background appear farther away than the things in the
foreground.
There are basically three visual concepts that our brains are using to
work out the relative distance of objects in the scene: overlapping, size, and
atmospheric perspective.
Size works in a fairly familiar way. Put simply, objects appear smaller as
they are farther from the viewer.
Overlapping is when an object in the foreground partially covers some-
thing behind it. Our brains unconsciously parse this data into depth
information.Let’s takealookatthe building inthecenterofFigure ..This
building is being partially covered by the two buildings in the foreground,
dramatically changing the building’s prole. Take a look at Figures. and
.whereI’vestrippedawaytheforegroundbuildingssoyoucanseejust
how dierent the building’s prole becomes when obstructed. Weird, eh?
78 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE 7.14 Overlapping creates
depth.
FIGURE 7.15 Isolated overlap.
But the primary visual concept I want to talk about is something called
atmosphericperspective.Thisisthefactthatobjectsthatarefartheraway
usually appear to be lighter and frequently bluer. Because there is air
(atmosphere) between an object and the viewer, these tiny particles layer
on top of each other becoming slightly opaque over a long distance.
In Figure. through Figure., I’ve taken Figure. and broken into
a few layers so that we can observe how the buildings in the background
become much lighter and bluer as they are farther away.
FIGURE 7.16 Far away things look lighter.
Drawing Secrets Revealed 79
FIGURE 7.17 Closer objects have more detail.
FIGURE 7.18 Objects that are closer have more contrast.
FIGURE 7.19 Closer objects have more saturation.
So slightly shiing the colors used to make your backgrounds can make
a huge dierence in the feeling of depth within your game.
Awonderfulside eectof this processis that itbecomesveryeasytomake
the interactive layer of your game stand out boldly to the player—making
the game clearer to understand. Even if the background gets complex, it’s
fairly easy to make the background sit back using atmospheric perspective
(as shown in Figure.).
80 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE 7.20 Even complicated backgrounds can sit back.
7.5 LINEAR PERSPECTIVE
Linearperspectiveisanexpansionoftheconceptthatasthingsarefarther
from the viewer, they appear smaller. This is the most common form of per-
spectiveusedandisusuallywhatisbeingspokenaboutifsomeonementions
“perspective” without context.Itis called “linear”perspective because of the
explicit technique of guring out how the size of something is in relation to
the scene—using lines to map out the size of objects in the scene. Let’s take
a look at how to do this:
The rst order of business is to establish where the horizon line lies.
The horizon line is an imaginary horizontal line in the distance where the
ground and the sky meet, as shown in Figure..

===== FILE 25/57: chapter-25.html =====

Drawing Secrets Revealed 81
FIGURE 7.21 The horizon line.
The horizon line can appear very low in a picture or very high, and each
creates a dierent viewing experience, as shown in Figure ..
FIGURE 7.22 High and low horizon line.
Aer creating a horizon line, you will establish a vanishing point at some
place on the horizon line. A vanishing point in a place o in the distance
where lines that are parallel appear to converge, as shown in Figures .
through ..
FIGURE 7.23 A vanishing point. FIGURE 7.24 Using linear
perspective to place objects.
82 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE 7.25 Vanishing point lines
dene some of the edges.
FIGURE 7.26 Linear perspective
implies object scale.
As you can see, this works remarkably well for buildings and blocks that
areallintendedtobethesameheight(andwouldbebetterstillwhenatmo-
spheric perspective is used). But what happens when we are dealing with
shapes that are of signicantly dierent sizes within the images, such as in
Figure.?
Before even guring out the shapes in the relating blocks, we’re going to
use atmospheric perspective to make some of these blocks appear closer or
farther away. This will make iteasier for our eye to accept that thereare very
large objects in background,such as the block in the upper le. Next, we use
imaginary lines to connect the points of the blocks closest to the vanishing
point—asshowninFigure..
FIGURE 7.27 Objectsappearingaboveandbelowthehorizonline.
Drawing Secrets Revealed 83
FIGURE 7.28 Using linear perspective to determine scale.
Let’s take a closer look at Figure ., as it has some dierences from the
rst linear perspective suite of examples. The bottom two blocks are below
the horizon line, so the tops of the blocks are visible. Likewise, the cube in
thetop-centerisabovethehorizonline,sothebottomofthecubeisvisible
to the viewer.
One more subtle dierence seen in the bottom two cubes is that because
of their orientation toward the vanishing point, two sides of the cubes can
be seen going back into space instead of one. When we take out the guide-
lines and add some shadow as in Figure ., we are le with a reasonably
convincing image of cubes in a three-dimensional space.
FIGURE 7.29 A reasonably convincing image.
84 Pixel Art for Game Developers
Acoupleoflastpointsaboutlinearperspectivebeforemovingon.Inour
examples, we’ve placed the vanishing point in the center of the picture, but
this is actually a bit formulaic for my taste and was done more for the ease
of demonstration. The vanishing point can actually appear anywhere on the
horizon line.
The other thing I wanted to touch on was that it is also possible to use
multiple vanishing points within one picture. This can be used to create
really nice eects—but is beyond the scope of what I want to cover in this
book.Asinglevanishingpointwillgiveyouallyouneedformostgame
developmentPixelArtsituations.
Artwork has several consistent properties that can be easily leveraged
when you create your work. Shading and cast shadow, light consistency,
atmospheric perspective, and linear perspective are all tools that have the
potential to give depth to your Pixel Art—both literally and guratively.
You can think of these properties as rules that help the viewers’ eyes to
understand visual material.
We will be breaking these rules on a regular basis.
EXERCISE 7.1: SHADING THE SPRITE (FROM EXERCISE 6.1)
At this juncture we will use the rules of light discussed in the last chapter to
build on our sprite from the earlier exercises.
In Figure E., we have our sprite from before, and he looks quite at
becausethereisnolightorshadowtogivedepthtothecharacter.Therst
thingthatI’mgoingtodoistoohavehisenormousheadcastashadowonto
his red shirt as shown in Figure E.. You’ll also notice that I’ve added a few
pixels around the edges to imply the shirt being a bit rounded and having
some folds in the cloth.
Drawing Secrets Revealed 85
FIGURE E7.1 Sprite
from the Chapter 
exercise.
FIGURE E7.2 The head
casts a shadow.
Next I’ll start to add some shadow to the face at the bottom and under
theeyes.ThehairwillalsocastsomeshadowsoI’lldarkentheskin
just below the hairline. I’ll add some shadow under the nose and to the
underside of the arms and hands as shown in Figure E..
Now we’ll add some light to the thigh area on the pants so that the area
below the shins read as being in shadow. I’ve also used the darker blue to
createthedesignofthepocketandseamonthepants,tryingtodoasmuch
as I can with only the two colors.
In Figure E., I’ve added some shadow into the hair and shoes and the
characterisstartingtoappeartohavemoredepth.

===== FILE 26/57: chapter-26.html =====

86 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E7.3 Adding
shadow to the pants
and skin.
FIGURE E7.4 Even the
hair can use some
shadow.
FIGURE E7.5 Highlights
addedtotheskinand
shirt.
FIGURE E7.6 High-
lights added to
the hair.
Drawing Secrets Revealed 87
In Figure E., we start to dene the features of the face by adding a
lighter tone to the skin. Remember from the previous chapter that the var-
ious surfaces will get more light as their orientation to the light source gets
closer to perpendicular—well this applies to skin too.
The side of the nose and the cheekbones are lightest where they protrude
and create surfaces facing the light. The top of the cheekbone and the back
of the hands also catch some light that helps to give the appearance of being
rounded.Wecanalsoaddalightercolorredforthepartsoftheshirtthat
catch the light. The top of the shoes have been lightened, and the pants get
a bit of added shadow.
In Figure E., we have only to add some light into the top most part of
the hair and we are done! Good job!

===== FILE 27/57: chapter-27.html =====

CHAPTER 8
Animating Pixels
The Shock and Horror of Being Flashed
byaPixel
A
      toward creating polish for your game.
It can give depth to your characters, personality to your text or envi-
ronment, and even give subtle clues about the game.
People think of animation not as simply making something move—but
technically it is the process of bringing an inanimate object or image alive.
As you may know, the illusion of life is given through the quick succes-
sion of images that our eyes interpret as movement. We’ll only have time to
skim over this meaty topic and help to avoid some of the common pitfalls
of animating with pixels.
To begin with, allow me to throw out a few pieces of technical informa-
tion to hold in your brain about animation:
• Traditionalanimationwas doneatframesper second;alowerframe
rate risks looking “choppy.”
•  frames per second has become more common today.
• Some current/next generation games run at  frames per second to
get a super-smooth appearance. We will not be doing that here.
89
90 Pixel Art for Game Developers
• For video games, the animation of the character or object is typically
done in place. For instance, imagine if we had a character walking
acrossthescreen;thiswouldbecreatedbycreatingacycleofawalk-
ing animation done in place—and a programming script that would
move that sprite across the screen.
I’m going to take a few minutes to show you some of the animation tools
in GraphicsGale before launching into the foundation principles of anima-
tion. This is so that you will be able to follow along with my descriptions
but also to give you an opportunity to experiment on your own a bit.
Every Pixel Art program will have tools similar to things I’ll be explain-
ing, but if you are using a dierent program you’ll be on your own to gure
out where the appropriate buttons and commands are placed.
8.1 USING THE PROGRAM FOR ANIMATION
The core of animating in pixels will consist of duplicating a frame and
making small changes to give the illusion of movement.
In GraphicsGale, this is done by pressing the little down arrow button
and then choosing the “duplicate frame” option in the drop-down menu
as shown in Figure .. This will activate a second pop up box shown in
Figure.. Aer hitting “OK” there will be a perfect duplicate of the frame
shown previously named Copy (the title of the last frame).
FIGURE 8.1 Duplicate frames to
save eort.
FIGURE 8.2 GraphicGale’s frame
properties.
Animating Pixels 91
To move back and forth between frames of animation, simply click on
the frame you want to work on in the animation window on the right
hand side.
You can also access these tools with buttons that reside at the top of the
pageshowninFigure..Fromletorighttheiconsinthisgureare()
add frame, () the duplicate frame button, () delete frame, () move back-
ward one frame, () move forward one frame, () properties of the current
frame,()cutthecurrent frame(usefulformovingtoadierent placein the
sequence), () copy the current frame, () paste frame from the clipboard,
() play the animation (in the “Preview” window that can be accessed by
checking the appropriate box in the “View” menu drop down), and ()
pause animation.
FIGURE 8.3 GraphicGale’s animation toolkit.
8.2 ONION SKINNING
Onionskinningisafeaturethatmanyprogramsusetoseetheframe(or
several frames) before and aer the frame you are working on. This emu-
lates the quality of working on a light table and helps to project what the
movement will look like.
92 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE 8.4 GraphicGale’s onion skinning button.
GraphicsGale has a little button that looks like a person running (circled
in Figure .) that toggles the feature on and o. If you click the trian-
gle to the right of the icon, you’ll actually nd three options: Back Frame,
Forward Frame, and Both. This lets you decide whether to look at frames
before or aer the current frame (or both). It’s really quite self explanatory
and I’m questioning my judgment as to including that last sentence, as well
as this one.
Soliloquy aside, in GraphicsGale there is something else you need to do
in order see the onion skin. You need to let GraphicsGale know which color
youwantto be (semi-)transparent. To do this, weneed toclick the three little
dots on the upper le side of the frame in the animation window (circled
in Figure.). This should pop up the “Properties” dialogue box shown in
Figures. and ..
FIGURE 8.5 Frame properties.
Animating Pixels 93
FIGURE 8.6 Click the “Transparent:
Enabled” checkbox.
FIGURE 8.7 Designate a color to be
transparent.
Simply check the “Transparent: Enabled” box and choose the color you
want to be semitransparent and violà! You’ve got a semi for onion skinning!
8.3 PIXEL FLASHING
Pixel ashing is probably the single most troublesome aspect of animating
Pixel Art and contrary to your expectations, this is not when a pixel reveals
its reproductive parts.
When a pixel or group of pixels suddenly appear or disappear (rather
than move position), the appearance can be jarring. Unfortunately, there
are times where it may be unavoidable, especially at very low resolutions.
It is somewhat dicult to represent this concept with still images so bear
with me as best as you can.
The character on the le in Figure . has a one pixel gap on the right
side where the jaw meets the shoulder, but when he turns his head the gap
is lled with a dark pixel. This has the potential to be jarring. Figure. is
even worse; in addition to the gap from before, the line describing the right
side of the head has become broken by both light and darker pixels.
Figure.resolvestheissuebykeepingthetransitionassmoothaspos-
sible.Ifyoudon’tseethedierenceorwhythiscouldbetroublesome,don’t

===== FILE 28/57: chapter-28.html =====

94 Pixel Art for Game Developers
worry—this can be very subtle. This is something extremely dicult to
notice when not in motion but I wanted to bring up the concept because
it is fairly important for animation. And once you see and understand the
issueitbecomesverydiculttolookpast.Soplease...please keep your eyes
open for this atrocity.
FIGURE 8.8 A single pixel can cause issues in animation.
FIGURE 8.9 Be careful not to make the situation worse.
Animating Pixels 95
FIGURE 8.10 Areasonablesolution.
8.4 CORE ANIMATION CONCEPTS
Animation is a huge eld with many concepts that can be studied—but
since this is a book on Pixel Art rather than animation, I’ve tried to distill
it into the most fundamental concepts for making something come alive:
anticipation with follow-though, and squash and stretch.
I’ve made an animorphized red blobto illustrate these ideas (Figure .).
He’s going to throw his hat with his head.
FIGURE 8.11 An animorphized red blob.
96 Pixel Art for Game Developers
8.4.1 Anticipation and Follow-Through
Anticipation is any motion that gives the viewer a suggestion of what is
about to happen. Obvious examples would be of a pitcher winding up to
throw a baseball ora boxer pulling his arm back for a strike. In most cases it
works quite well to exaggerate this motion as far as possible: not just show-
ing the pitcher pulling her arm back—but pulling her head back, and arcing
her entire body in anticipation of the throw.
But in animation it really pays o to use this concept to exaggerate almost
any motion: rather than have a character move his arm to pick up a coee
mug—if there is wind up before moving the arm forward—it becomes a
more convincing motion.
Ourblobisgoingtothrowit’shattothele—butbeforeitdoes,itneeds
to get some head momentum. Although it doesn’t really have a head... But
our blob does need to lean back in order for the motion to read correctly.
Figure. shows that part of the motion by having the blob lean back to
get ready to toss the hat.
FIGURE 8.12 Winding up to throw the hat.
Follow-through is the continuation of the motion aer it would other-
wise be completed. To extend our examples from earlier: Aer a pitcher
throws the ball, her arm continues to follow that path for a few moments
aerward—showing the momentum. Her sleeves and hair y forward and
her weight is extended to the other foot.
Inthecaseofourblob,it’sheadwillcontinuetoextend.Thehatwill
continue its trajectory while the blob settles back into a normal position
and the eyes will follow the hat’s motion as seen in Figure.. The motion
of the hat can be thought of as follow-through, but is also frequently called
“secondary animation”.
Animating Pixels 97
FIGURE 8.13 Follow-through.
Secondary animation refers to the objects that move in reaction to the
primary movement of the character. This could be clothing onthe character
or an item in the environment but could also be part of the character that
swings in reaction to the primary movement—such as arms that swaywhile
the character walks.
When we add the anticipation and the follow-through together, the
animation looks like Figure.:
FIGURE 8.14 Anticipation and follow-through together.
OnemorethingIfeelIhavetoaddressbeforewemoveoniswhenan
animation is intended to move very fast. There are times where an object is
supposed to move very far in one frame and that motion can be easily lost.
TakealookatFigure..Inthisguretheballisonthelesideofthepicture
inoneframeandontherightinthenext.Theballhastomoveagreatdistance
inoneframeandhasthepotentialtogetvisually“lost”becauseoureyeswon’t
be able to ll the missing motion. One way to deal with this is to use ghost
versions of the image showing the trail of motion, as shown in Figure..
FIGURE 8.15 Fast moving objects can get lost between frames.
FIGURE 8.16 Use a trail of motion to avoid losing an object.
98 Pixel Art for Game Developers
In the case of the anamorphic blob, there isn’t really a huge distance to
cover but if I wanted to really emphasize the speed of the head jerk I could
add this eect to one frame of the animation, as shown in Figure .. If
you look closely, you can see several dierent attributes that were added in
an attempt to trick the viewers’ eyes into reading this as motion. One is the
repetition of several lines of the right prole tracking the imaginary motion.
Another is a line tracing the path of the motion itself—in this case it would
be the lines showing the path of the hat above and below. Lastly, there is the
stretching of attributes from one location to the other done with the eyes in
this image.
FIGURE 8.17 Using eects to imply fast motion.
When you are creating your animations, consider what sorts of things
could use anticipation and follow-through. Although this will add more
frames to your animations, the technique will have a huge payo in the
quality of your work. The nice thing about doing this with pixels is that
you can oen create the eect by literally only moving one or two pixels.
8.4.2 Squash and Stretch
Squash and stretch are almost exactly what they sound like: taking the char-
acter (or object or item) and stretching it or squashing it beyond what would
be possible in real space. As an abstract idea it is very similar to anticipation
and follow-through—they help the idea come alive through exaggeration.
Let’s take a look at a jump animation for our blob and how we can
usesquashandstretchtoreallymakethismovementlookawesome.In
Figure., we have our character getting ready to jump, which in this case
is really a type of anticipation (discussed before). Our blob in now roughly
twice the width and half the height as the starting point for the character—
this is the “squash” in the expression squash and stretch. Notice that even

===== FILE 29/57: chapter-29.html =====

Animating Pixels 99
his hatgets a little squashed which I like, although we’re going to revisit how
the hat behaves shortly.
FIGURE 8.18 Squash.
Now that our little blobby dude is ready, let’s have him spring upward
stretching his body in the other direction like in Figure.. This time our
blob is roughly twice the height and half the width as the starting point
for the character—this is the “stretch.” Since the motion is going upward,
I’veaddedachangetothebrimtoemphasizetheforceoftheupward
motion.
FIGURE 8.19 Stretch.
What we have looks pretty nice, but let’s see how far we can push this
concept. Let’s really exaggerate the squash and stretch by adding two more
frames to pushing the change even farther, like the ones in Figure..
100 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE 8.20 Exaggerated squash and stretch frames.
Whilethese maylookstrangeandcomicalas stillimages,theyblend right
intotheanimationandwillhelptogivetheimpressionofanentitythat
is alive.
OnemorechangethatIwanttomaketothisanimationistoseparatethe
hat’s movement into secondary animation to continue to improve the feel
of the movement. In this case we’ll have the blob squash so fast that the hat
willtakeamomenttodribackdowntotheblob’shead.Tomakethiswork
properly we’re going to need to take o the squash from the hat. All together
with the squash, stretch, and follow-through our jump animation will look
like Figure.. You may notice that although we took the squash eect o
of the hat so that it can dri down as a secondary animation, the hat still
stretches as the character expands upward. You may have to experiment to
gure out what works for you and your characters.
FIGURE 8.21 Squash and stretch frames.
I’ve used a blob to make the pointextremelyexplicit, but in truth this can
be used with just about anything, from inanimate objects to on-screen text.
Animating Pixels 101
FIGURE 8.22 A typical crappy game animation.
For the sake of the discussion let’s imagine that you wanted to have a
cannon re in your game. Figure . shows what you would frequently see
as the animation created for most games. One frame of blast, one frame
at rest—that is all. While this is very ecient, there is denitely a missed
opportunity for giving that cannon some character. Building games is di-
cult and time consuming so I fully understand and highly respect keeping
things as simple as possible, but animation can genuinely add so much to
the players’ experience.
So going back to the cannon, we could easily create some anticipation
by having a fuse that animates before the ring, as in Figure .. This has
the potential to be an interactive/gameplay element as well, creating a delay
between the command and the desired eect—but for now I simply want to
useitasaseven-frameagentofanticipation.
FIGURE 8.23 Anticipation has been created.
Figure. creates a climax for the anticipation with a squash, squishing
the object horizontally and extending it vertically. I’ve squashed both the
barrel and the wheels, but feel to experiment because squashing dierent
parts will give a dierent feel to the animation. It doesn’t really matter that
the object is made of iron—it still has a very appealing aesthetic, creating
some life in an otherwise static object.
102 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE 8.24 Squashcanbeaddedtoinanimateobjects.
Figure. uses some stretch to really emphasize the blast. The anima-
tion places the most squashed frame right next to the most stretched frame,
creating a lot of contrast—which is perfect for something like a cannon
blast. This is followed by some secondary animation of the smoke settling
and the cannon slightly rolling back (which you cannot really see in the still
image other than the wheel rolling a bit).
FIGURE 8.25 Stretch and follow through.
All put together, Figures. through . create a cannon that doesn’t
just shoot, but really comes alive when red. Not too shabby for an inani-
mate object.
Squash and stretch, anticipation and follow-through, and secondary ani-
mation are really only the tip of the iceberg for animation technique. There
is so much more to be explored from timing to lip synching to posture and
gesture, that I really could not possibly cover everything here.
ThebestIcanhopeforistogiveyouatasteandstronglyencourageyou
to explore the cra further.
8.5 GAME-SPECIFIC CONCERNS
Soon we’ll try our hand at creating a little animation but before getting
started on that exercise, it is worthwhile to touch on some components
of animation that are specic to games. There are fundamental dierences
between animation for games versus animation for lm or television.
In more traditional animation settings, animations can be entirely built
for the context. That is to say that the characters are typically animated
to do anything they happen to be doing in the scene—whether it is
Animating Pixels 103
something very common and repetitive or a movement that is small and
unique. A character’s movement can then be a continuous motion, with
uid transitions throughout all actions.
Gamesaren’ttypicallybuiltthatway.Becausecharactermovementsare
generally triggered by something the player or environment does dynam-
ically, it is next to impossible to know a character’s every movement state
necessaryinthegame.Historicallythere have also been space restrictions
that also limit the amount of assets that a game can hold in memory.
The way that games deal with this is by slicing the movement into indi-
vidual actions that can be (but aren’t always) looped. These tend to be
theactionsthataredonemostfrequentlyandinmanycasestransition
animations or non-essential movements are eliminated.
Oen games will include the following individual animations:
•Awalkcycle
•Aruncycle
• An idle animation (activated when no buttons are pressed)
• Attack animations
• Death animation(s)
•Ajump
Sometimes the gameplay is augmented by additional animations
such as
• A landing animation (when a jump is nished)
• A dance or emotive animation
• Crouching/crawling
•Takingdamage
•Climbing
• Pulling out weapon
•Wavingarmstocatchbalance
These can be triggered by a player pressing a button (such as an attack)
or by an interaction of the environment (such as taking damage).

===== FILE 30/57: chapter-30.html =====

104 Pixel Art for Game Developers
In most cases it is dicult to account for all transitions between move-
mentswithinagameandoenanimations“snap”fromonetothenext.
This usually works just ne within the context of game and players gener-
ally have the expectation that their character will respond with immediate
feedback.
This is a very good thing because it would be very challenging to create
transition animations between all of the main animations. Consider that I
have listed  animations listed earlier in my noncomprehensive list. If my
math is correct, and it probably is not—in orderto have transitions between
all of these you would need create  animations to create all possible
transitions!
One more thing to consider for your animations is the number of frames
that you’ll need to create the animation. A walk cycle animation is fre-
quently done with  frames, but could be done with  to get a silky-smooth
ow of movement. I’ve also seen walk cycles created with  or  frames that
give just barely enough information to slip by as a walking movement.
8.6 SUMMARY
We coveredhowtogetstartedanimatingin GraphicsGale,usingonionskin-
ning to view the adjacent frames for reference. We talked about the dreaded
pixel ash and covered a few core animation concepts, including squash and
stretch, as well as anticipation and follow-through.
I’vetriedmybesttogiveyouthemostfundamentalaspectsofanimating
with pixels but animation has its own history and the discipline is too vast
to cover in this one section. If you like the idea and want to learn more, I
encourage you to pick up a copy of the book TheAnimator’sSurvivalKitby
Richard Williams.
EXERCISE 8.1: CREATE AN IDLE ANIMATION (FROM
EXERCISE 7.1)
In the last exercise we covered the basic fundamental aspects of animation.
This chapter we will just lightly touch on these by creating a very simple
animation—less for putting the foundational aspects into action and more
to get accustomed to what it is like to animate with Pixel Art. We’ll give a bit
oflifetothischaracterbycreatinganidleanimation,givingyouacoupleof
possible variations to choose from.
Animating Pixels 105
Simplify the Sprite (Suggested but Optional)
Our character has a bit of shading and detail, which is nice, but has the
potential to be a real pain to animate. In many cases, you’ll want to simplify
thespriteasmuchaspossiblebeforecreatinganimations.
FIGURE E8.1 Simplifying sprite for animation.
Figure E. shows a simplied version of our sprite from earlier—which
is probably the rst thing I’d do if I were going to create a whole suite of ani-
mations for this character. I’ve eliminated as much detail as I could get away
with and reduced the gradients for each hue to no more than two colors.
Why? Why take something that looks nice and strip away detail?
Foryoursanity!
Themorecomplexityacharacterhas,themoretimeitwilltaketocreate
consistent and believable animations. Consider that each bit of detail has to
move in proper speed and proportion to the rest of the sprite. What’s more,
each bit of texture has the potential for creating pixel ash or other jarring
artifacts when in motion.
Take a look at the characters created by the great D animators through-
out history and you’ll notice that they tend to be somewhat simple and/or
stylized. The best animators know that what they give up in terms of visual
complexity they can more than make up for with the quality of movement.
OnethingI’dliketopointoutthatwasdoneinthisexamplewastomake
onearmandonelegentirelyinshadow.Whilethisdoesn’tappeartobe
a noteworthy change, this actually serves utility when it’s time to animate.
106 Pixel Art for Game Developers
This helps to keep clear which limb is the rightand which limb is on the le.
Whilethismaynotseemtomakeadierencefromthefront,ifthecharacter
isfacingsideways(asitwould beinaside-scrollinggame)—having onelimb
in shadow can be very useful in determining which is which.
The Simplest Path
Butifyouinsist onkeeping complexityin your sprite design,I willintroduce
acoupleofideasthatwillhelptokeepthingspainless.Well...atleastless
painfulthanitcouldbe.Ifwe’regoingtokeepourcharacterspriteshaded
asitwasbefore,itshouldbeourgoaltotrytocreateasmuchlifeaspossible
by moving whole sections intact (rather than re-drawing each frame).
We’re going to do this by dividing our character into pieces like what’s
shownin FigureE. which couldbe literal (as I’vedone) orcouldbe simply
thewayyouthinkaboutthespriteguratively.Bythinkingofeachsectionasa
wholeunit,wecanmovethingsin“chunks”andavoidaccidentallychanging
the textures that would break the appearance of continuous movement.
Cosmigo’s program ProMotion actually has adragand dropinterface for
treating large chunks as brushes, allowing you to create a new “brush” with
one click. These chunks are then easily accessed in a window on the side,
which can be very helpful throughout the animation process. But because
most of you are using GraphicsGale, you can consider placing the various
chunks onto dierent layers.
FIGURE E8.2 For complicated sprites, animate in sections.
Animating Pixels 107
One of the idiosyncrasies of animating with pixels is that each move-
ment must be at least one pixel distance. While that may not seem like
much,itmayactuallybealargeportionofthethingthatyouaremoving.
Say you want the character to li his foot slightly—the foot is only three pix-
els tall. The smallest distance it can move would be a third of its size, which
isnottrivialifyouaretryingtocreatesubtlety.Andasageneralrule,idle
animation tends to be subtle. Hang on tight.
Our most simple iteration of an idle animation would be a simple two-
frame cycle where the chest heaves slightly. In this case, the head and the
legs stay static, but the torso and arms shi one pixel upward to give the
illusion of breathing.
Figure E. shows these two frames that look so similar that I’ve used
an extra image to diagram which pixels actually shied position. The entire
torsowasmovedinonebigchunk,changingonlyafewpixelsatthebottom
of the shirt to change the appearance of the creases.
As simple as this animation is, it gives a bit of life to the character when
not in action. It seems to work well with a pretty low frame rate, somewhere
around  frames/second (or  milliseconds per frame).
FIGURE E8.3 A movement of  pixel is enough to create idle animation.
This actually isn’t bad and would work quite well for many games. As
slightasthemovementmaybe,itbreathesabitoflifeintoanotherwise
static character.

===== FILE 31/57: chapter-31.html =====

CHAPTER 9
Tiled Backgrounds
I
   we’ll talk about one of the ways in which Pixel Artists
can leverage their eort is by using sections of art over and over again.
By creating individual “tiles” that t together, it becomes easy to cover a
huge environment with components that can be arranged an rearranged ad
nauseam(apparentlythetermadnauseamcomesfromtheconceptthat
something can be discussed until it makes you nauseous—but we’ll stop
before you get sick, I promise).
Figure . shows how ve  ×  tiles can be reused over and over to
make an entire image.
FIGURE 9.1 Several small sections can create a whole scene.
109
110 Pixel Art for Game Developers
This process gets more mileage from the initial eort, saves computer
memory, and gives tools to make the construction of a level very fast. The
reusable sections of art are called tiles and are kept together in one place
called a tile set.
9.1 TILE SIZES
A tilemap will be made of tiles that are each the same size. The most
common tilesizes are 16×16 pixels, 8×8 pixels, or 32×32 pixels(Figure .).
Noticethat thedimensions are alltothepower of —this allows thecom-
putertodealwiththeimagelesmoreeectivelyandavoidsneedlessly
wasting computer memory.
FIGURE 9.2 Tiles are typically built to the power of two.
Another important thing to note is that as the numbers in the dimension
size double, the actual amount of space quadruples. Figure. shows how
four 16 × 16 squares t into one 32 × 32 square.
FIGURE 9.3 One 32 × 32 tile can hold four 16 × 16 tiles.
Tiled Backgrounds 111
This becomes extremely important when considering what size to work
in and how much time it will take to build things. Imagine you’re working
with someone who wants you to build an environment but doesn’t really
care what size you build the tiles. Figures . and . show how a resolution
of  ×  will be 16 times the size of a tile set built at  × .
FIGURE 9.4 Compare the size of the
8 × 8 tile to the 32 × 32 tile.
FIGURE 9.5 One 32 × 32 tile can
hold sixteen 8 × 8 tiles.
Thisisnotonlyimportantforkeepingtheaestheticconsistentandhaving
a quality resolution—but also entirely game changing when managing your
work ow and eort...and sanity.
I desperately want for you to avoid accidentally agreeing to four times
the eort (or more) because you arbitrarily agreed to make sprites and/or
environments at a certain size.
9.2 SETTING UP THE TILEMAP WORK AREA
When using tiles, it will be important to display a grid, and useful to toggle
the“snaptogrid”function.In GraphicsGale,the buttontotoggle thegrid on
ando is shown in Figure.. In this screenshotthe canvasis only 128× 128
and this is probably smaller than what I would recommend for a building
area if building a tile set that uses 32 × 32 tiles. The size of your canvas
should be large enough to make a few rows and columns to test out the tiles
you build. So this would probably be a ne size for 16 × 16 tiles—but for
the 32 × 32 tile set we’d probably want a canvas to work on that was sized at
least 256 × 256.
The grid size should be the size of the tile you’re working with for the
most part.
112 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE 9.6 Work on a grid when creating tiles.
Conveniently, the button to toggle the grid snap function is just to the
right of the button that toggles the grid visibility, red circled in Figure..
In truth, this is such a commonly used tool that I would strongly rec-
ommendgivingitahotkey.Asareminder,youcansethotkeysinthe
File—Preferences menuundertheKeytab.Itypicallyusethecharacter“g”
as the hotkey—as g for grid is fairly easy to remember.
FIGURE 9.7 Snap to grid.
9.3 TEXTURES THAT REPEAT ON YOU
There are many instance where an image repeats over and over again like a
visual loop—like a brick wall or grass eld. This is called an innitely tiling
texture and is one of the places where Pixel Art shines brightest!
In most cases the tile will be repeating both horizontally and vertically
so they will have to link up nicely in all directions.
Tiled Backgrounds 113
The general composition of a tiling texture tile should be fairly homoge-
nous, as anything that stands out too much will become very obvious when
repeating. Following are some examples of things that can adversely aect
an innitely tiling texture, each demonstrated with an example. It’s in your
best interest to try to avoid the following:
• Elements that stick out too much, like a single rock (Figure .).
Although this may be a ne looking tile on its own, once the tile
is repeated it totally breaks the illusion of a continuous believable
surface.
FIGURE 9.8 Some items stick out when tiled.
• Gradients on the tile (Figure .). Gradients are super useful in gen-
eral, but for the most part they do not work as repeatable tiles.
FIGURE 9.9 Gradients create patterns when repeated.
• Dramatic shadows or too much contrast (Figure .). Although this
doesn’t always break the cycling pattern, it will almost always detract
fromthe scene overall. Contrast will bring attentiontothetile,making

===== FILE 32/57: chapter-32.html =====

114 Pixel Art for Game Developers
it harder to hide the repetition. It also causes a situation where the
main subjects—such as the character—ght for priority with the
environment, which is not desirable.
FIGURE 9.10 Highcontrastcancreateproblemswhentiled.
• One item taking up the majority of the tile (Figure.). This makes
the repetition of the tiles painfully obvious.
FIGURE 9.11 Some patterns stick out when repeated.
• Tight concentration of detail in only part of the tile (Figure.). This
creates an eect similar to having something take up the majority of
the tile—and the repetition once again becomes obvious.
Tiled Backgrounds 115
FIGURE 9.12 Concentrated patterns become conspicuous when repeated.
• Accidentallyemphasizingthe tile edge(Figure .).Avoidputtingtoo
many pixels in a row right on the edges of the tile and you run the risk
of popping that tile out.
FIGURE 9.13 Avoid making the grid too obvious.
Now compare those against these tiles (Figure.). It is not that the aes-
thetic is so much better with these two, but the fact that they are being
repeated over and over becomes greatly obscured.
116 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE 9.14 Tiles that make the grid reasonably indiscernible.
Although there are times when emphasizing the tile works in your favor.
An example would be when you want to represent something angular or
ridged. Or perhaps there may be a time where you need to represent tiles
(such as oor tiles) with your tiles (Figure .).
FIGURE 9.15 Sometimes a noticeable grid is okay.
Iftheseseemabittooblandforyou,don’tworry—wecanstilladdtiles
that create variation!
Havingabasetilethatrepeatswithoutbeinganeyesorecanbeahuge
asset. A very modest time investment can go a long way toward having your
game look appealing—even in early prototype phases!
Once your innitely tiling texture is created and you feel good about it,
youcanadd variationsto make itlook moreorganicandgenerallymoreaes-
thetically interesting. When we take simple repeating textures and add just
a few variation tiles, it immediately becomes more interesting (Figure .).
Tiled Backgrounds 117
FIGURE 9.16 Use variation tiles to break the monotony.
And once those are built, we can use these elements to imply a path and
start to guide gameplay like in Figure ..
FIGURE 9.17 Variation tiles can compose your environment.
118 Pixel Art for Game Developers
9.4 CREATE A TILE LIBRARY
Once you’ve created a few tiles that you feel good about, you’ll want to
keep a repository of tiles. This can be called a tile set, a tile map, or a tile
palette. It really doesn’t matter what you call it, although it is helpful to keep
it organized and up to date as your tiles change and improve over time.
SomePixelArtprogramssuchasProMotionandPyxelEdithavesome
advanced tools that go a long way toward making the process easier. Specif-
ically what comes to mind is the autoupdate feature that allows you to make
changes to one tile and the program automatically updates all of the same
tile type inreal time.Thiscan be superhelpfulin eliminatingthe seam when
creating tiling textures. Unfortunately to the best of my knowledge, at this
point in time GraphicsGale does not have this feature.
9.5 DITHERING AND OTHER PATTERNS
Dithering is the concept of using the placement of pixels to imply blending
between colors. Because Pixel Art typically uses a limited palette, dithering
can trick the viewer into perceiving more colors than are actually used.
I think about dithering as having two main categories: patterned and
organic. In most cases I prefer an organic dither, so we’ll start with that one.
9.5.1 How to Create Organic Dither
Put a tile of each of the two colors that you want to blend next to each
other (I’ve used a 16 × 16 sized tile in my example). Dithering can easily be
completed using a two-step process, although other methods exist. Figure
. shows the process and follows the steps explained in the following:
Step : Add pixels of one color into the other side. Make the concentra-
tion more dense as it gets closer to the barrier between the two colors. Try
to avoid static patterns (we’ll talk about those shortly), but try to place the
pixels quasirandomly.
Step : Repeat the process with the other color, going the other direction.
Theendresultisagradientthatappearstoblendfromonecolorintothe
next. This kind of dither works very well for creating skies, shadows, and
other sorts of organic shading.

===== FILE 33/57: chapter-33.html =====

Tiled Backgrounds 119
FIGURE 9.18 Organic dithering.
FIGURE 9.19 Dithering can imply blending.
Figure . shows how a gradient that has been dithered appears more
blended—or at least the blend has a soer appearance.
9.5.2 Patterned Dither
Patterns can be another handy tool for creating blending on less organic
items. The most commonly used of these is the standard checkerboard pat-
ternshown inthe middle ofFigure.. As you cansee inthe top partofthe
gure, there are only ve distinct colors being used but the dithering gives
the impression to the casual observer that there are nine colors.
Other sorts of patterns can be used separately or conjunction as shown
on the bottom of Figure..
120 Pixel Art for Game Developers
These inorganic patterns lend themselves to man-made textures such as
metal or plastic. In my experience they are great for inanimate objects but
tend to appear a bit static for trees and foliage.
FIGURE 9.20 Dithering patterns will soen edges in dierent ways.
GraphicsGale has a number of built-in patterns that you can use for
dither built in accessible through a drop-down selection box in the Palette
menu—shown in Figure.. The two colors that are selected will create the
two colors that build the pattern.
FIGURE 9.21 Default dithering patterns in GraphicsGale.
I’ve occasionally seen people dither with elaborate hand drawn patterns
that can be very stylized and striking. Experiment and decide what works
best for you.
Tiled Backgrounds 121
One last note on dithering: animation and dither are mortal enemies,
mixthematyourownperil.Becauseofpixelashandthepotentialfor
texture inconsistency, this combination is fraught with problems. This is
notachallenge—ifyoucanpullito,great... But I do advise against it
and would guess that you will need a truckload of aspirin by the time your
project is completed.
EXERCISE 9.1: CREATING A TOP-DOWN TILE SET
In the last chapter we talked about how we can use a small set of tiles
in a clever way to create a full-sized D game environment, as shown in
FigureE. example.
While we still have tiled backgrounds fresh in our mind, let’s go ahead
and build an entire tile set!
I’ve always had a sweet spot for top-down environments. Growing up
in the Nintendo Entertainment System era, this convention was indelibly
engraved on my gaming experiences. Games like The Legend of Zelda,
Ikari Warriors, Spy Hunter, Final Fantasy I, and Crystalis have become
foundational for the top-down aesthetic that is still used today.
Buttalkischeap,solet’sgetstarted!
Step 1: Create a New Project, Get a History Lesson
Go to File—New or hit Ctrl+N to create a new le and we’re going to
make the dimensions quite a bit bigger than anything we’ve done so far. We
want to make sure that we have room to both draw the individual tiles, but
also to place them into a scene to see whether they work within a context.
Let’smakethisle256 × 128 pixels with -bit color as shown in
FigureE..
FIGURE E9.1 Create a new le.
122 Pixel Art for Game Developers
Notice that  and  are both numbers that are a power of  (
8
and

7
, respectively), which means that the canvas can be tiled evenly with tiles
that are each sized at  ×  or  × . We will be using  ×  tiles for this
exercise.
Although we are going to use a -color palette, we are actually only
going to be using only  colors to make our scene. In truth, the idea of
an -bit palette being  colors is a bit misleading (at least as it had been
used historically in games). Even though a game’s background environ-
ment could use all  colors in total, each individual tile could use only
 colors—and frequently oneofthose colors was reserved for transparency.
For this reason, the building of almost any individual object in -bit games
wasrestrictedtoonlycolorsratherthan.
Since the birth of Pixel Art, the tools available for game development
haveexplodedinscopeandaccessibilityandthehardwarebeingused
to run them have become exponentially more powerful. The technical
requirements have changed dramatically and we are seldom bound by these
restrictions that birthed the style. Since the development scene has changed
so dramatically, I’ve adjusted the instruction accordingly. I’ve tried my best
to create this exercise to give youa solid understanding of the method while
avoiding the technical minutia.
Step 2: Turn on Your Grid
When working on a tile-based environment, feeling comfortable with the
grid will be key to speed, eciency, and your sanity. To turn your grid on
in GraphicsGale, simply select the grid icon from the toolbar and select the
 ×  option shown in FigureE.. To turn o the grid, you would choose
None from that same dropdown menu.
FIGURE E9.2 Turn on the grid.
Tiled Backgrounds 123
Also of great importance is the tool just to the le of the grid icon.
The icon shown in FigureE. snaps everything to the grid. This is used
so frequently that it is a good idea to create a hotkey for this tool in the
File—Preferences menu.I’veassignedthe“g”buttonasmyhotkeyasyou
can see in FigureE..
FIGURE E9.3 Snap to
grid button.
FIGURE E9.4 Create a “snap to grid”
hotkey.
Step 3: Prepare Your Palette
A number of these steps are covered in Chapter , but are iterated here for
those of you that like to jump right to the tutorials. That being the case, feel
free to skip ahead if that makes sense for you.
Your new canvas will have a palette that looks something like the one
showninFigureE..IndithelpfultomakethecolorsI’mworkingwith
stand out dramatically from the unused ones. I use black or very dark colors
that can be confused with black from time to time, so I prefer to change all
unused colors to a bright magenta or neon green. I’m going to use the color
thirdfromthe rightonthebottom(whichhappenstobexFFFFforthose
of you that care).

===== FILE 34/57: chapter-34.html =====

124 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E9.5 Default  color palette.
FIGURE E9.6 Example of a color ramp.
A “ramp” or “gradient” is a smooth transition between two colors, and in
the Pixel Art that would be a set of colors that smoothly transition from one
color to the next like what’s shown in Figure E..
And we will create a gradient of green like the one shown above, but rst
we are going to use the same technique in the program to turn the palette
all magenta. We’re going to copy the magenta, paste it in two places, then
“ramp” the two colors together. Because there is no variance between the
twocolors,itwillmakearampofonlyonecolor.
If you haven’t done so already, you’ll need to assign a hot key to the
procedures that we’ll need:
Tiled Backgrounds 125
• We’ll need to copy the color, so in File—Preferences menu, nd
Palette—Copy RGB Value and assign it the C key as shown in
FigureE..
• Next, assign the V key to the Palette—Paste RGB Value on the line
below as shown in Figure E..
• Finally, we’ll assign the R key to the Palette—Make Gradation line,
asshowninFigureE..
FIGURE E9.7 Set hotkey for “Copy RGB Value.”
FIGURE E9.8 Set hotkey for “Paste RGB Value.”
126 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E9.9 Set hotkey for “Make Gradation.”
Great—now we’ll put these guys to work right away.
• Click on the magenta color third from the right on the bottom and
press the C button to copy the color.
• Click on the color on the far right bottom and press the V button to
pastethecolorintothatposition.
• A window will pop upthat looks likeFigure E..HitOK (the bottom
lemost color should turn magenta).
• ClickonthecolortothemosttopleofthepaletteandhittheVbutton
again.AerhittingOKforthepopupwindow,thetoplemostcolor
should be magenta as well.
•Nowle click the top le color, then right click the bottom right color,
then click R to ramp the colors. A pop uplike FigureE. will pop up.
Hit OK.
FIGURE E9.10 Copyacolortoanewlocation.
Tiled Backgrounds 127
FIGURE E9.11 Create gradation.
If everything worked as it should, your entire palette should be an ugly
shade of magenta, as shown in FigureE..
We’re going to start our tile-based environment with a grass texture,
so let’s begin by building a gradient of greens, similar to what’s shown in
Figure E..
Double click on the second color slot and that should pull up a Color
menu. Create the lightest green for our grass by adjusting the sliders until
you have something similar to what’s seen in FigureE.. Aer hitting
OK, you will be le with a light green in the second palette position, like
FigureE..
FIGURE E9.12 A clean palette to begin working.
128 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E9.13 Choose a neutral green.
FIGURE E9.14 Leave the rst color magenta.
And since we’re going to create a seven color gradient like Figure E.,
we’re going to make our darkest grass color several spaces over in the eighth
colorposition.Then we’ll rampthe colors togetherasshown inFigure E..

===== FILE 35/57: chapter-35.html =====

Tiled Backgrounds 129
FIGURE E9.15 Pickthedarkestgreenandcreateagradient.
You may have noticed that I’ve le the rst color magenta. This is a habit
from the old days of creating palettes for low-powered hardware. This is
commonly the space that is reserved for transparency. Although this may
notbenecessaryforthisparticularexercise,itisausefulhabit.
With our palette neatly organized, we’re now ready to get grooving on
creating some artwork!
Step 4: Create Our First Tile
We’re going to use our lled rectangle tool to ll in one square of your grid
with the middle color of green gradient so it looks like FigureE.. As a
Pixel Artist you will live and die by the grid, so get used to being conscious
ofwherethingsfallinrelationtothegrid.
For our rst tile, we’re going to keep everything simple and avoid adding
complexityforaslongaspossible.Soforourrstgrasstexture,wecanstart
by just adding dots of color at quasirandom places on the square as shown
in Figure E..
130 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E9.16 Agreentile. FIGURE E9.17 Afewdots=asimple
grass texture.
Isayquasirandombecausethereactuallyisabitofthoughttowhere
those little dotsaregoing... Or to be more accurate, where they arenotgoing.
For textures that will be repeated over and over again, it is important that
nothing stands out too much.
Becausegrassisanorganicentity,itisimperativethatthepatternofpixels
doesn’t read as static. To achieve this, we need to avoid having pixels that
line up horizontally or vertically. Take a look at FigureE.a, where the
tile on the le is being repeated on the right. You can see that the tile has
a number of places where the pixels line up. This sort of pattern may work
well for manmade materials like plastic or metal, but looks too patterned
for organic material like grass.
Ontheipside, wealso needtoavoidmaking areas ofthe tile that are too
clustered. If there is a higher concentration of pixels in one area of the tile,
it will stand out as an intentional pattern once the tile is repeated. We can
see this eect in FigureE.b. This is almost never desirable in repeating
textures although it can work well for accent tiles that create variation.
We want a somewhat uniform distribution of pixels throughout the tile.
Tiled Backgrounds 131
(a)
(b)
FIGURE E9.18 (a) Pixels that line up don’t look organic. (b) Pixels that cluster
don’t look organic.
Thecolor beingusedfortheindividual dotsisthegreen thatis justdarker
thanthemiddlegreenandsoonwe’lladdonemorecolorthatisashadow
lighter to add some variation. For the most part, we want a fairly low con-
trast combination of colors for your environments. This serves the function
ofkeeping thebackgrounds sittingback so that theywon’t compete with the
character sprites for attention and also helps to keep a repeating tile from
looking too patterned. In FigureE.c, I’ve given an example of using too
high of a contrast in the tiles colors.
132 Pixel Art for Game Developers
(c)
FIGURE E9.18 (c) Avoid using too much contrast.
In Figure E., I’ve added in some light pixels throughout the tile to add
more variation throughout the tile. In Figure E., you can see that I’ve
duplicated this tile nine times on the grid to see what it looks like when
tiled. For the most part this tile looks pretty good when tiled but I’m going
to be a little anal retentive and make a small change—in part because it is
our rst tile, and in part just to illustrate the sort of critical eye you should
be working to build.
FIGURE E9.19 A seemingly organic grass tile.
Tiled Backgrounds 133
FIGURE E9.20 Duplicate to see how the overall pattern.
FIGURE E9.21 Some pixels are still lining up.
Myeyeispickingoutabitofaverticalpatternwithafewofthepixels
when the tile is repeated, which I’ve highlighted in FigureE.. I’ll iter-
ate that I’m being very nitpicky here, but if you notice something like this
andyouhavethetimetoxit(andthatisoenabigif )thenwhynot?
So I’ve done a small adjustment so that we end up with what we see in
FigureE.. Nice.

===== FILE 36/57: chapter-36.html =====

134 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E9.22 Areasonablesolution.
Step 5: Create a Grass Variation—As well as a Blend Tile
Congratulationsonmakingyourrsttile!We’regoingtofollowupbycre-
atingabitofvariationinthegrass—someareaswhereitgrowsabitmore
wild. We’ve been taking it a little slow but we will ramp up the speed of our
creation process as we move ahead.
First,let’sdrawanewtileusingthesamecolorsbuthasahighercon-
centration of both the light and darker color green, like what’s shown in
FigureE.. For this one, it’s okay to have clumps of color—although you
stillwanttokeepitfairlyevenlydistributedthroughoutthetile.
FIGURE E9.23 More going on for a rougher texture.
If you take a look at FigureE., you’ll notice that I am keeping both
tiles separated over to the le. This is the beginning of a tile bank or tile set,
where you’ll keep individual copies of each tile you’ve created.
Tiled Backgrounds 135
This new tile looks pretty good but when I tile it, I see a bit of vertical
and horizontal alignment that displeases me highlighted in FigureE..
FIGURE E9.24 Duplicate to see how the overall pattern.
FIGURE E9.25 Some pixels lining up vertically and horizontally.
136 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E9.26 Good enough!
So aer making some adjustments we have what you see in FigureE..
Thetileisstillnotreallyperfect,butquiteadequateforourpurposes.
As individual textures, these are looking pretty good, but when we start
to put those tiles together into a scene we notice a pretty big problem. We
can see in FigureE. that there is too sharp of a contrast between the two
tiles. On closer look, they actually look okay on the border between le and
right or top and down, but the angles look far too blocky for something
organic like grass.
FIGURE E9.27 Two textures without transition.
Oneofthetraditionalwaystohandlethisistomaketwonewtilesto
round out the edges, as shown in FigureE. leaving us with two new tiles
Tiled Backgrounds 137
asshowninFigureE.butthatisnotreallymyrecommendation.Aswe
can see in FigureE., it denitely cures the angular edges between the
grasstypes,butthecurvesseemtooperfectfororganicmatter.Another
commonwaytodothisistousewhattheycalla“slice”—whichwewill
do later but not for this transition.
FIGURE E9.28 Creating tiles to
round the edges.
FIGURE E9.29 Two texture tiles and two
transition tiles.
FIGURE E9.30 The edges of the path are now rounded.
Instead, my preference would be to create one tile that makes a soer
blendonadiagonallikewhat’sshowninFigureE..Thismakesthetran-
sition a bit soer and also has the advantage of using one less tile to receive
138 Pixel Art for Game Developers
a similar eect. Less is more when it comes to Pixel Art. Now we have three
tiles, and a satisfactory “blend tile” between the two grasses—all of which
can be observed in FigureE..
FIGURE E9.31 One tile that will replace the two transition tiles.
FIGURE E9.32 Less to keep track of and it looks more organic.
Step 6: It Isn’t Easy Being Green—Moving on to Sand
In this step, we are going to create a sand tile, then show how to create a
“ slice” to transition between grass and sand using eight tiles. Finally, we’ll

===== FILE 37/57: chapter-37.html =====

Tiled Backgrounds 139
addressanotherwaytohandlethisissueusingonlythreetiles(whichismy
preference in most contexts).
First and foremost, we need to add some colors to our palette. My palette
is shown in FigureE., which I’ll take a moment to explain.
FIGURE E9.33 Our palette with some spots le for emergency.
The gradient of green will be used to create grass, trees, and shrubbery.
The gray colors to the right will be used for stones, stone walls, and/or
cement. On the bottom row I have a four-color gradient of blue that will
be used to create water. Flanking the blue on either side is yellow and pur-
ple that I plan to use for owers (and the blue may get used as well). Then,
we’vegottentothebrown,whichwillbeusedforsand,andperhapstree
trunk or mud. Lastly, there are three spots that are le over that I am leav-
ing as magenta. These can be in reserve if we decide that we really need
another color to make something work.
Okay, with our palette squared away, let’s build a tile for some sand. In
FigureE., I’ve shown the simple process of creating a sand tile: Begin
with a brown tile. (I’m using the lightest brown in my palette.) Then draw
somepixelsthataregrey, butwitha similarvaluetothe brown.Thatis tosay,
agraythatisroughlytheamountofbrightnessasbrown—thesearepebbles
in the sand. Next we’ll add a few places where the pebbles are reecting a
bit of light by adding some lighter color gray dots. Lastly, we’ll add some
variation in the brown by adding some pixels of brown that are a shade
darker.
FIGURE E9.34 Create a generic sand tile.
140 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E9.35 We need some transition from grass to sand.
As you can see in FigureE., the sand will need some work in order to
integrate properly with the grass. The most common way to deal with this
transition is to use a “-slice.”
Essentially a  slice is when you create a transition for each of the eight
sidesthatborderatile.YoucanseeinFigureE.athroughd,I’vegone
through the steps involved in creating those transitions. In FigureE.a,
I’ve outlined the shape that the transition from grass to sand will take. In
Figure E.b, I’ve lled in the area outside of the line with more of the grass
texture.
(a) (b)
FIGURE E9.36 (a) We’re creating  new transition tiles for a -slice. (b) Fill in
appropriate area with grass.
Tiled Backgrounds 141
FigureE.c (where we’ve colored the dividing line) and FigureE.d
(which adds some cast shadow) show a poignant advantage of making a
transition using the  slice method; it allows for proper light direction. We
will explore another method of transition shortly that does not have this
unique advantage.
(c)
(d)
FIGURE E9.36 (c) We can color the line to imply lighting. (d) Add some cast
shadow.
Aswe see in FigureE., the  slice method allowsyou tobuild dierent
sizes of sand without any trouble. This opens up a number of opportunities
for laying out a scene but we still need four more tiles to really open up the
more unique shapes.
(e)
FIGURE E9.36 (e) The -slice can create various rectangles.
142 Pixel Art for Game Developers
To build the new tiles, we’ll create an area of sand surrounding a patch of
grass creating a reverse  slice. To save eort, we can reuse the side and top
tiles that we’ve already created. The bottom tile of the last  slice becomes
the top tile of the new one, as you can see in FigureE.f. This is repeated
for the other side and top tiles, so that we are only missing corners like
whatisshowninFigureE.g.Thissaveseortandthelightingevenstays
consistent.
(f)
(g)
FIGURE E9.36 (f) Reuse tiles on opposite side for inversed -slice. (g) Inversed
-slice needs corner tiles.
Tiled Backgrounds 143
In FigureE.h, we’ll outline the corner pieces, continuing to keep the
light source consistent. Now we need only to complete the texture and add
some shadow to have another nished  slice, as shown in Figure E.i.
(h)
(i)
(j)
FIGURE E9.36 (h) Create corners with proper lighting. (i) Add cast shadow.
(j) We are no longer conned to rectangles.
So we can see in Figure E.j that’s we can put together these tiles in
dierent ways to create unique shapes of sand and grass. In the end, we’ve
actually needed  transition tiles to get the full range of shapes shown here.
This is a very common method, but not my personal favorite. The  slice
method is great, but does necessitate a certain anal retentiveness about light

===== FILE 38/57: chapter-38.html =====

144 Pixel Art for Game Developers
direction. The nal outcome can be very lovely, especially if you take lots of
time to really esh out each tile (which I did not). The issue is that I want to
be far more lazy than the  slice method allows. Instead, let us rebuild these
grass transitions using only three tiles.
We’ll start the three-tile method by creating a section of nine tiles and
outlining only two tiles as shown in FigureE.. It’s important that the line
on the top tile divides it in half fairly evenly. This is so that when the tile is
ipped, it still aligns properly with the corner tile.
In Figure E., I’ve colored the line a dark green and given it some cast
shadow, and then in Figures E. and E. the grass texture has been
duplicated to ll in the space. I will also add a bit of detail including some
blades of grass in the sand that you’ll see in the following images.
FIGURE E9.37 I’m too lazy for the
-slice method.
FIGURE E9.38 We’re going to ignore
light direction.
Tiled Backgrounds 145
FIGURE E9.39 Fill in areas with grass. FIGURE E9.40 Use two tiles instead
of eight.
Now we need only to duplicate and ip those two tiles as shown
in FigureE. and we have the fully formed transition displayed in
FigureE..
FIGURE E9.41 Duplicate and ip your tiles.
146 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E9.42 Two tiles create the impression of eight.
Sowiththetwoadditionaltilesbuilt,weseeinFigureE.thatwecan
easily build beds of sand of dierent sizes. We still need to create one more
tileinordertobuildthemoreuniqueshapes,andwe’lldoitthesameway
the  slice was built... but faster.
FIGURE E9.43 Our two tiles emulate the -slice.
In FiguresE. and E., we’ve set things up just like we did when cre-
ating the inverse  slice. In this instance, however, we can reuse the same
tile for all four sides.
Tiled Backgrounds 147
FIGURE E9.44 We still need an inverse transition.
FIGURE E9.45 Once again we reuse the sides.
Nice, eh? Then we simply draw in the corner tile as shown in
FiguresE. through E.. And FigureE. shows how we can now use
these tiles to make a number of unusual shapes.
148 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E9.46 We need only one
more tile.
FIGURE E9.47 We’ll continue to ignore
light direction.
FIGURE E9.48 Create some texture
and cast shadow.
FIGURE E9.49 Violà!

===== FILE 39/57: chapter-39.html =====

Tiled Backgrounds 149
FIGURE E9.50 The three-tile method in action.
The three-tile method is a similar process to the  slice method, but sig-
nicantly shorter. The shortcoming is that you cannot keep a genuine light
direction throughout your scene when building this way. The advantages of
thiswayovertheslicemethodarethatitisfastertocreatethetiles,eas-
ier to build a scene with the tiles, and less chance of inconsistencies. It also
means that your le sizes have the potential to be even smaller (which leads
to faster compile times, download times for players, le management, etc.).
Youcouldalsousethetilesavingstocreatealoadofvariationstotheedge,
which helps to conceal the appearance of the grid within the scene.
Step 7: Variation Elation for the Game’s Duration
Now let’s really hammer on this topic of variation and build a number of
variant tiles for the grass and sand. We’ve already built two types of grass
that begins to give a bit of variation, but I like ower tiles. They’re pretty. So
tobeginwith,let’screatesomeowerstobeaddedtothegrassandI’lltry
to break them down to show how I make them.
InFigureE.a,I’veillustratedthestepsIusetobuildtheowers.Start-
ing with one of the base grass textures, I’ll add a few light green pixels as a
owerstemorleafandoneofthebrightercolorsfortheowerpedals.This
is how each of the tiles is begun on the le-hand side. Next, I’ll start to add
some shadow being cast by the ower onto ground. Sometimes I’ll give a
bit of an outline to the ower so that it’ll pop out a bit more, as I’ve done
with the sunower. Finally, I’ll add some detail into the image in the form
of texture and additional light gradient when applicable.
150 Pixel Art for Game Developers
Onelastbit,togetthemostoutofoureorts,istoduplicatethenal
image with anothercolor. This eectively gets twodierent variations while
only expending the eort of building one.
(a)
FIGURE E9.51 (a) Creating  new variation tiles.
Iwanttobuildanotherower(well,twoifwecountthecolorshied
duplicate),butIwantthisonetobegrowinginapatchthat’sabitwilder.
To give the impression of a thicker/wilder grass, we’ll want to use a higher
contrast in the colors between dark and light.
I want to extend as little eort as possible so I’m going to build darker
version ofour currentgrass beforebuildingthe high-contrastower. I know
that we’re going to need a grass tile with some cast shadow later, so we’ll
preemptthateortnowbeforebuildingtheower.
You can see in FigureE.b that the tile is identical, but with all of the
green colors shied one value darker. You could potentially build a new
grass tile with darker colors and ultimately that would likely be a more var-
ied (and likely more desirable) aesthetic. But this way is much faster and in
my experience does not detract from the scene in any noticeable way.
Tiled Backgrounds 151
(b)
FIGURE E9.51 (b) Use a palette shi to create a darker grass tile.
Thereareacouplewaystocreatethistilethatonlytakeacouple
moments. Many pixel art programs have a “darken” mode of some sort that
will automatically shi the colors down in value by one slot. The problem
with that is that it can sometimes give undesirable results (sometimes shi-
ing the colors too dark or loosing colors that are close in value). The best
practice is to have another le open with a dierent palette—a palette that
is almost identical but with the colors shied in position. Then when the
tile is cut and paste into the le, it will read with the new colors. The steps
involved in moving that tile back into your tile set can get a bit convoluted
and they are rather program-specic, so I’ll let you nd your inner pixel
genius work out those minute steps.
Now where were we? Oh yes, creating a wild ower. In Figure E.c, I’ve
shown the steps to building the wild ower. First add three pixels of a light
green to make some larger blades of grass, then add some dark green next
to them to make them “pop” out a bit. You could potentially use this tile as
another grass variation, but it would need to be altered quite a bit so that
it wouldn’t look so patterned when repeated. You can x it up if you like,
but I’ve got too many other nuggets of information I need to pass on to get
sidetracked onthis grass tile. I just added the pink owers intothe grass and
placed some dark green next to them the same way I did with the blades of
grass, but with a darker green so that they’d be more pronounced. Lastly, I
added a yellow variation version to capitalize on my eort.
152 Pixel Art for Game Developers
(c)
FIGURE E9.51 (c) Two new variation tiles, with a palette shi to create a third.
In FigureE., we’ve used the tiles on the le to create the scene on
the right and it’s already starting to come together. Doesn’t that look like
afantasticplacetoslaydragons?
FIGURE E9.52 Just  tiles can create whole scenes.
In Figures E. and E., I’ve created some stones for the grass in a
fairly standard way. I’ve begun with ugly grey blobs placed within the tile.
Youmaynotice that theseare builtwiththreestones,andthatisno accident.
I almost always use odd numbers when creating organic scenery, as even
numberstendtobereadintopatternsmoreeasilybythehumaneye.Odd
numbersofitemsarealsofrequentlyused inne artandaresometimescited
as being aesthetically preferable.
Tiled Backgrounds 153
Next, I’ve created light and dark in the grass, followed by some light and
dark in the stone. Lastly, I’ve added some texture in the rock to make them
look niy.
I’m sure you’ve noticed that Figure E. features an image built onto two
consecutive tiles. I hope I didn’t just blow your mind with that one. It turns
outthatwe’reallowedtodothat!Ifyouweretosplitthetwohalvesapart
theywouldlookdreadful.Butsolongastheyaretogether,theycanaddnice
little dollops of augmented detail for a scene.
FIGURE E9.53 Using an odd number of rocks.
FIGURE E9.54 Using a two tile sequence.

===== FILE 40/57: chapter-40.html =====

154 Pixel Art for Game Developers
Stones can be used for creating paths in your game, which are great for
leading the player through your game environment.
Now that we’ve added so many variation tiles to the grass, the sand is
getting a bit jealous. Let’s add a couple of variation tiles there as well, to
pretend that we love the sand as much as we love the grass. In Figure E.,
you’ll nd some cacti being created in a method that should be starting to
be kind of familiar: make blobs of color, add some light and shadow, make
somevariationtoimplytexture,andaddafewpixelofcastshadow.This
should be starting to feel somewhat standard by this point in your training.
FIGURE E9.55 A couple of sand variation tiles.
Step 8: Rocking Out
My editoristellingmethat she’s about tofall asleep, so let’s createsomething
abittrickiernow.We’regoingtotrytocreatearockface.Ithinkyoucan
handle it.
We’re going to start by making an outline of the texture. I think of
buildingthissimilartotheshapeofscalesonash.Ifwetakealookat
FigureE.a we start by just making a couple of curves like the rst image
on the le. When we add the third curve in the second image, we do some-
thing sneaky by “wrapping” it around to the le side. That will signicantly
hide the edge of the tile. Then we continue to add arches, making sure that
the lines at the top align with lines starting the curve at the bottom so that
it repeats continuously without interruption like in Figure E.b.
Tiled Backgrounds 155
(a)
FIGURE E9.56 (a) Creating a rock tile that repeats.
(b)
(c)
FIGURE E9.56 (b) Test the tiling. (c) Add highlights.
In FigureE.c, we’ve added a light grey to the top of the stones so to
give the impression of a third dimension to this pattern.
InFigureE.d, wenishthistileby addingtexture. We’veadded abitof
variationofgreywithinthedarkandthelightareasandaddedsomegreen
into the crevices to give the impression of moss. There’s also been some
brown added to imply some random splotches of dirt.
156 Pixel Art for Game Developers
(d)
FIGURE E9.56 (d) Add texture.
This rock face looks pretty good, butwe see in FigureE.a that the area
where it connects with grass is a fairly harsh line that should be integrated
together.
To resolve this, we start by stripping away the bottom. Notice that the
rocks in front go down a pixel further than the crevice or the rocks in back.
Make a copy of this tile with the empty bottom—we’ll use it in a moment to
create anothertile. Then in the duplicatetile, we ll inthearea atthe bottom
with a grass texture. I made it a bit dark at the edge, and gave the impression
of some grass blades overlapping the rock.
(a)
FIGURE E9.57 (a) Creating a blend tile.
Tiled Backgrounds 157
InFigureE.b,wecannoticeasimilarproblemwherethetopoftherock
wall connects with the grass: it appears too angular and does not look at all
appealing. This time we canuse the tile thathad been editedbefore to delete
thetophalfofthestonetile,leavingbehindthebottomhalf.Thenwecanadd
thattothegrasstilecreatingatopedgetothewallasshown inFigureE.c.
(b)
(c)
FIGURE E9.57 (b) A blend tile is needed for the top of the stone wall.
(c) Creating the other blend tile.
When the top edge is added to the wall in Figure E.d, the reap-
pearance of the tall rock with the light color lends itself to a patterned
158 Pixel Art for Game Developers
appearance. For that reason I’ve decided to make the top of the rock a bit
moreevenandaddedsomedarktothegrasstomaketherockstandout.
Figure E.e shows that we’re going to make an edge that works for both
sides of the rock, despite the fact that it creates a slightly impossible lighting
situation. Once again, I’m making this choice as an informed decision to
save tiles as well as to keep production (and instruction) simple. Basically
thistilehastoberepeatableonthetopandbottom,butconnectuptothe
rock face believably on one side.
(d)
(e)
FIGURE E9.57 (d) Minimizing the patterned look. (e) An edge tile ipped to
work on both sides.
In FigureE.f, we’ve made a couple more tiles that blend the top and
bottom corners of the rock with the grass. And in Figure E.g we’ve

===== FILE 41/57: chapter-41.html =====

Tiled Backgrounds 159
added three more tiles to create the edges of the upper portion of the raised
grass area.
(f)
(g)
FIGURE E9.57 (f) Adding a top and bottom to the sides. (g) Three more tiles
added for the top.
I’d like to add some castshadow to give this addition have morepresence.
We have actually alreadybuilt the main tile ofdarkened grass when creating
our wild owers (Figure E.b), so aer placing it in the scene, we only
needonemoretoblendthelightwiththeshadow.Aeraddinginthedarker
tonedgrass, we see in Figure E.hwherethings don’treally match up. The
edge at the back can be angular because it somewhat mirrors the shape of
thestructure,butwe’lluseatiletoblendtheareainthefront(FigureE.i).
160 Pixel Art for Game Developers
(h)
(i)
FIGURE E9.57 (h) Adding some cast shadow. (i) A blend tile for the cast shadow.
We’re almost done building this structure, but I really want to take
advantage of the grassy area on top of the rock. This seems like a nice place
to add gameplay elements, but need to create an element to connect the
bottom with top; I chose a stairway.
The main tile to build the stairway shown in Figure E.j uses a pattern
withtwodarkpixelstoimplytheverticalpartofastepfollowedbypixels
of light to imply the horizontal part of the step...But if you look carefully,
you’ll notice that it doesn’t come out evenly and that we had to use an extra
bandoflightpixelsatthebottom.Bummer.
In FigureE.k, we’ve added a top and bottom tile with a nonexistent
lighting source and can see the results. They look pretty good, but there is
a signicant improvement when we build in the light and dark sides as in
FigureE.l, which brings tile count up to ve for the steps.
Tiled Backgrounds 161
(j)
(k)
(l)
FIGURE E9.57 (j) A single tile ipped to create stairs. (k) Tiles for the top and
bottom of the stairs. (l) Optional tiles to imply light direction.
162 Pixel Art for Game Developers
Step 9: Water
So far so good, so let’s add some water. In FigureE., we have a repeating
tile on the le and two variation tiles on the right.
Waterusuallyhassomesandorearthontheedgebeforebecominggrassy,
so we will do exactly that. We are going to use the three-tile method as
we did with the sand to integrate it with the grass. In fact, we’ll use the
three tiles from the sand as guidelines for the edge of the water as shown
in FigureE.a.
In FiguresE.b through d we’re pushing the sand back to make room
for the water, which should come up to the middle of the tile. Aer creat-
ing a bit of shading to the tile and adding them to the scene, it looks like
FigureE..
FIGURE E9.58 Water and variation tiles.
(a)
FIGURE E9.59 (a) Using sand as guidelines for water edges.
Tiled Backgrounds 163
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE E9.59 (b)Backingthesanduponthesidetile.(c)Scootingthesand
back on the corner tile. (d) Filling in the blank area with water.

===== FILE 42/57: chapter-42.html =====

164 Pixel Art for Game Developers
(e)
FIGURE E9.59 (e) Testing them in action aer some shadow was added.
The edges still look a bit too angular for my taste, so in Figure E.f we
make the angle a bit less severe. Also notice that we’ve given the water a bit
of angled direction that echoes the shape of the land and made the water a
bitdarkerclosetothebeach.
(f)
FIGURE E9.59 (f)Makingthecornerssoer.
Tiled Backgrounds 165
Step 10: Put It All Together
Ideally you’ve been putting together some environment ideas all the time
whilewe’vebeencreatingtheindividualtiles,sothisisn’treallyastepso
much as some thoughts on how to use a tile set in interesting ways.
Overthecourseofthisexercisewe’vecreatedgrass,sand,andwateras
well as some variant tiles and it’s time to start using these to put together
scenes in yourgame.Figures E. through E.showsomedierent ways
that you can congure these tiles within a game setting.
One thing to note is that you can denitely use your tile set to create
gameplay. Looking at Figure E., you can see that the arrangement of
stones and owers within the grass create a clear path that the player can
easily follow.
FIGURE E9.60 Use owers or stones (or both!) to create paths.
Wecanalsousetheelementsoftheenvironmenttosuggestotherideas,
which can result in some very satisfying puzzle elements. You can use
the shape or conguration of the tiles to create a secondary image, as in
FigureE. where the lake has been put together to resemble a key.
166 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E9.61 Create unique scenes while reusing assets.
Of course, these elements can also be congured in more subtle ways
thatimplynuanceonlytothemoreobservantplayer.InFigureE.,there
is a primary path that leads upward toward a patch of sand at the top of the
structure. But there is also a more subtle path that veers to the le at the
bottom that is created from the second type of grass and some stray stones.
If you follow that path, it leads to an area where the owers make a pattern
on the le side of the stone structure. This would be a perfect place to build
asecretofsomesortintoyourgame,asthereissomedegreeofdirectionto
theplayer,butlikelytobemissedwithoutcloseobservation.
Tiled Backgrounds 167
FIGURE E9.62 Useaccenttilestocreatesubtleclues.
We could continue to grow our tile set, adding more sorts of terrain to
our sand, grass, and water—adding interior spaces, caves, etc.—but here
is where we will move on to something dierent. That being said, if you
plan to use what you’ve created for your game—I encourage you to con-
tinue expanding on this foundation to really add a high degree of variety
and variation.
By this juncture you should have a good handle on how to create these
kind of tiles and our joined eort is better spent moving in a dierent
direction and getting exposure to some other ideas.
EXERCISE 9.2: CREATING A SIMPLE SIDE-VIEW TILE SET
Inourlastexerciseweused16 × 16 tiles to create tiles to build a game from
a top-down perspective, but this time we are going to change things to use
some of the concepts we’ve talked about in dierent ways.
Forthisexercisewearegoingtouse32 × 32 tiles to build a side-scrolling
sort of environment.
To begin with, create a new le with a canvas size of 640 × 480 and an
-bit palette. This will give us a canvas to work with that is  tiles wide and
 tiles high.
With this sort of environment we are going to work from back to front.
That is to say that we will rst create the things that appear farthest away
andcreatetheclosestobjectslast.Thiswillmakeiteasytovisualizewhat
168 Pixel Art for Game Developers
we are doing in context and also help us to see the results of our eort in
real time.
First we are going to create a gradient like what is seen in Figure E.
and use it to build the sky. If you take a moment to look at this gradient, you
may(ormaynot)noticethatitlooksabitdierentthanthegradientswe’ve
built so far and I want to take a moment to explain why.
This gradient changes in morethan just value.Itdoes changevalue going
from darker on the le to lighter on the right, but it also shis its hue as well:
the colorsblend from purple on the le to blue in the middleand right. The
saturation also changes through the gradient—being more intense in the
center colors.
FIGURE E9.63 A  color sky gradient.
With that built, we can use those colors to create bands of color in the
sky like FigureE.. Notice that the bands of color get smaller and smaller
astheygettowardthetopofthescreen;thisgivesasubtleimpressionof
atmosphereandusuallyreadsbetterthanaperfectlyevenramp.Forthis
reason, I haven’t gotten to worry about where these bands fall in relation to
the grid (yet).

===== FILE 43/57: chapter-43.html =====

Tiled Backgrounds 169
FIGURE E9.64 Asimpleskybackground.
Onebehaviorofcolorrampsthatisparticularlyusefulforbuildingskyis
that the tighter the gradient, the more they will blend together, as demon-
strated in FigureE.. But for now we will leave these colors as they are
ontheright-handsidebecausewearegoingtouseditheringtoblendthese
guys together in just a moment.
FIGURE E9.65 Gradients with low contrast blur better.
170 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E9.66 Averticalslice
of the sky background.
Althoughwelledinthewholecanvas
with sky, we can actually think of this as one
vertical strip like the le side of Figure E.
repeated over and over again. Although the
wholebottomsideisreallythesametile,we
can actually focus all of our eort just on the
tiles on top half.
Sonowwewilluseadithertocreatethe
impression that the colors are blending from
one to the next. This is done exactly as the
rstsortofdithershowninSection..The
only major dierence is that this is being
done with 32 × 32 tiles instead of 16 × 16,so
it will take roughly four time longer to com-
pletethe process.Whenyou’redoneitshould
look something similar to the strip on the
right-hand side of FigureE..
Tiled Backgrounds 171
FIGURE E9.67 Using anti-aliasing for
additional blending.
FIGURE E9.68 Using some texture
for the primary sky tile.
I’ve decided to add a bitof pattern shown in Figure E. into the last tile
that covers thebottom halfof thepicture.This is not necessary andbasically
falls into the category of “eort spent on things no one will ever notice,” but
still I like the result.
Now we’ll create a new layer in GraphicsGale. Just go to the Layers win-
dow (FigureE.) and click on the little button shaped like a downward
arrow pointing toward a line on the le-hand side. Then select the “Add…”
option as shown in Figure E..
FIGURE E9.69 The layers window in GraphicsGale.
172 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E9.70 Add a new layer.
Now let’s add some mountains. We’re going to block them out as rectan-
gular tiles as seen in FigureE. but don’t worry, we’ll give them a proper
prole shape very shortly. We’vedone this using thesecond lightest sky color
that will make them appear to sit back because of atmospheric perspective
(that we talked about in Section .).
FIGURE E9.71 Roughing out some mountains.
Now we will add a proper prole shape to the mountains. (I told you we
would be doing this shortly!) I’ve drawn three tiles shown in Figure E.
that we’ll use to make our blue squares look more like a mountain range.
Tiled Backgrounds 173
You can see the dramatic change in Figure E. and see how it looks in our
scene in FigureE..
FIGURE E9.72 Edges for the mountains.
FIGURE E9.73 Adding the edges to the
mountains.
FIGURE E9.74 Mountains
in the distance.
Now you have a small decision to make in your future: do you want that
mountainrangetoscroll,ordoyouwantittobestaticinthebackground.
It is nice to have your background in multiple layers so that they can scroll
at dierent speeds (called parallax) that gives a lovely illusion of depth. In
many cases your programmer may impose a hard limit on the amount of
parallax layers, and since the mountains sit so far back it is a good candidate
for merging into the sky layer. It’s your decision (or perhaps it may be your
programmer’s choice).

===== FILE 44/57: chapter-44.html =====

174 Pixel Art for Game Developers
Now to get more mileage out of our mountains we’re going to reuse
those tiles by simply duplicating them and making them two shades darker
(FigureE.).
FIGURE E9.75 Reusing the tiles for a closer mountain range.
Butbecausethesemountainsaregoingtobeabitclosertotheviewer,
we’re going to give them a little bit of detail. We made these tiles two shades
darker so we can use the in-between color to add some highlight to the
peaks of the mountain, as shown in FigureE.. Then we can add these
mountains onto a new layer and we can see how the added texture subtly
improves the image in FigureE..
FIGURE E9.76 Adding highlights.
Tiled Backgrounds 175
FIGURE E9.77 Beforeandaeraddingthehighlights.
At this point the tops of the newer mountains have a little bit of depth,
but that also makes the lower part that is entirely one color read as being
very at. Once again we are going to reuse our tiles to add some detail with
minimal eort.
InFigureE.,wearetakingaduplicateofthetilesthatcreatethepro-
le of the mountains and add them right on top of the blue creating the
nonproleparts,creatingtexturethatcanbeusedinthebodyofthe
mountain shown in the right side of the picture. At the end of this pro-
cess we should have something fairly spiy, like the background shown in
FigureE..
176 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E9.78 Adding additional highlight textures.
FIGURE E9.79 Light colors used for atmospheric perspective.
I’msurethatyou’venoticedthatwe’veonlyusedlightcolorssofarto
imply atmospheric perspective in our scene. That’s one of the things I like
about you—you’re observant.
We are actually going to grow this tile set for two types of environments:
an outdoor scene as well as a cityscape. This will give our environment a
greatdealofversatilityintermsofitsuse.Forthemostparttheywillbe
Tiled Backgrounds 177
used separately but there may also be cases where we can “mix and match”
them together, so that occasionally our tiles will actually do double duty.
We’regoingtostartwiththeoutdoorscene,tocontinuethethemeof
organic matter, starting with some foliage o in the distance and grass
bridging the distance between the background and foreground.
First I want to build some trees in the distance, but we’re going to need
a few more colors to make that happen. Figure E. shows the three col-
ors that I’ve added to the palette. The new colors are a light blue–green, so
that they won’t conict with the higher intensity and contrast colors we will
be using for the foreground later. This will help these background trees to
appear to sit back and create the horizon. For this tile, I’ve actually only used
the two lighter colors.
FIGURE E9.80 Adding  colors to create some distant bushes.
OnethingI’dliketopointoutisthatthenaltileshownontheright
side of Figure E. is almost identical to the tile adjacent to it. The only
dierence is that I’ve shied its position horizontally to the le on the tile
so that the tree on the edge isn’t split in half between the two tiles. This will
make it easier to create a variation tile.
178 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E9.81 One tile makes a big change in the scene.
FigureE. shows how we started by a simply setting a horizon and
then added detail within that one tile from FigureE.. Notice also that
the darker green goes all the way to the bottom of the screen; this will
helptheparallaxtobeabitsmoother.
FIGURE E9.82 Adding a variation tile.
In FigureE., we’ve added a variation tile to the horizon, allowing the
tree line to appear a bit more varied.

===== FILE 45/57: chapter-45.html =====

Tiled Backgrounds 179
Now we’ll add another layer to our scene and add a couple more trees,
showninFigureE..I’vestartedwitharathersloppyoutlineandlled
it in with the most neutral tone. Then I blocked out the areas of dark and
added in some areas of light and cleaned up the lines in the image.
FIGURE E9.83 From sloppy to clean.
In the nal images on the right, I’ve added the color of the ground to
adequately cover the background tiles when the background is in parallax.
Thatistosaythatonceingame,thislayermaynotbestaticandwillmove
in relation to the other layers. A simple grass is needed to tile at the bottom
(whichcouldbeasinglecolor)tomakesurethatthelayersscrollwithout
hovering in the air. Figure E. shows the layer in isolation and in context
to show how the orientation of the background can change.
FIGURE E9.84 Fill in the bottom to avoid parallax issues.
180 Pixel Art for Game Developers
The less-than-desirable outcome of not including the grass at the bottom
isshowninFigureE..Ugh.
FIGURE E9.85 An example of a parallax issues.
At this juncture I want to create some tiles on our interactive layer—
whichwillconstituteoftheobjectsthatthecharactercanhavecontactwith.
In the environment this could consist of solid ground, platforms, walls, or
anything else that the character would collide with. In homage to the -bit
gaming trope of the platformer, let’s begin with a platform.
Once again, we’ll want to add some new colors to our palette. The new
colors should be higher in saturation (intensity)to make the interactivetiles
stand out clearly from the background. The new colors should also have a
higher contrast of value, so you may need more colors in your ramp to pull
it o nicely. FigureE. displays my current palette, with the new colors
on the bottom. I’ve used another gradient of green and some browns that
I’ll need to build my platforms.
FIGURE E9.86 Saturated colors added for the interactive layer.
Tiled Backgrounds 181
FigureE.demonstratesthestepsItaketobuildaplatform.Animpor-
tant factor in the building process is that in most games the collision
detectionis builtasa rectangularboundingbox.Thatisto saythatthe places
that are solid—that the character collides with—are usually rectangular. As
a general rule I build my tiles right out to the edge of the tile (give one or
two pixels) so that the behaviors the player will experience will make sense
visually.
To begin with, I simply block out the areas where the grass and dirt are
going to be with solid colors. Then I add the dark to the side of the grass,
deningthewalkingareaontop,followedbysomecastshadowonthedirt
area.
All while I’m making changes, I keep duplicating the le tile and ipping
it to create the tile on the right so that the platform is made by one tile mir-
rored to create the other side. Reusing the tile has more to do with the ease
of using tiles to create a scene later in the process than aesthetic preference,
andwhetheryoufollowthispracticeisgenuinelyuptoyou.
Next (on the top right) I add some midtone to the grass, followed by a bit
ofoutlineonboththegrassanddirt.Lastly,Iaddsometexturedetailtothe
grass andthe earth resulting ina nice littleplatform. In truth,I tendto build
these with the background visible on lower layers as shown in FigureE..
That way I can make adjustment as needed so that the colors and size work
nicely within the context that they will be used.
FIGURE E9.87 Creating a platform tile (mirrored).
182 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E9.88 I frequently build over a background layer.
That’s apretty niceplatform,especiallyconsideringthatitconsistsofonly
one tile. Now we’ll build a second tile that will allow this platform to be
extended. FigureE. shows that I’ve begun by duplicating the tile on the
right and placing it in the center. Then I’ve taken a vertical strip from one
part of the tile (shown in red) and duplicated it to cover up the edge. Violà!
We now have an extendable platform built lickety-split.
FIGURE E9.89 Reusing part of the existing tile to create a middle tile.
Tiled Backgrounds 183
In FigureE., we see the result of our eort and it works within the
context quite well. One thing that there is something that disturbs be a
bit though—our platforms appear to be simply hanging in midair. Many
platform games do ne just like this—certainly many of the most famous
platform games of all time use this oating platform method and we can
probably get away with it too.
FIGURE E9.90 Two tiles can create dierent sized platforms.
Butbecauseitbugsme,we’regoingtolookintoonewayofresolving
this visual incongruence. You’ll need to add another layer to the scene in
between the platforms and the rest of the background. We’ll also add a cou-
plemorecolorsthatareablendbetweenthebrownoftheplatformandthe
blue–green of the grass, like the last three on the right-hand side of Figure
E.. I’ve added three colors, but we may only need the two lighter colors.
FIGURE E9.91 Three more colors added.
This is an instance where we’re going to deviate from the traditional
methodofbuildingtiles,althoughyoucoulddo thistile by tileifyouchoose.

===== FILE 46/57: chapter-46.html =====

184 Pixel Art for Game Developers
Basically the game plan is to draw in an organic stone/clay structure to
support the platforms so that they don’t look like they’re hanging in midair.
I don’t believe there is much time to be saved by building this part tile by
tile,soI’mgoingtoreverttoafreehandtechnique.
First I’m going to simply rough in the general shape I want to support the
platforms,asshowninFigureE..
FIGURE E9.92 Roughing out a context for the platforms.
Although this was started freehand, I’ve still kept the general shapes
within as few tiles as possible. I began with the vertical part on the le, and
then decided to duplicate that shape and reuse it a couple times (ipped on
the x-axis in one instance).
NextIwantthoseplatformstocastabitofshadow,soI’mgoingtomask
the color and draw the shadow in only on that shade of brown. Masking is
super useful for working on a single color at a time without disturbing any
of the others. Simply click on the mask button and then click on the color
Tiled Backgrounds 185
you want to mask around. That’s it—Now we can start drawing in shadow
where you want it to go, as shown in FigureE..
FIGURE E9.93 Adding shadow.
To blend the shadow, I’m going to use a patterned dither. This will serve
thedualpurposesofmakingtheedgeofthecastshadowsoer,whilesimul-
taneously giving the surface more texture. Starting with the le, the altered
image looks like Figure E..
In Figure E., we duplicate the image to reuse it a couple of times and
continue this look into the rest of the image. I’ve also tried to reuse tiles
whenever it is feasible.
Aer that I took the shapes used to make the mountains in the back-
ground to build some more tiles that are more reusable, as shown in Figure
E.. I guess I just couldn’t help building them into tiles. Figure E.
shows how we integrate everything into the background image.
186 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E9.94 Using dithering
to add detail.
FIGURE E9.95 Reuse the shape when
possible.
FIGURE E9.96 Building texture tiles from existing tiles.
Tiled Backgrounds 187
Ireallylikethissortofimage—wherethereisacommonbackground
element to unify the items that would otherwise be oating in air. Unfor-
tunately there are some serious drawbacks to arranging your level this way.
Beyond the more limited amount of reuse available, this sort of thing can
easily set you up for trouble down the road.
Developing games—and designing levels in particular—is an iterative
process and this technique doesn’t lend itself to lots of adjustment. Con-
sider what happens when you decide your level needs to be more vertical
and need to place everything in a completely dierent spot... All of your
work would be lost (or at least in need of major readjustment).
This sort of thing really works best when your level is already complete
and play-tested. It looks nice, but once again, you’ve been warned about a
major potential pitfall.
FIGURE E9.97 Integrating the new tiles.
But whether you choose to put in this sort of environment uniting struc-
ture like Figure E. or not, it’s usually nice to have a bit of foliage to break
up the area. In FigureE., I’ve added a patch of grass and some bushes,
using the same colors as the rocky structure.
188 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E9.98 Addingfoliagetobreakupthearea.
Onething that Iwouldliketodraw your attention towhilewe’vegot these
as an example is the prole of the layer. When an environment has multiple
scrolling layers, I’ve found that creating a unique silhouette for the shape of
the objects makes the layer very aesthetically appealing.
If we take a look at the shape of the layers that would be scrolling in sil-
houette, we can see there is a dramatic dierence depending on the details
wegive.IfwetakealookatFiguresE.andE.weseethatthe
silhouettedlayer isratherdull andlifeless.Thissortofshape islikea cubical-
bound oce worker that has become resigned to the position and has lost
the drive to go out and nd another angle on life.
Nowlet’scomparethatwithFiguresE.andE..Clearlythesecond
images have a lot more going on and have more appeal in silhouette form.
These are more like former oce workers that have le their job to follow
their passion of writing books about how to create video game graphics.
The rather curious thing is that in addition to looking nice, the more
complicated silhouette the layer creates—the more it reads as being believ-
able to the viewer.

===== FILE 47/57: chapter-47.html =====

Tiled Backgrounds 189
FIGURE E9.99 The scene without
detail tiles.
FIGURE E9.100 Silhouette of scene
without detail tiles.
FIGURE E9.101 The scene with detail
tiles.
FIGURE E9.102 Silhouette of scene
with detail tiles.
190 Pixel Art for Game Developers
Let’salsotakeaquickmomenttoconsiderwhatwouldhappenifweused
more muted colors in the foreground and higher intensity for the colors in
the background. We would risk completely losing the sense of depth as seen
in Figure E.. The viewer’s eye want to go to the back area of the picture
and does not want to focus on the background. Woof.
FIGURE E9.103 Don’t ght atmospheric perspective.
If you’ve been following along, you should have the tiles to build a nice
organic background. But what if you want to create something more urban?
Let’s expand our tile set to include some buildings, perhaps for a dier-
entlevel.Whenwe’redone,weshouldbeabletocreatesomethinglike
FigureE. relatively easily.
Tiled Backgrounds 191
FIGURE E9.104 A simple urban environment.
FIGURE E9.105 Adding colors to the palette.
But rst things rst—we’re going to need more colors. Figure E.
showsthatwe’veaddedagraygradienttothetoprowofcolorsthatwill
be used for buildings in the distance. We’ve also added a row of colors on
thebottomthatwillgiveuscolorswecanuseforthecloserbuildings.
That being said, we (perhaps ironically) will be reusing two of our col-
ors used in the sky to create the most distant buildings as displayed in
192 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FigureE..Thesewillbeinthefarbackgroundoftheimage,soweare
using the palette tohelp these buildings appear tobe farther fromthe viewer
in the picture.
FIGURE E9.106 Using sky colors for buildings in the distance.
As you can see from the example, the buildings in the background can
be almost comically simple. In this case, each tile is giving the impression of
two buildings next to each other. This is only suggested by the arrangement
of windows rather than by explicitly dening a boundary. This will help the
buildingsappeartoblurintothebackground,helpingtheforegroundto
stand out clearly.
Le as it is (FigureE.), this would be too rough even for the back-
ground. So we’ll make a handful of tiles (FigureE.) that dene the
distant city’s skyline. I’ve decided to use a tile that only has a few pixels to
create the impression of some items on the roof, improving the silhouette
for the layer.
Tiled Backgrounds 193
FIGURE E9.107 Roughing out a far background.
FIGURE E9.108 Tiles to create a better silhouette.
Once these new tiles are added into the scene like in FigureE., the
tiles read much more like buildings. As we add more buildings in the fore-
ground with more contrast and detail, the viewer’s eye will “read” these as
buildingsasmuchfromthecontextasfromtheactualdrawing.

===== FILE 48/57: chapter-48.html =====

194 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E9.109 Far background with the additional tiles.
Now we’ll repeat the process with larger buildings and slightly darker
colors to create some new tiles seen in Figure E.. In this case I’ve taken
the darkest color from the sky and used it as the base color for the buildings
and a gray as the window color. When added to a new layer in the scene as
in FigureE., the image starts to build the appearance of depth.
FIGURE E9.110 Creating closer buildings.
Tiled Backgrounds 195
FIGURE E9.111 Roughing out the closer background.
The next layer we’ll build another building, still larger and darker than
the previous layers—shown in FigureE.. I’ve actually made the impres-
sion of things going on in the window although it is unlikely to be noticed
by any players.
You may notice that I’ve used a dull green as the window shadow. It
givesthecolorabitofavorandseemstoworknicely.I’llalsopointout
a grievance that I have in my own work: the top le tile is extremely waste-
ful. The whole tile is used for only a handful of pixels and this is denitely
suboptimal.I’vemade thisconcessionforthesakeofcreatingaslightlymore
interesting prole shape but this is denitely a tradeo situation.
196 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E9.112 Buildingthethirdandclosestbackground.
Finally, we can start into our main layer and we’ll do it by beginning
with the most common tile—a brick that tiles seamlessly. The rst step in
FigureE.shows tostartbycreatingthe general brick pattern. Thebricks
in thepattern all have a uniform height—three pixels ofred followed by one
pixel of the dark color for the mortar.
Thenextstepshowstoaddalightercolortothetopandlesidetogive
the impression of depth to the pattern. The last step shows that I’ve added
some variation to the mortar that gives the brick texture a more weathered
appearance and adds some zing to an otherwise static pattern.
Tiled Backgrounds 197
FIGURE E9.113 Making a repeating brick tile.
In FigureE., we go through the steps of constructing a window that
will go with the brick texture starting with only the barest impression of a
frame and windowsill. Next we add some detail and the shadow cast from
being slightly recessed from the frame. In this case we create the window
shininess from diagonal lines of varying thickness. There are other ways to
create the window shine aesthetic, but this method is fairly independent of
the rest of the environment so we avoid contextual inconsistencies.
We then add the window to the brick tiles and add some cast shadow to
integrate the window into the context.
Looking at FigureE., we can see that the foreground is actually start-
ing to shape up. Obviously this is not enough to look complete, but looks
startlingly good considering that we’ve only created three tiles.
To complete the tiles for this building, we need to create some form of
roof and something dening the edge for the building.
198 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E9.114 Creating a window.
FIGURE E9.115 Our cityscape so far.
In FigureE., we createa roof ledge using one tile forthe main section
and an extra tile to create the le (and right) edge. We also create another
brick tile to give the impression of cast shadow. In Figure E., we build
a pattern to be used on the edge of the building and add it to the brick.

===== FILE 49/57: chapter-49.html =====

Tiled Backgrounds 199
Iwasn’tabletomakethattilelookgoodwhenipped,soIbuiltseparatetile
foreachsideofthebuilding.
FIGURE E9.116 Adding a roof to the brick.
FIGURE E9.117 Adding accent tiles to the brick.
200 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E9.118 The accented edges need cast shadow.
Whentheledgeandsidepatternareaddedtothescene,thingsstart
to come together. But if you look closely at Figure E. you can notice
that ledge doesn’t cast shadow onto the wall pattern. This is a problem.
FigureE. goes through the steps of building a version of each wall
patterntilewithcastshadowtocompletethebuildings.
FIGURE E9.119 Creating cast shadow accent tiles.
All said and done, we’ve completed these building using only the  tiles
shown in FigureE.. The pattern on the side of the building was some-
what expensive, as we had to use four tiles but this is ultimately a fairly
economical layer.
Now let’s give these buildings a bit more vitality by creating some varia-
tion tiles. In Figure E., I’ve created an alternative side pattern, some roof
Tiled Backgrounds 201
ledge variations, a moldy version of brick, and a window with a creepy guy
looking out.
FIGURE E9.120 The tiles used in the main layer.
FIGURE E9.121 Adding variation tiles.
202 Pixel Art for Game Developers
Once this is added to a dynamic situation (like a game) these variations
aren’treallynoticedby theplayerataconscious levelbutdoaect theoverall
“feel.”Cumulativelythesecanmakethedierencebetweenalevelthatfeels
unique and interesting over one that feels dull and repetitive.
The creepy guy window variation brings us to an interesting point that
I’d like to discuss. Ultimately there is almost no chance that anyone would
perceive this level of ne detail. That makes this an incredible opportunity
to slip an inside joke into your game. Perhaps it would amuse you to create
a caricature of a friend or throw in a reference to an imaginary rock group.
Just keep in mind that with mild power comes mild responsibility.Inthis
litigious society I encourage you to respect copyright and avoid anything
that would be totally oensive or inappropriate.
WhenweaddthesenewtilestooursceneinFigure E.,thingsactually
start to look fairly polished. If those layers parallax in the game, the eect
will be even more dramatic and powerful.
FIGURE E9.122 The nished environment.
I imagine this environment as one where superheroes would be moving
along the roof ledge, jumping from building to building. If I were to con-
tinue to build the tile set, I’d add things that protrude from the building
Tiled Backgrounds 203
that could act as additional platforms in the game. Air conditioning units
couldworkasadditionalplaysurfaces,aswellasscaoldingorreescapes.
Iwouldtrytoworktheplatformsintothetilesasbelievableentitieswithin
the environment as much as possible.
We’ve spent so much time on constructing these buildings, let’s not for-
getabouttheorganictileswebuiltearlier.Obviouslywecanbuildthetwo
dierent types of environments separately, but we can also mix and match
the tiles—but we have to be careful because things don’t always match up
smoothly.
FigureE. shows one way in which we could screw up the scene by
using the tiles incoherently. In truth, we could almost get away with this
if the buildings were shown at ground level rather than being in the air.
FigureE. works a bit more reasonably and I’ll bet that you could come
up with something better still.
FIGURE E9.123 Layer priority gone awry.

===== FILE 50/57: chapter-50.html =====

204 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E9.124 Mixing up tiled environments.
All in all we’ve built this environment from the  tiles shown in
FigureE..
FIGURE E9.125 tilescreatethewholetilesetforthisenvironment.
Let’s wrap up this chapter by talking about managing your tiles. In most
cases a game’s level editor will organize the tiles something like what is
shown in FigureE.—eliminating any unused tiles. This may be ecient
Tiled Backgrounds 205
for the computer but it isn’t really the easiest to use for those of you that
happen to be human.
Thatlookslikeabitofamess,butlet’stakealookatthesetilesarrangedin
couple other ways. FigureE. shows the same set organized from closest
totheviewer onthele tofarthestontheright.Thiscanbeuseful,especially
for ne tuning your palette (which I won’t do today on account of extreme
laziness).
Butoverall,I ndit best toworkwith somethinglikeFigure E.if pos-
sible.Bykeepingeachtiletypetogether andpartiallyconstructed itbecomes
very easy to nd whatever you are looking for to build with. The tiles that
have only a few pixels describing a bit of detail over a distant building can
easily become totally obscure without context. This way everything stays
clear in the mind’s eye.
FIGURE E9.126 Tiles organized by layer priority.
206 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE E9.127 Tiles organized by type.
All in all we’ve built this environment from only  tiles. Put together
this would be only one 320 × 256 imagethatuseslessthancolors.But
broken into pieces it can be used to create countless environments within
your game. I don’t believe that I can articulate just how ecient that is in
terms of computer space management. Although I think I just did. Weird.

===== FILE 51/57: chapter-51.html =====

CHAPTER 10
You’re Doing It Wrong
Things to Avoid
A
     about good waystodo things,
I thought it tting to write a chapter on what not to do. There are cer-
tainissues that seem topopupand reartheir ugly headsona fairlycommon
basis so it seems tting to address them now—before your milestone is due.
10.1 BANDING AND “SUPER PIXELS”
Banding is a common mistake among novice Pixel Artists—even folks with
some great art talent. The good news is that once you understand what to
look for, it is oen fairly easy to avoid (or at least substantially mitigate).
I say mitigate rather than eliminate because there may be instances where it
cannot be entirely abolished. As you work in smaller resolutions it becomes
more and more dicult to completely avoid the banding eect.
Banding is an eect that occurs when sets of color or shape “end” in
the same place, causing an imaginary line that bands the unrelated items
together. One of the most common places that this occurs is when the
shading on an object line up with the outline of the same item.
The most obvious example of banding is creating what is sometimes
called a “super pixel”. This is where multiple lines of shading all line up
exactly when creating a diagonal line. The opportunity to imply a smoother
line is lost, in eect giving no higher delity than a large pixel. Figure.
shows a super pixel on the le with an example of how to resolve it on
the right.
207
208 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE 10.1 The dreaded “super pixel.”
Perhaps the most heinous crime you can commit as a Pixel Artist is to
create the dreaded super pixel. There is only one instance that this may be
forgivable: if there is only one small segment that is being repeated in code
to create a wire or vine that moves. Even this may be unforgivable.
Of course, some banding is less obvious to casual observation. Take the
example in Figure. and we can see how the lazy gradients on the le can
create some substantial banding. The corrected version on the right may
still have some issues to resolve, but the banding has been dealt with.
FIGURE 10.2 Avoid banding when possible.
In Figure., the issue is even more subtle, but certainly still a situation
that can be improved upon. Take a moment and look at the green blob on
thele—canyoundsomebanding?Itdoesn’tleapoutquiteasmuchasthe
previous examples, so you may need to look closely.
You’re Doing It Wrong 209
FIGURE 10.3 Sometimes banding can be subtle.
Figure. explicitly shows the specic areas where the pixels line up by
eachoftheeyes.Theissueissubtlebutonceyoubecomeattunedtoit,it
becomes dicult not toseeandabitofabane.Nowyoucanlookback
at Figure . to see how I’ve resolved the oending spots without making
changes that are terribly noticeable.
FIGURE 10.4 Subtle banding revealed.
10.2 TOO MUCH ANTI-ALIAS
If some anti-alias is good then more is better, right? Wrong. For the love all
things good in the world, take it easy on the anti-aliasing! A little bit goes
a long way. Too much and the picture will look blurry, making it look an
awful lot like it was a larger picture reduced in size, losing image quality
indiscriminately (Figure.).
210 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE 10.5 Avoid using too much anti-alias.
10.3 POOR LINE QUALITY
We talked about line quality earlier in the book but it has so much poten-
tialformayhemthatitmustbeiterated.Becausealineisactuallybuiltofa
bunch of squares it is super important to have it appear intentional.
Unfortunately, you cannot really avoid this issue by excluding lines
becausethesameaspectcomesupfortheshapeoftheobjectyouarecreat-
ing (albeit less pronounced). I guess it should be called “poor shape quality”
instead; whatever it is, try to avoid it.
FIGURE 10.6 Even shapes have edge quality.
Figure . shows how the awkward shapes created by the prole of
the head and the contour of the shadows can be resolved by some slight
adjustments.
You’re Doing It Wrong 211
10.4 WEAK PALETTE CHOICES
Quality palette choice is one of the key aspects to creating successful Pixel
Art. Palette errors usually fall into the following categories:
• Toomuchortoolittlecontrast(Figure.)
FIGURE 10.7 Low contrast on the le, high contrast on the right.
• Toomuchortoolittlesaturation(Figure.)
FIGURE 10.8 High saturation on the le, low saturation or “muted” colors on
the right.

===== FILE 52/57: chapter-52.html =====

212 Pixel Art for Game Developers
• Too many colors (Figure.)
FIGURE 10.9 A potentially problematic palette.
10.5 TOO MUCH COMPLEXITY
ThisoneismypersonalweaknessandIfallintothismakingthismistake
more oen than I care to admit. Early on in a project I’ll decide to create a
spritethatlooksreallyniceandnotgivemuch thoughtaboutthe scopeofthe
project;over timeI’ll notice all theplaces where the quality level will needto
be raised to match that sprite. Before I know it, things have snowballed out
of control. When I add more sprites into the project, I begin to notice the
extensive palette choice I made; and when it’s time to animate I inevitably
regret that the rst sprite was done elegantly. Why couldn’t I have started
withcrap!?Andreallyonceastandardofqualityhasbeenset,itshouldbe
maintained throughout the entire process for the sake of consistency—and
that can cause some major growing pains.
Besides, this is Pixel Art for goodness sake—it’s supposed to be simple!
Oen times, players will actually prefer a simply aesthetic.
Whenyoudecide onyournalaesthetic,consider your project scope and
remember the acronym KISS: keep it simple, stupid.
You’re Doing It Wrong 213
10.6 FLASH SHADING
Sometimes people will shade in their images by making the edges of the
object the darkest point and this can make the form appear at. Oen this
is called pillow shading although I do not know why. But I call this ash
shading because I think that this inclination comes from using ash pho-
tography for source images—as it somewhat emulates a light source similar
to a photo taken with a ash like Figure ..
This particular technique doesn’t bother me nearly as much as it does
some of my colleagues, many of which become violently ill to the point of
projectile vomiting when they see “pillow shading.”
Overall this technique gives a fairly mediocre result and seems particu-
larly weak when compared to amore realistic light source like in Figure ..
FIGURE 10.10 Boring “ash” shading.
FIGURE 10.11 Decent shading from an overhead light source.
214 Pixel Art for Game Developers
10.7 NO TEXTURE
This is not an issue that is unique to Pixel Art, I see this particular oversight
in the work of art students everywhere. When people start to learn how to
uselightandshadowtocreateform,thereseemstobeanalmostuniversal
amnesia that objects have texture.
An object will react to light dierently depending on a number of dier-
ent surface attributes that include transparency or translucence, reectivity,
and coarseness. Not to mention that the object may be more than one color,
which would likely aect the value.
FIGURE 10.12 Surfaces have texture.
Take a look at the two mugs from Figure.. The version on the le
denitely implies form and gives a sense of depth but there is almost no
texture implied in the drawing.
The wine glass on the le of Figure. suers from the same aiction.
You can see the top line of the liquid, so the viewer can tell that the glass
has some translucency, but no other surface information is given about the
glass. The wine glass on the right in contrast gives the viewer tons of infor-
mation about the qualities of the material. There are many places where the
purple color of the background is clearly visible through the glass, show-
ing it’s transparency. There are also places where there is implied reection
as well as specular highlights. Even the shadow that it casts gives informa-
tion about the nature of the surface of the glass, showing that the glass has
transparency as well as light that gets refracted.
You’re Doing It Wrong 215
FIGURE 10.13 Boring vs. interesting texture.
It may not be feasible to go into this level of detail when you create your
Pixel Art, and that is okay. But it is important to know that these properties
exist and can be conveyed within your imagery.

===== FILE 53/57: chapter-53.html =====

CHAPTER 11
Interviews with Game
Developers
I
    about the many virtuous and wonderful
aspects of using Pixel Art but let’s hear from some folks who are proac-
tively using these techniques in the eld. I’ve spoken with a couple of
contemporary independent game developers about their choice to use Pixel
Art in their projects
Although brief, their responses were not edited down and reect the
advantages and drawbacks candidly.
11.1 AN INTERVIEW WITH JAMES PETRUZZI
OF DISCORD GAMES
FIGURE 11.1 Screenshot from Chasm.
217
218 Pixel Art for Game Developers
I had the good fortune to speak with James Petruzzi of Discord games
about their game Chasm.
Chasm is a beautiful looking D platform style game featuring dynam-
ically generated dungeons. The game was funded through Kickstarter in
May  with  backers (myself being one of them). And their game
is particularly relevant to us because Chasm was built with hand-placed,
jaw-dropping, awe-inspiring Pixel Art (Figures . through .).
At the time of the writing of this book the game is still unreleased, so it is
a real privilege to get this interview at this juncture in their busy schedule.
. Why did you and your team choose to use Pixel Art for Chasm?
I chose it for two reasons: the rst is that it has a certain nos-
talgic quality that reminds me of the games I grew up with, and
I really wanted to make something that looked like it could have
existed on Super Nintendo when I was a kid. The second is that,
like cartoons, it contains less detailed information about the world
that allows the viewer to ll in the gaps with their imagination. I’ve
found that the more detailed things are, the harder they are to sell as a
simulation.
FIGURE 11.2 Screenshot from Chasm.
Interviews with Game Developers 219
. What advantages or disadvantage have there been using Pixel Art in
your game?
A common misconception is that Pixel Art is less work than other
styles,soithasn’treallysavedusanytimeover,say,plainolddigitalart.
It canalso be apain in ourcase since ournativeresolution is 384×216.
Sometimes you want things to scroll smoother at smaller increments
than is possible. When it comes down to it a pixel is either “here” or
“there,” not some place in between like with high-resolution displays.
Thingslike player customization also factorin heavily. InD, it’s much
easier to have more variations, like layering equipment and such. This
becomes very infeasible for uid animated sprite characters since you
need to hand make a variation for every possible frame.
FIGURE 11.3 Screenshot from Chasm.
. How have players responded to your game’s aesthetic?
Players have responded to the art style better than we could have
ever hoped. We took a big risk by not mixing resolutions or using gra-
dients, ambient lighting, or other modern conveniences. We wanted
something that looked as authentic as possible to a SNES or Genesis
era title, and it seems to have paid o for us. As soon as someone sees
thegametheyprettymuchimmediately“getit”ifit’ssomethingthey’re
interested in. It’s certainly made selling the game much easier for us,
as it basically tells the audience what it is just by the visual style.
220 Pixel Art for Game Developers
FIGURE 11.4 Screenshot from Chasm.
Bonus point question: Do the artists on your team have any tips or
techniques they’d like to share with us?
I will check with the artists and see if they have any tips.
Thanks for your time James!
Note: Unfortunately, their team has been very busy and hasn’t been able
to follow up with the tips that we all desire—but having this brief interview
was a fantastic experience.
11.2 AN INTERVIEW WITH JOCHUM SKOGLUND OF
CRACKSHELL
I had the good fortune to speak with Jochum Skoglund of Crackshell about
their game Hammerwatch.
Hammerwatch is a top-down hack and slash game with tons of Pixel
Art—style eye candy (Figures . through .), featuring co-op gameplay
and multiple character classes and diculty levels. The game is currently
available at www.hammerwatch.com or through Steam. I’ve played through
it (albeit on the easiest diculty level) and loved it—a very fun time by my
assessment.
Interviews with Game Developers 221
FIGURE 11.5 Screenshot from Hammerwatch.
. Why did you choose to use Pixel Art for Hammerwatch?
[It’s] easier and faster than D.
. What advantages or disadvantages have there been using Pixel Art in
your game?
D isn’t really eective when it comes to characters and such, when
you need a great variety in equipments and so. Also, you need to draw
each angle, you can’t just rotate Pixel Art.
FIGURE 11.6 Screenshot from Hammerwatch.

===== FILE 54/57: chapter-54.html =====

222 Pixel Art for Game Developers
. How have players responded to your game’s aesthetic?
We’ve had a great response on our graphics.
Bonus point question: Do the Artists on your team have any tips or
techniques they’d like to share with us?
I’m the artist and this was my rst Pixel Art ever, but I think if you just
sit down and apply yourself, you’ll get it aer a while. Most issues artist have
withPixelArtseemstobeanglesoflight,butit’snotreallythathard,you
justneedtothinkinD,butdrawinD.
Thanks for the guidance Jochum!
FIGURE 11.7 Screenshot from Hammerwatch.
Interviews with Game Developers 223
11.3 AN INTERVIEW WITH DAVE PRESTON OF HEART
MACHINE
FIGURE 11.8 Screenshot from Hyper Light Drier.
I had the pleasure to speak with Alex Preston of Heart Machine about
their game Hyper Light Drier.
Hyper Light Drier is a gorgeous D Action RPG heavily inuenced by
early -bit and -bit games. The game was funded through Kickstarter in
September of  with , backers and raised signicantly more cash
than they hoped for. Hyper Light Drier is being built using breathtaking
Pixel Art (Figures . through .) and we have this unique opportunity
to nd out more about their process.
FIGURE 11.9 Screenshot from Hyper Light Drier.
224 Pixel Art for Game Developers
. Why did you and your team choose Pixel Art for the game?
I love the aesthetic and I grew up with blocky games...but it was
originally a choice of eciency. I had originally imagined creating
the Art for the game in a high resolution, fully illustrative style but
itbecameclearthatitwouldjusttaketoolong.Therewerethingsthat
Iwantedtodointhegamethatwouldhavebeenimpossibleforasin-
gleperson,atleastwiththevarietythatIneeded.SoPixelArtjustt
the bill for eciency and it turned out to be more than that.
. What advantages and disadvantages have there been using Pixel Art?
Disadvantages: It was sometimes hard to express certain specic
things like emotions because we have such a limited canvas size. It
is also dicult to make rounded objects if we don’t want them to look
crumby.
Advantages: The constraints allowed me to do a lot and focus on
things that I wouldn’t have been able to otherwise. I think it was the
rigidstructurehaskeptmeinline.Itallowedmetodocreativethings
I wouldn’t have thought of otherwise.
. I noticed it doesn’t seem like you use any outlines, which is kind of
uncommon. Can you tell me about your decision to do that?
Thereareacoupleofexamplesofpixelstylegamesthatwere
being made without outlines before Hyper Light Drier—and now
everybody and their mother is doing it <chuckle>.SuperTimeForce
was a good example. Also the guys from Capy—they have some
fantastic artists and they were dabbling in that style before.
Swords and Sorcery also had some no-outline stu going on, and
I think they really helped push it into popularity. Fez also did that
to a degree. I was mostly inspired by that set of games that were
mainstream-ish and able to really showcase what could be done with-
outathickblackoutline.AlthoughmyArt—myillustrativestyle—isn’t
really line work anyway.
Interviews with Game Developers 225
FIGURE 11.10 Screenshot from Hyper Light Drier.
. How have players responded to the aesthetic?
Very positively. I am a very private person usually, so it was a very
unusual thing for me to have such a public and intense reaction to
what I’m working on.
WegotalotoffanartfromtheKickstarterlaunchandthatfeltcrazy
tome! It wasn’ton my radar that peoplewould reactthatway. I put the
Art out there because I wanted to make the game...And to get all of
that intense reaction to it—it was great! It is great.
. HaveyoucomeacrossanysurpriseswhilecreatingArtforHyperLight
Drier?
This is the rst time I’ve made a game at this scale with a team and
I’m responsible for a lot of things. There are a lot of twists and turns in
game development and there have been surprises all the time. There’s
alottogureoutwhenmakingtilesormakingenemysprites.I’mnot
sureIcouldnameoneinparticularbecausetherearesomany.
. Are there any things that you built forHyper Light Drier thatyou are
particularly proud of? Particular favorites?
Building the whole game is kind of my favorite right now
<chuckle>. If you need a specic example...there were some ninja
frogs that I made recently that I really enjoy.
226 Pixel Art for Game Developers
. What single thing do you think makes the biggest dierence in the
success of a piece of Pixel Art?
I would say color choices.
. Doyouhave any tipsortechniquesthatwouldbehelpfultothereaders
of the book?
The thing that’s worked best when I’m doing any kind of Pixel
Art—whether it be character or environment—is just being aware of
everything that it’s going to interact with.
Thismaybemoretrueforourgamebecausewedon’thaveoutlines.
With solid colors it can be really challenging to make things pop out.
I think just being aware of where the piece of Art is going to be placed
inyourgameandthe thingsarounditbecausethoseassociationsreally
matter. You need to be aware of color, composition, and value in order
for something to either blend in or stand out.
Youcan’tdesigninabubble.
FIGURE 11.11 Screenshot from Hyper Light Drier.

===== FILE 55/57: chapter-55.html =====

CHAPTER 12
Resources
D
’    with the completion of this book! There
are a number of fantastic resources for rening your abilities as a
Pixel Artist. Following are a number of resources that I’ve found useful
throughout my own journey as a game artist.
12.1 ONLINE RESOURCES
. Pixelation—Way of the Pixel: http://wayohepixel.net/
An online Pixel Art forum with an emphasis on improving technique
through critique.
. Pixel Joint: http://www.pixeljoint.com/forum
AnonlinePixelArtforumwherethereismoreofanemphasisonthe
Pixel Art community.
. Pixel Prospector—The indie goldmine: http://www.pixelprospector.
com/ This is the motherload of links to articles, videos, tutorials, and
other resources for game development.
12.2 BOOKS
. Drawing on the Right side of the Brain by Betty Edwards
The single most cleverbook I’ve read teachinghow to draw, lled with
ideas and exercises.
. The Animator’s Survival Kit by Richard Williams
An incredible book for learning animation.
227
228 Pixel Art for Game Developers
. Essentialism: The Disciplined Pursuit of Less by Greg McKeown
Although not specically linked to Pixel Art in any way, I cannot
endorse this book enough for task completion and generally improv-
ing quality of life.
12.3 PIXEL ART SOFTWARE
Although this is not a comprehensivelist, I still have nothad an opportunity
to use all of these programs listed. For that reason, I can’t openly endorse all
of these. I’d suggest to try several and see what works for you. I’ve catego-
rized the list by operating system.
Windows:
•Aseprite
• GrafX
• GraphicsGale
•mtPaint
•Pickle
•ProMotion
•PyxelEdit
•RagePixel(Unity extension)
•RotSprite
Mac:
•Aseprite
• GrafX
•Pickle
•PyxelEdit
•PikoPixel
•Pixen
Resources 229
•PXL
•RotSprite
Online:
• MakePixelArt: http://makepixelart.com/free/
• Piq: http://piq.codeus.net/draw
• Pxlr: http://apps.pixlr.com/editor/

===== FILE 56/57: chapter-56.html =====

CHAPTER 13
Afterword
Some Thoughts on Why I Wrote This
Book
T
    I  about working on games. I adore
the marriage between creativity and problem solving. I actually love
the surprises—the little idiosyncrasies where you think things are going to
be easy and in fact they are not. I even enjoy the compromises that need
to be made on a project in order to make a completed product.
SowhydidIspendthetimetocreatethisbookratherthanworkingon
another game?
Ihavemanypassionsbutatsomepointthevolumeofmyinterests
became a burden. I became a nervous wreck and felt buried under too many
ideas, prototypes, and other commitments. Aer feeling somewhat crazed I
found myself reading a book called Essentialism: The Disciplined Pursuit of
Less by Greg McKeown and decided to shed my various interests and obli-
gations down to one major project. I was committed not to start a single
otherprojectuntilIwasnishedwithmynumberonepriority.
But since I was dropping so many disparate interests simultaneously, I
could not take my choice of projects lightly. I wanted to work on the one
thing that could allow me to give my biggest contribution that I am capa-
ble at this juncture in time. What should it be? I had some interesting
ideasforaDgame—butwasthatagoodideagivenmyskillsandtal-
ents? Should I make a D game about monsters playing basketball? Team up
withafriendtocreateashmup?Writeandpromoteashredguitaralbum?
A book on creative guitar soloing? I found myself with more questions than
I started with.
231
232 Pixel Art for Game Developers
Eventually, I decided to create a Venn diagram with three circles: One
for things that I wanted to create, another that contained things that I am
good at, and the last a list of things that I could create that would be helpful
or likely to be wanted by other people. When framing my options through
thelensofthatdiagram,itbecameobviousthatabookonhowtocreate
Pixel Art was objectively the strongest contribution that I could oer at this
juncture in time.
Thank you for reading this, I hope that you were able to get some useful
ideas from the book. I ended up learning a lot through the process—more
than I would have expected.
Best of luck and perhaps we can chat on one of the Pixel Art forums
online or at the Game Developers Conference sometime!
Also be sure to join my mailing list at www.learnpixelart.com

===== FILE 57/57: chapter-57.html =====

K23868
“Pixel Art and Pixel Art games are very popular and the technique is a great
way for independent creators to create very good-looking games with limited
resources. It’s frankly shocking that there hasn’t been a resource like this
before ... a very timely book.”
—Chris Totten, George Mason University, Washington, DC, USA
Uncover the secrets to creating stunning graphics with Pixel Art for Game
Developers. The premier how-to book on Pixel Art and Pixel Art software,
it focuses on the universal principles of the craft.
The book provides an introduction to Pixel Art, its utility, foundational
elements, and concepts such as light and shadow. It offers tutorials on
creating animations and serves as a functional guide for the most common
methodology in 2D game development.
Gamers love the retro feel of Pixel Art, and lucky for you it is easy to create.
You'll love the tiny file sizes that will reduce compile times and help your
game run faster. Providing you with the skills to create the characters and
environments needed for 2D games, this book will help you:
• Create tilesets to build game environments
• Understand light and shadow
• Work efficiently with pixels
• Use atmospheric and linear perspective
• Create professional-quality Pixel Art
This book has chapters dedicated to theory as well as step-by-step tutori-
als, both of which describe the process explicitly. Whether you are an artist,
programmer, indie developer, or certified public accountant, after reading
this book, you'll understand the steps necessary to create production-qual-
ity Pixel Art graphics.
Computer Science & Engineering / Computer Graphics
ISBN: 978-1-4822-5230-9
9 781482 252309
90000