TITLE: The Art of Photography, 2nd Edition
ISBN: 9781492018803
FILES: 28


===== FILE 2/28: Text%2ftitle.xhtml =====

BRUCE BARNBAUM

The Art of Photography
2nd Edition

A Personal Approach to Artistic Expression

===== FILE 3/28: Text%2fcopyright.xhtml =====

The Art of Photography, 2nd Edition

A Personal Approach to Artistic Expression

Bruce Barnbaum

www.barnbaum.com

Editor: Gerhard Rossbach

Project editor: Joan Dixon

Project manager: Lisa Brazieal

Marketing manager: Jessica Tiernan

Layout and Type: Petra Strauch, just-in-print@gmx.de

Cover design: Helmut Kraus, www.exclam.de

Cover photo: Bruce Barnbaum

ISBN 978-1-68198-210-6

2nd Edition (1st Printing, February 2017)

© 2017 by Bruce Barnbaum

All photographs © Bruce Barnbaum (unless otherwise noted)

Rocky Nook Inc.

1010 B Street, Suite 350

San Rafael, CA 94901

www.rockynook.com

Distributed in the U.S. by Ingram Publisher Services

Distributed in the UK and Europe by Publishers Group UK

Library of Congress Control Number: 2016950247

All rights reserved. No part of the material protected by this copyright notice may be reproduced or utilized in any form, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without written permission of the publisher.

Many of the designations in this book used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks of their respective companies. Where those designations appear in this book, and Rocky Nook was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed in caps or initial caps. All product names and services identified throughout this book are used in editorial fashion only and for the benefit of such companies with no intention of infringement of the trademark. They are not intended to convey endorsement or other affiliation with this book.

While reasonable care has been exercised in the preparation of this book, the publisher and author assume no responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from the use of the information contained herein or from the use of the discs or programs that may accompany it.

This book is printed on acid-free paper.

Printed in China

===== FILE 4/28: Text%2fdedication.xhtml =====

To the wonderful memories of my mother and father.
For as long as I can remember
they both encouraged me to teach.

===== FILE 5/28: Text%2ffrontmatter01.xhtml =====

Bruce Barnbaum
PO Box 1791
Granite Falls, Washington 98252
USA
Phone or Fax: (360) 691-4105
barnbaum@aol.com
www.barnbaum.com

===== FILE 6/28: Text%2fcontents.xhtml =====

Table of Contents

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

1COMMUNICATION THROUGH PHOTOGRAPHY

Enthusiasm

Judging Your Own Personal Response

2WHAT IS COMPOSITION?

How the Human Eye Sees

Unified Thought

Simplicity

Expressing Your Own Point of View

Simplicity vs. Complexity

3ELEMENTS OF COMPOSITION

Contrast and Tone

Line

Form

Line, Form, Contrast, and Emotion

Pattern

Balance

Movement

Positive/Negative Space

Texture

Camera Position

Focal Length of Lens and Cropping

Depth of Field

Shutter Speed

Relationships

Involvement with the Scene

Rules, Formulas, and Other Problems and Pitfalls

4VISUALIZATION

Step 1: Photographic Looking and Seeing

Step 2: Composing an Image

Step 3: Envisioning the Final Image

Step 4: Suggested Procedures for Those Having Trouble Envisioning a Final Image

Step 5: Planning a Strategy for a Final Image

How Your Eye Differs from Your Camera

Alternative Approaches

5LIGHT

Looking at Light

Exercises in Learning to See Light More Accurately

Light Determines Form

Types of Lighting/Quality of Light

Light as Seen by the Eye and by Film or Sensors, and the Inverse Square Law

6COLOR

The Color Wheel and Color Sphere

Color Composition

Color Families, Color Contrast, and Their Emotional Effects

Subjectivity and Mood of Color

Working with Color Digitally

Working with Color Traditionally

In Summary

7FILTERS

Black-and-White Filters for Film

Examples with a Hypothetical Landscape

Contrast Control with Filters

Infrared Film and Filters

Color Correction Filters for Traditional Film Imagery

Neutral Density and Polarizing Filters

Problems Associated with Polarizers

Digital Polarizing Filter

Digital Black-and-White Filtration

Digital Color Filtration

8THE ZONE SYSTEM OF EXPOSURE FOR BLACK-AND-WHITE FILM

A Brief Overview

Film’s Response to Light: Building the Zone System

Translating Negative Densities to Print Tonalities

The Light Meter—How It Works

Review of Negative Exposure Procedure

Using the Zone System to Depart from Reality

The Zone System for Color Negatives

The Zone System and the Inverse Square Law

In Summary

9CONTRAST CONTROL AND THE EXTENDED ZONE SYSTEM FOR BLACK-AND-WHITE NEGATIVES

Chapter 9 Overview

The Negative During Development

The Bellows Analogy

Putting Higher Zones to Work

Reciprocity Failure

Examples of Decreasing and Increasing Contrast

The Exposure/Density Curve and Zone 4 Shadow Placement

Differences Between Photography and Sensitometry: Texture vs. Tone and Zone 4 Shadow Placement

Developing the Exposed Negative

Explanation of Compensating Development

Two-Solution Compensating Development for Negatives

Development Procedures for Sheet Film and Roll Film

The Zone System and Roll Film

Negative Materials and Developers

10THE PRINT

Black-and-White Enlarging Papers

Variable Contrast vs. Graded Papers

Fiber Base Papers vs. Resin Coated (RC) Papers

Black-and-White Paper Developers

Making Contact Proof Prints

Preliminary Work Toward a Final Print

Make Test Prints, Not Test Strips

Dodging and Burning

Integrating the Entire Process: Visualization, Exposure, Development, and Printing

Burning with Variable Contrast Papers

Advanced Darkroom Techniques

Inspection, Evaluation, and the Myth of “Dry-Down”

Potassium Ferricyanide Reducing (Bleaching)

Final Fixing of the Image

Local vs. Overall Contrast Control

Scale

Selenium Toning Prints

Other Toners

Chemical Coloration

Full Archival Processing of Prints

Toning, Intensifying, and Reducing Negatives

Cold, Neutral, and Warm Tone Papers

Review of Contrast Controls

Infinite Contrast Control for Black-and-White after Negative Development

Color Printing

The Final Product Is What Matters

Scanning from Film

11THE DIGITAL ZONE SYSTEM

Basics of Digital Exposure

The Sensor’s Useful Brightness Range

Translating Theory to Excellent Digital Exposures

The Histogram—The Heart of the Digital Zone System

The RAW Converter—Processing the RAW Exposure

High Dynamic Range Images—The Extended Zone System for Digital Photography

Converting Digital Color Exposures to Black-and-White

Panoramas and Other Image Combinations

12IMAGE ADJUSTMENTS—USING THE DIGITAL TOOLS

The ACR Tool Chest

ACR Summary

The Photoshop Tool Chest

Returning to ACR from Photoshop

Closing Thoughts

13TRADITIONAL, DIGITAL, ART AND TECHNIQUE

Art, Technique, and Their Importance

Choosing Digital or Traditional

Some Closing Thoughts

14EXPLODING PHOTOGRAPHIC MYTHS

Myth #1

Myth #2

Myth #3

Myth #4

Myth #5

Myth #6

Myth #7

Myth #8

Myth #9

Myth #10

15PRESENTATION

Dry Mounting Prints

Making Positioning Guides for Print Placement

Spotting, Etching, and Correction of Defects

Print Finishing

16PHOTOGRAPHIC REALISM, ABSTRACTION, AND ART

Photography as Fine Art

Photography and Painting—Their Mutual Influence

Some Personal Examples

The Strength of Abstraction

Inwardly and Outwardly Directed Questions

The Power of Photography

17APPROACHING CREATIVITY INTUITIVELY

Intuition in Science

Avoiding Intuition

Understanding and Misunderstanding Intuition

Examples of the Intuitive Approach

Applying Intuition to Your Photography

Conclusion

18TOWARD A PERSONAL PHILOSOPHY

Flexibility

Visual Arts

Nonvisual Arts

Expanding and Defining Your Interests

Limitations of Photography

Developing a Personal Style

Self-Critique, Interaction, and Study

APPENDIX 1

Testing Materials and Equipment for Traditional Photography

APPENDIX 2

Enlarger Light Sources

===== FILE 7/28: Text%2facknowledgements.xhtml =====

Acknowledgements

Few books are the work of one person in complete isolation from the rest of humanity. This book is no exception, and I would like to thank the many individuals and organizations that have been helpful in putting it together.

First, I wish to thank the workshop participants who read my early papers and manuscripts, gave me encouragement to expand my writing concepts, and suggested additional topics to be considered. Other workshop participants pointed out errors, suggested improvements, and identified segments that were unclear upon initial reading. Altogether, the quality of the book rests upon these hundreds or even thousands of “co-editors” who helped me improve my writing over the past 35 years.

Second, I must commend a number of people who have helped me in my entry to digital photography. Bennett Silverman deserves special thanks for his tremendous help and his writing of the digital chapter for the first edition of this book. In addition to Ben, I thank Rajmohan Murali, Ron Reeder, Don Rommes, and Franz Messenbaeck for their needed and wonderful help getting me on board.

A number of individuals have been a great help by supplying me with ideas over the years. These ideas have subsequently been incorporated into my photographic thinking, and therefore into this book. Prime among them are:

Jay Dusard, who introduced me to potassium ferri-cyanide bleaching of prints, and who has been a great friend, a fabulous workshop collaborator, and my best honest critic;

Ray McSavaney, who helped me start our first private workshop program, the Owens Valley Photography Workshops, and gave me the idea of extremely dilute negative developer solutions (the “compensating” development technique) to greatly control negative contrast. He also inspired me with his artistic approach to life. I’ll always miss Ray as a friend and consummate artist;

Don Kirby, who has not only taught numerous workshops with me, hiked and photographed with me, rappelled into Lower Antelope Canyon with me long before it became grossly commercialized, and camped with me throughout much of the unsurpassed Utah Canyon Country, but who also has given me great insight into the value of negative masking and helped me expand my creative and instructional abilities;

Heike Maskos, a workshop student who has worked closely with me on previous editions of this book, making it read better and look better, and who has been of greater help than she will ever recognize or admit;

Alexander Ehhalt, who introduced my self-published book to Gerhard Rossbach, founder and publisher of Rocky Nook, who worked with me on this and other books, and has become a trusted friend and workshop co-instructor;

Reed Thomas, a wonderful friend and sometimes workshop co-instructor, who has opened up my eyes and thoughts to alternative ways of seeing any scene;

Morten Krogvold, who has inspired me with his powerful imagery and his ability to motivate photographers to higher achievements, and to touch them to the core of their souls;

And, above all others, my wife, Sonia Karen, who has made the good things throughout my photographic career possible by thoroughly supporting me and helping me in all phases of my endeavors. She is the quiet, lovely gem of my life!

To each of them, and to everyone else who has given me ideas, techniques, and tips of all sorts, I wish to say thank you for your contributions to this book.

===== FILE 8/28: Text%2fchapter01.xhtml =====

Figure 1-1: What Was . . . What Is
An ancient Western Red Cedar tree, thirteen feet in diameter, in the rainforest of Washington’s North Cascade Mountains, cut down a century ago, has been replaced by dozens of tall, skinny trees, which together contain less wood (board feet) than the single cedar contained. None of the new trees are Western Red Cedars. There are no ferns, shrubs, or mosses on the ground, so the replaced forest can support no wildlife. Timber companies say, “there are more trees in America than ever before,” and they’re right; yet it is an utterly deceptive claim. It’s a dead forest; a tree farm. The photograph, near my home, was designed to show the damage of industrial clearcutting, euphemistically called “harvesting.” No other art form can make such a statement as powerfully as photography.

CHAPTER 1
Communication Through Photography

PHOTOGRAPHY IS A FORM OF NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION. At its best, a photograph conveys a thought from one person, the photographer, to another, the viewer. In this respect, photography is similar to other forms of artistic, nonverbal communication such as painting, sculpture, and music. A Beethoven symphony says something to its listeners; a Rembrandt painting speaks to its viewers; a Michelangelo statue communicates with its admirers. Beethoven, Rembrandt, and Michelangelo are no longer available to explain the meaning behind their works, but their presence is unnecessary. Communication is achieved without them.

Photography can be equally communicative. To me, the word photograph has a far deeper meaning than it has in everyday usage. A true photograph possesses a universal quality that transcends immediate involvement with the subject or events of the photograph. I can look at portraits by Arnold Newman or Diane Arbus and feel as if I know the people photographed, even though I never met them. I can see landscapes by Ansel Adams, Edward Weston, or Paul Caponigro and feel the awesomeness of the mountain wall, the delicacy of the tiny flowers, or the mystery of the foggy forest, though I never stood where the tripods were placed. I can see a street photograph by Henri Cartier-Bresson and feel the elation of his “decisive moment,” captured forever, though I was not beside him when it occurred. I can even see a tree by Jerry Uelsmann floating in space and feel the surrealistic tingle that surrounds the image. I can do this because the artist has successfully conveyed a message to me. The photograph says it all. Nothing else is needed.

 Photography is a form of nonverbal communication.

A meaningful photograph—a successful photograph—does one of several things. It allows, or forces, the viewer to see something that he has looked at many times without really seeing; it shows him something he has never previously encountered; or, it raises questions—perhaps ambiguous or unanswerable—that create mysteries, doubts, or uncertainties. In other words, it expands our vision and our thoughts. It extends our horizons. It evokes awe, wonder, amusement, compassion, horror, or any of a thousand responses. It sheds new light on our world, raises questions about our world, or creates its own world.

Beyond that, the inherent “realism” of a photograph—the very aspect that attracts millions of people to taking “selfies” and other everyday digital snapshooting, or much of 35mm traditional film shooting—bestows a pertinence to photography that makes it stand apart from all other art forms. Let’s briefly review a few examples. At the turn of the 20th century, Lewis Hine bridged the gap between social justice and artistic photography with his studies of children in factories, and the work led directly to the enactment of humane child labor laws. In the 1930s and 1940s, Ansel Adams, Edward Weston, and a host of others raised public consciousness of the environment through their landscape photographs. Into the mid- and late 20th century a number of national parks, state parks, and designated wilderness areas were created based largely on the power of the photography. During the Depression years, Margaret Bourke-White, Walker Evans, Dorothea Lange, and others used their artistry to bring the Dust Bowl conditions home to the American public. Today, photographs comparing the size of shrinking glaciers with photographs of the same location a century or more ago have alerted those who can comprehend facts about the reality of global warming and its deep problems. (Unfortunately there is too much pushback against obvious facts for much progress to be made.) But the bottom line is this: used well, photography can be the most pertinent of all art forms (figure 1-1). For the intent and purpose of this book, let us concern ourselves with photography as a powerful art form and documentary form, not for its fun-filled everyday uses as personal remembrances.

To create a meaningful statement—a pertinent photograph—the photographer must gain an insight into the world (real or created) that goes far beyond the casual “once-over” given to items or events of lesser personal importance. The photographer must grow to deeply understand the world, its broad overall sweep and its subtle nuances. This intimate knowledge produces the insight required to photograph a subject at the most effective moment and in the most discerning manner, conveying the essence of its strength or the depth of its innermost meaning. This applies to all fields of photography.

How does a photographer proceed to create this meaningful statement and communicate emotion to others through photography? This is a complex question that has no clear answers, yet it is the critical question that every photographer of serious intent must ask and attempt to answer at each stage of his or her career.

I believe the answer to that question revolves around both personal and practical considerations. On the personal, internal side are two questions:

What are your interests?
How do you respond to your interests?

The first question asks what is important to you. It’s unlikely, maybe impossible, to do good photography with subject matter that don’t interest you. The second question points you in the direction of how you want to express yourself, and even how you want others to respond to your imagery. Or, stated differently, how do you want your photograph to look, so that others will get the message you want to convey? To create the photograph you want to make, you’ll have to consider such issues as design and composition, exposure, lighting, camera equipment, darkroom or digital techniques, presentation of the final photograph, and other related considerations that turn the concept into a reality.

Let’s start with the first of the two personal, internal questions: What are your interests? Only you can answer that question. But it is critically important to do so, for if you are to engage in meaningful photography you must concentrate your serious efforts on those areas of greatest interest to you. Not only that, but you must also concentrate on areas where you have strong personal opinions.

Allow me to explain my meaning by analogy. Did you ever try to say something worthwhile (in ordinary conversation) about any subject you found uninteresting, or about which you had no opinions? It’s impossible! You have nothing to say because you have little interest in it. In general, that doesn’t stop most people from talking. Just as people talk about things of no real interest to them, they also take pictures of things that have no real interest to them, and the results are uniformly boring.

But let’s go further with this analogy. Take any great orator—say, Winston Churchill or Martin Luther King, Jr.—and ask them to give an impassioned speech on quilting, for example. They couldn’t do it! They’d have nothing to say. It isn’t their topic, their passion. They need to be on their topic to display their greatest oratorical and persuasive skills. The great photographers know what interests them and what bores them. They also recognize their strengths and their weaknesses. They stick to their interests and their strengths. They may experiment regularly in other areas to enlarge their interest range and improve their weaknesses—and you should, too—but they do not confuse experimentation with incisive expression.

Weston did not photograph transient, split-second events; Newman did not photograph landscapes. Uelsmann does not photograph unfortunate members of our society; Arbus did not print multiple images for surrealistic effect. Each one concentrated on his or her areas of greatest interest and ability. It is possible that any one of them could do some fine work in another field, but it would probably not be as consistent or as powerful. They, and the other great photographers, have wisely worked within the limits of their greatest strengths.

Enthusiasm

The first thing to look for in determining your interests is enthusiasm. I cannot overemphasize the importance of enthusiasm. I once heard that three human ingredients, when combined, will produce success in any field of endeavor: talent, hard work, and enthusiasm, and that a person can be successful with only two of those attributes as long as one of the two is enthusiasm. I agree. Photographically, for me, enthusiasm manifests itself as an immediate emotional response to a scene. Essentially, if the scene excites me visually, I will photograph it (or at least, I will take a hard second look to see if it is worth photographing). It is purely subjective. This positive emotional response is extremely important to me. Without it, I have no spontaneity and my photographs are labored efforts. With it, photography becomes pure joy.

Enthusiasm also manifests itself as a desire to continue working even when you’re tired. Your enthusiasm, your excitement, often overcomes your fatigue, allowing you to continue on effectively as fatigue melts away. On backpacking trips, I’ve often continued to photograph long after the others settled down at the end of the day simply because I was so stimulated by my surroundings. Once in 1976 on a Sierra Club trip, we finally arrived at our campsite after a long, difficult hike. Everyone was exhausted. But while dinner was cooking, I climbed a nearby ridge to see Mt. Clarence King (elevation 12,950 feet) in the late evening light. It was like a fugue of granite (figure 1-2). I called to the group below to come see this stunning mountain, but even without backpacks or camera equipment, none did. I was the only one to see that sight!

Figure 1-2: Mt. Clarence King
This grand crescendo of granite rises lyrically as evening light brings out each ridge, each buttress. I used a red filter to cut through any haze (though no haze was apparent) and to enhance the clouds by darkening the blue sky.

Likewise, I’ve worked in the darkroom until 3, 4, or 5 a.m. on new imagery because the next negative looked like it had great possibilities and I wanted to see if I could get a great print. More recently, I’ve spent equally long hours at the computer working to transform RAW digital images to final TIFF files, effectively oblivious to the fact that I was at the keyboard and monitor for hours after the midnight gong. In essence, I just couldn’t wait until tomorrow to work on new images. These are not things you do for money, but for love.

In the field, if I don’t feel an immediate response to a scene, I look for something else. I never force myself to shoot just for the sake of shooting or to break an impasse. Some photographers advocate shooting something, anything, just to get you moving under those circumstances. That’s pure nonsense. Why waste time on useless junk when you know in advance that it’s useless junk? Snapping the shutter or pressing the cable release is not an athletic act, so I don’t have to warm up doing it, and you shouldn’t either.

Figure 1-3: Morten Krovgold
One of the world’s truly great photographers, Morten struck me as a marvelous portrait subject with his strong Viking-like facial characteristics. But what would be the best angle to photograph him, and what type of lighting would convey that feeling most effectively? I finally decided it was the strength of his near profile. That evening, under the dim light of a chandelier, he propped his chin on his hands with his elbows on a low table for the 25-second exposure. Deep background tones surrounding him increase the feeling of strength.

But once I get that spurt of adrenalin, I work hard to find the best camera position, use the most appropriate lens, choose filters for optimum effect, take light meter readings or carefully check the histogram, and expose the image with great care using the optimum aperture and shutter speed. All of these things are important and require thought and effort. The initial response to the scene is spontaneous, but the effort that follows is not!

I believe this approach is valid for photographers at any level of expertise, from beginners to the most advanced. When you find something of importance, it will be apparent. It will be compelling. You will feel it instantly! You won’t have to ask yourself if it interests you, or if you are enthusiastic about photographing it. If you don’t feel that spontaneous motivation, you will have no desire to communicate what you feel.

On the other hand, I think the prime motivation for most snapshots is either the knowledge that someone else wants you to take the picture, or your own desire to take it to show where you have been. Neither of these motivations are concerned with personal interpretation or with personal expression, and neither have that internally compelling aspect. Photographs like these, where you’re standing at the sign to the entrance of Yellowstone National Park—probably just to prove that you were really there—or nearly one-hundred percent of selfies, are pure fun, memory-laden images, but have little or no artistic merit.

 I’ve worked in the darkroom until 3, 4, or 5 a.m. These are not things you do for money, but for love.

It has long struck me that people who attempt creative work of any type—scientific, artistic, or otherwise—without feeling any enthusiasm for that work have no chance at success. Enthusiasm is not something you can create. Either you have it or you don’t! True enough, you can grow more interested and enthusiastic about something, but you can’t really force that to happen, either. If you have no enthusiasm for an endeavor, drop it and try something else. If you are enthusiastic, pursue it! Just be honest with yourself when you evaluate your level of enthusiasm.

 It has long struck me that people who attempt creative work of any type without feeling any enthusiasm for that work have no chance at success.

Ask what you are drawn to, what intrigues you. Most likely you will take your best photographs in the fields that interest you when you have no camera in hand. If you are deeply interested in people—to the point of wanting to know them thoroughly, what really makes them tick—it’s likely that portraiture will be your best area. If you want to know more about people than their façades, it would follow that, with camera in hand, you will dig deeper and uncover the “real” person. While I don’t consider myself to be a portrait photographer, I’ve made some portraits of people I know and like, that have been meaningful to me (Figure 1-3).

Figure 1-4: Ghost Aspen Forest
Soft, hazy sunlight made this photograph possible. Bright sun would have been too harsh for the delicate tones I sought. The bleached branch at the lower right maintains the lines and movement of the diagonal trees. The rippled reflections were more interesting to me than a mirror reflection would have been because they reflect only the vertical trees, not the diagonals.

Are you excited by passing events, or by action-filled events, such as sports? Are you fascinated by the corner auto accident, the nearby fire, the dignitary passing through town today? If so, you may be inclined to photojournalism or “street photography.” The latter term encompasses a wide cross section of candid photography that was elevated to an art form by Henri Cartier-Bresson, Weegee, and others. The approach differs greatly from formal portraits in that the subject matter is usually unrehearsed and often unexpected. This type of photography (which is certainly a form of documentary photography at its best) is geared to those who seek the unexpected and transitory.

Consider a further aspect of this pursuit: the most incisive efforts in this realm often don’t concentrate on the event per se, but rather on the event’s effect on the observers or participants. In many cases, emphasis on human reaction and interaction reveals more about human nature—and about our world—than the occurrence itself. Straight photojournalism is all too often involved with the event, and only on rare occasions rises to the insightful commentary that transcends mere recording to become true art.

Are you stimulated by pure design, or by color arrangements? Perhaps abstraction is suited for you. Brett Weston was a prime example of a classically oriented photographer using the “straight silver print” and abstraction applied to almost any subject matter. Experimental pursuits such as multiple exposures, photomontage, double- and multiple-printing, solarization, non-silver methods, the nearly infinite digital opportunities for subtle or radical manipulations, and any other conceivable approach is fair game in this realm. The only restraint is your lack of imagination or your unwillingness to experiment.

Perhaps your interests lie elsewhere. Analyze them. If you cannot define your interests, try your hand at a number of these alternatives and see which appeal to you most and which least.

I have evaluated my interests, and it may prove instructive to see what I have found. Today I photograph a wide variety of subjects, but I started from a more limited base. Initially nature was my sole interest. Slowly my interests grew to include architectural subjects and then branched out widely within both of those broad subject areas, while making forays into other areas. As Frederick Sommer once said, “Subject matter is subject that matters!” I realized that there was no reason to limit myself unnecessarily.

My initial interest in nature was all-inclusive. I was (and still am) drawn to trees, mountains, open fields, pounding rivers, tiny dewdrops at sunrise, and millions of other natural phenomena. I am fascinated by weather patterns and the violence of storms, the interaction of weather with landforms, and the serenity of undisturbed calm. Geology excites me, and I feel awed by the forces that create mountains and canyons. All of these phenomena appear in my photographs along with my interpretations, my awe, my excitement. Without a camera I would still exult in them. With a camera I can convey my thoughts about them. Then others can respond to my thoughts, my interpretations, my excitement.

In 1976, near Yosemite National Park, I came across a grove of aspen trees killed by flooding from a beaver dam. The pattern of dead trees was remarkable, but the bright sunlight was too harsh to allow a photograph. However, my familiarity with weather patterns in the Sierra Nevada, and my observations of cloud patterns that day indicated a storm could be coming within a day or two, and that if I were to return the next day I might be lucky enough to obtain a photograph under hazy sun or soft, overcast lighting. As expected, by noon the next day a layer of thin clouds—the immediate precursor of the storm—softened the light and I made my exposure. My interest in weather helped me make the photograph I wanted (figure 1-4).

A strange-looking landscape and my interest in natural history drew me to take a series of short hikes—once or twice a day—in late 1978 and early 1979 through an extensive area of the Santa Monica Mountains in Southern California that had been burned by a chaparral fire. Starting two weeks after the fire, my walks took me to unusual vistas, through the velvety blackness of mountains and valleys, and, in time, through the spectacle of rebirth as the region burst into life again (figure 1-5). I chose ten of the photographs made during that four-month period for a limited edition portfolio titled “Aftermath.” The photography ended up as a major project, but it began as a sideline to my interest in the natural history of the region under special conditions.

Figure 1-5: Raccoon Tracks
The cracked mud of a drying streambed held the paw prints of a raccoon, the first sign of life I saw in the burned landscape, bringing tears to my eyes. It was a joyous indication that some of the local residents had survived the fire.

In 1978, I began photographing a fascinating set of narrow, winding sandstone canyons in northern Arizona and southern Utah, the slit canyons, and my lifelong interest and educational background in mathematics and physics has greatly colored my interpretation of them. I view their sweeping curves as those of galaxies and other celestial bodies in the process of formation. The lines and the interactions of forms strike me as visual representations of gravitational and electromagnetic lines of force that pull the dust and gases of space together to form planets, stars, and entire galaxies, or the subatomic forces that hold atoms and nuclei together. To me, a walk through those canyons is a walk through billions of years of evolving space-time, and I have tried to convey that vision through my photographs (figure 1-6).

Figure 1-6: Hollows and Points, Peach Canyon
I see the gracefully sweeping lines of the slit canyons as metaphors of cosmic forces made visible, as if we could see gravitational or electromagnetic lines of force. If we could see those forces between heavenly bodies (stars, galaxies, planets, etc.), rather than seeing the heavenly bodies themselves, they may well look like this. I feel that this photograph contains particularly elegant and enigmatic examples of this effect, with sculptured lines so lyrical that it would make a Michelangelo or Henry Moore jealous with envy.

Figure 1-7: Nave From North Choir Aisle, Ely Cathedral
A series of compound columns, arches, and vaults frame the distant portions of the cathedral, with still more arches and columns, indicating even more around the bend. Indeed there are more. The unity of forms amidst the complexity of the architecture is a vivid example of Goethe’s statement that “Architecture is frozen music.” This is also an example of positive/negative space in which the nearby columns and archways form the positive space, and the distant nave the negative space.

Figure 1-8: Chicago, 1986
Seven different modern skyscrapers huddle together in downtown Chicago, creating interesting interactions within the geometric sterility of each. Somehow these giant urban file cabinets can become visually interesting when viewed in relation to one another.

Over time, I recognized that many of the same facets of nature that intrigue me are also present in architecture. Architecture can be awesome and uplifting; it can supply fascinating abstractions and marvelous lines and patterns. It often can be photographed without the need for supplementary lighting, and in that respect it is much like nature and landscape photography. Turning my attention to manmade structures was an inevitable expansion of my interests.

After ten years of commissions in commercial architectural photography, my first major effort at architectural subjects for my own interpretation came in 1980 and 1981: the cathedrals of England. Prior to my first cathedral encounter, I would have had an aversion to photographing religious structures; it’s just not my bag. But upon seeing them for the first time, I was awestruck by their grandeur. My deep love of classical music crystallized my interpretation of their architectural forms as music—as harmonies and counterpoints, rhythms and melodies—captured in stone. I also saw the architecture in mathematical terms, as allegories on infinity, where nearby columns and vaults framed distant ones, which in turn framed still more distant ones in a seemingly endless array. I altered my flexible itinerary to see as many cathedrals as I could during my two-week visit, then returned in 1981 for five more weeks of exploring, photographing, and exulting in these magnificent monuments of civilization (figure 1-7).

As time went by, my interest in architecture—specifically, in large commercial buildings—led to a continuing study of downtown areas in major cities. This series, too, draws on my mathematical background, for I am drawn to the geometrical relationships among the buildings and the confusion of space caused by the visual interactions of several buildings at once. I find this aspect of my urban studies appealing (figure 1-8).

But my response to modern urban structures has another side, too. Unlike my positive reaction to cathedral architecture, I dislike the architecture of all but a very few commercial buildings. They are cold, austere, impersonal, and basically ugly. I feel that these giant downtown filing cabinets are built for function with little thought given to aesthetics. To me, they are the corporate world’s strongest statement of its disinterest in humanity and its outright contempt of nature. I have attempted to convey those feelings through my compositions of their stark geometries.

Over the years, my work has grown increasingly abstract. It has become bolder and more subtle at the same time: bolder in form, more subtle in technique. My subject matter will likely expand in the future; I will look further into those subjects that I looked at in the past, bringing out new insights that I missed the first time. Such growth and change is necessary for any artist, or stagnation and artistic senility set in.

I have come to recognize a very surprising fact: subject matter ultimately becomes secondary to the artist’s seeing, vision, and overall philosophy of life and of photography. This is not to imply that subject matter doesn’t matter. It surely does! It’s the subject matter that’s important to you that lured you into photography in the first place, but once ensnared, it turns out that your specific vision (i.e., the way you compose your images) will prove to be unique. There is a one-to-one equality between the artist and his art. A photographer’s way of seeing is a reflection of his entire life’s attitude, no matter what the subject matter may be. Only Edward Weston could have made Edward Weston’s photographs; only W. Eugene Smith could have made W. Eugene Smith’s photographs; only Imogen Cunningham could have made Imogen Cunningham’s photographs, etc. This is true because each great photographer has a unique way of seeing that is consistent throughout the artist’s entire body of work.

It would be of value to you as a serious photographer to delve into the question of why your interests lie where they do, and why they may be changing. Such evaluation is part of getting to know yourself better and understanding your interests more fully. It’s part of successful communication. Start with your areas of highest interest and stick with them. Don’t worry about being too narrow or about expanding. You will expand to other areas when you are compelled internally to do so—when something inside you forces you to make a particular photograph that is so very different from all your others.

Judging Your Own Personal Response

The second of the two personal considerations is more difficult. How do you respond to your interests and how do you wish to convey your thoughts photographically? This is a more deeply personal question than “What interests you?” It requires not only knowing what interests you, but also just how it affects you and how you would like viewers to respond to your photographs.

In the examples of my own work just discussed, I attempted to express a bit of this second consideration. The slit canyons overwhelmed me in a very specific way—as cosmic analogies, or as analogies to force fields—and my imagery is based on conveying that impression to others. Similarly, the cathedrals struck me as grand, musical, and infinite in their marvelous forms. Again, I tried to emphasize those qualities in my imagery. I did not simply conclude, “These things are interesting!” and begin to shoot, but rather I responded to the specific ways that I found them to be interesting. I approached them in an effort to express my strongest feelings about them photographically.

The next time you are photographing, think about your reaction to the subject. Are you trying to make a flattering portrait of someone you find unattractive or downright ugly? Unless you are taking a typical studio portrait (the “tilt your head and smile” type) you would do well to follow your own instincts. Does the subject strike you as cunning? If so, bring out that aspect. Is he or she sensitive and appealing to you? If so, try to show it in your portrait. Is the outdoor market colorful and carnival-like or is it filthy and disgusting? Emphasize the aspect that strikes you most strongly. Don’t try to bring out what others expect or want; emphasize your point of view! You may upset a few people initially, but soon they will begin to recognize the honesty as well as the strength and conviction of your imagery. But in order to do that, you first have to determine what your point of view actually is. It is not always easy to do so, because you may be struck by conflicting impressions, but it is essential to recognize such conflicts and choose the impression that is strongest.

An example may be instructive. Not long after World War II, portraitist Arnold Newman was commissioned to photograph Alfred Krupp, the German industrial baron and Nazi arms supplier. Newman was Jewish. He managed to get Krupp to pose for him on a small platform raised above the spreading floor of his factory, with the assembly lines below in a background. Fluorescent lights flooded the factory, and Newman augmented them with auxiliary lighting placed below Krupp’s face and almost behind him. He did not filter to correct the fluorescent color shift. Because the two of them were high above the factory floor, nobody else saw what was happening, and Krupp himself had no knowledge of photographic processes. The resulting portrait shows a ghastly, green-faced monster with ominous shadows crossing his face diagonally from below—the devil incarnate. Newman knew what he wanted and he understood his material. But I must also admit that the black-and-white version of this portrait is, to my mind, even more effective simply because the sick green color is missing. To me, that color goes overboard and pushes the envelope too far.

 As soon as I determine what I am responding to most strongly, and how I am responding, I must concentrate on emphasizing all the elements that strengthen that response, while eliminating those that weaken it.

A hypothetical example may also be valuable. As I wander through the canyons of the Kings River in Kings Canyon National Park, I am awed by the towering granite cliffs and pounding cascades. Yet I am also struck by the softness and serenity of the grassy meadows and sun-streaked forests.

If I were to make just one photograph of the area, I would choose the aspect I wished to accentuate: its overall awesomeness or its more detailed serenity. I doubt that I could successfully convey both in one photograph. Am I more strongly drawn to the spectacular or the serene? I would study the cliffs and cascades to determine if they truly are as spectacular as I first perceived them to be. And are the forests and meadows as serene? Am I looking for the spectacular, let’s say, and straining to find an example when none actually exists? In other words, am I stretching too far for a photograph? I must make proper assessments of these questions in order to produce a meaningful image that can communicate my feelings.

As soon as I determine what I am responding to most strongly, and how I am responding, I must concentrate on emphasizing all the elements that strengthen that response, while eliminating (or minimizing) all those that weaken it. Basically, I am responding to the mood the scene evokes in me, and I must determine how I wish to convey that mood through my photography. The feeling my photograph evokes is my editorial comment on the scene. If the response is what I intended, I have communicated my thoughts successfully. If the response is the opposite of my intent, I may be disappointed but subsequently come to feel that the interpretation has some validity. It may even open up new insights to me. However, if my photograph evokes nothing in others, I have failed miserably.

In the future, I may look at the same scene and work toward conveying a different thought. Why? Because of changes in my own perception as time goes by. My interpretation will change. My “seeing” will be different. My goals will be different.

You, too, will doubtless change over time, as will your approach to photography. But if you are like me, you will find that these changes will not invalidate your successful earlier efforts. A fine photograph will survive the test of time. Beethoven would not have written his first, second, or third symphonies in the same manner after completing the final six, but that does not invalidate the earlier scores.

Though your perceptions will change, it is of utmost importance to be in touch with them at all times. Your perceptions and your internal reactions set the direction for your photography, your visual commentary. Get yourself in tune with those reactions. In other words, get to know yourself. But one word of caution: don’t analyze yourself to death. There is a reasonable limit to introspection. Before getting hung up on it, start communicating by making some photographs.

Successful communication of your message is the essence of creative photography. Reporting the scene is shirking your responsibility; interpreting the scene is accepting the challenge. Though the scene may or may not be your creation, the photograph always is (figure 1-9)! So don’t just stop with the things you saw; add your comments, feelings, and opinions. Put them all into the photograph. Express your point of view. Argue for your position. Convince the viewer of the validity of your conclusions.

Understand what you want to say!

Understand how you want to say it!

Then say it without compromise!

Now you are thinking in terms of creative photography!

Of course there are those who will say that an artist is searching for the truth, and it is foolish to be so adamantly positive about your approach. There is some validity to this objection, but in general, I think the idea of “searching for the truth” is a highly romanticized notion. I believe that each artist, like everyone else, has strong views about the world: what it is, what it should be, and how it could be improved. As such, I think that most artists are not so much searching for the truth, but searching for a proper method of expressing the truth as they see it. It should be manifestly obvious that Lewis Hine was not searching for the truth, but revealing the grim truth of conditions in factories employing child labor. Similarly, Ansel Adams was not searching for the truth in his nature photography, but expressing the truth about the beauty and grandeur of nature as he saw it.

The list can go on and on, but the point should be clear. Even if we go back in time long before the start of photography, we see similar examples of artists expressing the truth rather than searching for it. Michelangelo depicted prominent local officials as being cast into Hell in some of his famous murals, a bold comment for which he suffered mightily. Other prominent artists, composers, and writers have been equally bold in their truthful statements.

Figure 1-9: Grass and Juniper Wood
Blue grama grass, rarely more the five inches tall, grows on the near-desert soils of Utah, usually with a crescent-shaped tuft at the top. I found this one with a full ringlet. As high winds shook it wildly, I pulled it up for later photography. Within a few steps I found a small piece of juniper wood with a cleft, to serve as a pedestal for the grass. I knew exactly what I wanted to do with these objects. Two days later, when the wind died down, I stacked two ice chests in front of my truck where I was camping, put the grass in the wood cleft, placed it atop the ice chest, and focused my 4 × 5 camera. I then laid the black side of my focusing cloth on the hood of the truck, hanging down over the grill to serve as the background.

Beyond that, there is no such thing in our complex world as “the truth,” but rather many, many truths, some of which conflict with others, and some of which contradict others. Thus the truth is elusive at best, and nonexistent at worst. Each of the subjects I have photographed, for example, has revealed different aspects of the world that I have found worthy of commentary. If my photographs have not revealed the truth, at least they have attempted to express my point of view about each of those subjects. I can only hope they provide interest, meaning, and insight to others.

 Most artists are not so much searching for the truth, but searching for a proper method of expressing the truth as they see it.

===== FILE 9/28: Text%2fchapter02.xhtml =====

Figure 2-1: Leaves, Big 4 Mountain Trail, Washington
Trailside leaves produce a rhythmic mix of metallic forms, interspersed with deep black holes (the spaces between the leaves) that have interesting shapes themselves, serving as negative space to the positive space of the leaves. There is no center of interest. Rather, there is a pattern, keeping the eye moving within the image.

CHAPTER 2
What Is Composition?

BEFORE MOVING ON, it would be worthwhile to study your photographs slowly while considering the questions posed in the first chapter, in order to better evaluate your own work. I feel that such an evaluation is extremely valuable and should be done periodically. Assuming that you have already done so, questions arise as to the most effective methods of conveying your thoughts photographically. The most effective technique, it turns out, varies from scene to scene and from artist to artist. No overall rule can be made. Indeed, art is devoid of rules.

One statement can be made concerning any artistic effort: it must possess good composition. Whether the subject is a fine portrait, a panoramic landscape, a slum alley, a studio tabletop arrangement, or anything else, only with good composition will it achieve meaning and importance. (In fact, this can be extended to all other art forms, including visual and nonvisual forms. After all, even music requires good composition!)

But, you may ask, what is good composition? What, in fact, is composition? The term is constantly used, seldom defined or discussed, rarely understood, yet never questioned. Try to define composition, and you will see how difficult it is.

My dictionary defines it as “an arrangement of the parts of a work of art so as to form a unified, harmonious whole.” This is an excellent beginning. “A unified, harmonious whole.” That is the key phrase. If photography is your means of self-expression, then composition must be the vehicle with which you express yourself clearly, concisely, and smoothly. Composition is the means of bringing viewers into your photograph and holding their attention long enough to read your commentary and define their own feelings.

Figure 2-2: Oak Tree, Sapelo Island
The immense oak tree is clearly the center of interest. Background trees form a rhythmic counterpoint.

We will delve into the dictionary definition more deeply, but first we need a short physiological description of the human visual process in order to apply the definition to photography.

How the Human Eye Sees

The eye does not see whole vistas at once. It views the world in small chunks, then puts the pieces together to form the complete picture. The angle of sharp vision is extremely small, only about three radial degrees. To see for yourself what this means, try the following: Hold your arm straight out with your hand bent upward and your fingers spread (as if your palm were held against a wall in front of you). You are looking at the back of your hand at arm’s length. Now, look at your thumbnail. As you do so, you will see that your little finger is out of focus! You will have to move your eyes in order to see your little finger sharply. Yet it is not very far from your thumb, even with your fingers spread. In fact, all of your other fingers are out of focus as well, indicating the limits of sharp vision.

With the eye able to see only small bits sharply at any moment, it must move about speedily to view the entire scene. It does not do so in an organized fashion like a TV scanner. Instead, it darts about randomly, up and down, side to side, picking out bits and pieces here and there, and sending these tidbits back to the brain at a furious pace. The brain processes this random data and puts it all together, like a mosaic or a jigsaw puzzle. While studying the scene the eye stops momentarily at prominent objects and sees them with real clarity, filling in the rest in a rather fuzzy manner. Thus, the eye does not perceive the whole scene with uniform sharpness or interest.

The term “random” is used loosely here, for when the eye stops momentarily at objects of greater interest, that is not purely random. However, I will use the term “random” to indicate that the eye’s movements are not preprogrammed like a TV or image scanner, but that the eye responds uniquely to each scene, never searching through two different scenes in precisely the same way.

We all see this way. Researchers have proven it and confirmed it more than once. It is a physiological fact. You can’t fight it!

With this in mind, let’s return to the discussion of composition and define it as follows: Good composition is the artist’s way of directing the viewer’s vision in a planned, derandomized fashion.

When a photograph is well composed, viewers first see the elements that the artist wants them to see most prominently and remember longest. Next, they notice the elements of secondary importance, and finally the elements of subordinate interest. With good composition, the artist leads viewers through the photograph in a controlled manner. Sometimes it may be bringing out interesting relationships that catch the viewer’s eye, perhaps a relationship that exists only from one point of view. There is nothing haphazard about a well-composed photograph (just as there is nothing haphazard about a well-composed musical score, a well-constructed novel, play, or movie or any other well-composed work of art). Composition is the artist’s way of bringing order into a nonordered world. In essence, this is what the dictionary definition calls for.

This definition helps explain why a magnificent scene often fails to translate into a fine photograph. The scene may be quite complex. The eye accepts this, darting about and selecting the most important bits of information, then filling in the rest. But a photograph or any other work of visual art must organize that information. If it fails to do so, the viewer’s eye roams about aimlessly, unable to find the artist’s statement because there is none. The scene has not been composed, but merely selected. The photograph is not a work of art, but merely a recording of the scene with one critical defect: it lacks the presence of the real scene.

There is a very real difference between “seeing” and “photographic seeing.” An individual may recognize and appreciate an interesting scene, but may not be able to organize it into an effective photograph. Only those individuals who can bring out an unusual, easily overlooked, worthwhile set of relationships from within a scene can be said to “see photographically.” Understanding composition and applying it separates the artists from the snapshooters. A single, interesting object of exceptional visual power may sometimes be enough to produce a wonderful image, but rarely. Usually it is the relationships of lines, forms, colors, etc. that create the exceptional compositions and the most insightful photographs. The savvy photographer looks at all parts of the intended image to uncover hidden relationships that produces the extraordinary image; she rarely confines her seeing to a single object of interest.

There are two aspects of good composition that are of prime importance. The concept of a unified thought is one; simplicity is the other. The two are strongly interrelated.

 With good composition the artist leads the viewer through the photograph in a controlled manner.

Unified Thought

The term “unified thought” comes from the dictionary definition of composition referred to earlier as “a unified, harmonious whole.” It means that all the elements of the photograph work together. In other words, a central concept underlies the photograph (figure 2-1). This concept often translates to the somewhat narrower concept of a center of interest. Let’s differentiate between a center of interest and a unified thought through the use of two examples.

Figure 2-3: Wings and Bubbles, Death Valley Dunes
There is no center of interest in this pattern of sand, with echoes of the same forms repeating themselves from the bottom of the image upward, and an array of nearly circular shadows in the background above them. It is the pattern that creates a unifying thought for this image, though the eye does not go to any singular point within the image as a center of interest.

The first photograph shows a huge oak tree with an array of more distant trees beyond (figure 2-2). An effective photograph of an old giant like this could have been made by isolating it against the sky rather than against a background of other trees. Even against a background of trees, it is so dominant as to clearly draw your attention, with the background trees obviously subordinate. Such isolation or obvious dominance focuses the viewer’s attention on the tree. It is clear that the tree is the subject under consideration and the thing to be studied. It is the center of interest.

Suppose, however, the subject is sand. How do you photograph something as potentially dull as sand, and how do you create a mood? One answer is to find an interesting pattern of sand, such as on the beach as a high tide is receding or on sand dunes, particularly after wind has molded them into compelling forms (figure 2-3). You wouldn’t find this in a children’s sand box or on a heavily trodden, popular sandy beach on a warm summer day.

If you concentrate on a unifying thought, your photographs will be cohesive. It is the visual equivalent of speaking on a topic without rambling aimlessly toward peripheral issues. Just beware of allowing the definition of a “unified thought” to become too broad. It’s easy to say, “The countryside is the unifying thought” as justification for shooting everything in sight!

Simplicity

For the beginner, simplicity is a necessity. The simpler the composition, the more likely he or she is to maintain control and direct the viewer’s attention to the important elements (figure 2-4). It is equally true for the intermediate or advanced photographer, though with increased experience and sophistication he is able to simplify and control progressively more complex situations. This is true of painters and sculptors as well as photographers—and of all other visual artists. It is even true of composers, with the modification that the concept applies to listeners rather than viewers.

The importance of simplicity cannot be stressed too strongly. Over the years, I have observed that most unsuccessful photographs fail because they are too complicated rather than too simple (assuming they are technically competent, of course). The photographer is unable to elucidate his thoughts clearly and concisely, and the resulting photograph illustrates his uncertainty and lack of direction. In some cases, this may produce exactly the desired effect, but in most cases it will not.

Look at your own prints and ask yourself what your goal was in each one. Can you distill the answer down to a clear comment? Try it. Put the book down and analyze several of your photographs as if they were someone else’s work. Try to be objective. A rambling answer to the key question usually indicates a photograph filled with ambiguity. Is it clear, concise, and basically simple, or is it complicated, unclear, confused, or just unimportant? Then again, are you actively trying to express ambivalence or ambiguity, or trying to create complexity or confusion? If so, you may need to alter your approach significantly to best achieve your goals. Be aware of your intent, and state it simply and clearly, even if your intended statement is, “I am confused!” That may seem contradictory at first reading, but it is not.

At the start of this chapter, I suggested looking through your prints slowly while considering the thoughts in chapter 1. I am doing the same thing again here. While this may seem redundant, I urge you to try it. If you have committed yourself to take the time to read this book, make your commitment worthwhile by relating what you read to your own photography. This process will also help you tune in to a better understanding of yourself, your goals, and your methods.

Expressing Your Own Point of View

Implicit in this questioning of your own images and their specific goals is the deeper question of whether or not your own point of view is visible. Without a point of view, there will always be ambiguity in the image that cannot be overcome by simplicity and unity alone. School graduation portraits are perfect examples. There is no commentary or point of view by the photographer. Each student marches in, puts on the appropriate robe, poses properly, and marches out. The photographer does not know the student, has no time to become acquainted with the student, and has no interest in the student, anyway. The result, predictably, is of no great moment. It’s a face. It’s simple and unified, but it is artistically lacking.

Figure 2-4: Pentstemon, Little Death Hollow
In one of the many side canyons of Utah’s Escalante River, a group of pentstemon flowers in soft sunlight stand out against the background of an overhanging canyon wall. The pentstemon are the obvious center of interest, for there is nothing in the image that competes with them for attention. An even simpler composition could have featured just one single plant, but the repetition of slightly arched flower stalks makes for greater interest, while still maintaining a very simple composition.

On a more sophisticated level, an attempt at enlightening portraiture will fail unless there is some rapport between the photographer and the subject (and if not rapport, at least some meaningful contact or strong prior feelings). The photographer should know the subject, have some interest in and some opinions about the subject, and try to convey those elements of the subject’s personality that strike him most strongly (figure 2-5). In some cases, the photographer must rely heavily on initial impressions, for it is not often possible to spend sufficient time with a subject to know them thoroughly.

Figure 2-5: Stu Levy in Waterholes Canyon
Stu is a good friend, a wonderful physician, a penetrating thinker, and a fine photographer. During a workshop we co-instructed, I asked to do his portrait. I wanted to show him in an environmental setting that suits him as much as his medical office.

Lack of sufficient time is a typical problem bedeviling all fields of photography. After all, how often have you been on a vacation, wanting to make one more photograph, but your friends, family or relatives were trying to rush you along? That’s a problem, but some photographers have thrived under the time constraints. Henri Cartier-Bresson did not spend weeks on a particular street prior to photographing an event there. Yousuf Karsh was unable to spend days with Winston Churchill before making his famous portrait. Ansel Adams tells of working with exceptional haste when photographing Moonrise, Hernandez, New Mexico. A quick impression is often all that a photographer can gain of his subject, and thus his perceptions and definitions must be quick and precise.

Surprisingly, this is true even if the subject is supposedly nonmoving, such as a landscape, because the lighting and other conditions always change—sometimes with astonishing quickness! A landscape is an ever-changing situation, and the photographer can rarely analyze the scene leisurely; but he or she must analyze it nonetheless. If you can quickly define your own reaction, determine how you want to convey that reaction, and go about composing the photograph with simplicity and unity of thought, you have a good chance of communicating your thoughts successfully.

Edward Weston defined good composition as “the strongest way of seeing.” Some people dislike that definition because it doesn’t offer a handle on how to compose. Yet it is a remarkable definition. It specifically avoids rules of composition and purposely relates composition to seeing. It talks about “strength of seeing,” or in other words, the art of creating a strong visual statement. I believe that Weston would fully agree that simplicity and unity go a long way toward imparting strength to a photograph.

Simplicity vs. Complexity

Other thoughts run quite contrary to those just discussed, and it would be worthwhile to air them, if only briefly. A good deal of contemporary thought claims that today’s world is complex, dissonant, fragmented, and brutal. Since art mirrors society, it would be remiss and even absurd to renounce these elements in favor of outdated concepts of simplicity and harmony. Just as ambiguity may be better expressed by contrary principles, so too should these aspects of life.

Such thoughts point to a radically different approach, and surely a valid one. It is not my approach, but it may be yours. It depends largely on your point of view, and to a lesser degree on your subject matter. Personally, I feel that a visual representation of even the most complex, confusing, and inharmonious subject should possess inherent simplicity and unity to achieve maximum effect—just as an incisive statement has greater impact than a long, rambling speech. To depict discord and complexity by means of still more discord and complexity strikes me as useless, for it merely declares the world a mess without shedding any light on it.

Furthermore, those elements which are certainly an unfortunate part of today’s world are not new at all. They have always been there. When was civilization not plagued by hatred, cruelty, war, contradictions, insurmountable problems, and unexpected disasters? Art can illuminate this perplexing and imperfect world by isolating portions of it in an understandable way. Simplicity and unity appeal to me as the most easily understood approach and the one possessing the greatest impact. Yet I must add that this approach is valid for me in most cases, but not all.

I feel that some amount of dissonance, complexity, or ambiguity can be meaningful or tolerable, but that in undiluted doses they serve no enlightening purpose. Then again, is art supposed to be enlightening? Perhaps. Perhaps not. I feel it should be, but your conclusion is a matter of personal choice. The question itself brings us to the most basic of all questions concerning art: “What is art?” An attempt to answer that question can be as elusive as grabbing a cloud. Despite the near impossibility of articulating a sensible answer, we can rely on the fact that every person has his or her own opinions, his or her strong likes and dislikes, and his or her own limits. It always boils down to the often-expressed phrase, “I don’t know what’s good, but I know what I like!” I feel that art should provide satisfying visual distillations of real or imagined worlds. For me, unity and simplicity are satisfying, whereas confusion and dissonance are relatively dissatisfying.

Another thought concerns the concept of simplicity alone and challenges its esteemed position rather effectively. This concept maintains that complexity is not only important, but also essential to any great work of art. By way of illustration, Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony is regarded as a greater work than “Twinkle, Twinkle Little Star” primarily because of its greater complexity, despite the fact that the latter is a rather “perfect” and pleasant tune. I endorse this thought completely.

That may seem to contradict some of the thoughts in the previous pages of this chapter, but the apparent contradiction can be easily explained. The Ninth Symphony is indeed highly complex, but Beethoven’s consummate mastery of music kept it under control at all times. A lesser composer could not have achieved such control. Beethoven harnessed the complexity and the dynamics. In a similar fashion, a photographer with a mastery of the medium can control greater complexity than a beginner. By striving for simplicity, the beginner can produce worthwhile photographs at the outset and then work toward gaining control over ever more complex compositions as his understanding of the medium—and his confidence in himself—grows. In doing so, he will probably create ever more meaningful images. I feel that complexity is essential to great art, but that it must be controlled.

A final thought that I want to consider is the concept of almost uncontrolled complexity as a core of artistic expression. Consider the paintings of Jackson Pollock, who is highly regarded among art critics. His paintings cannot be considered simple, though they can be viewed as unified in that the eye repeatedly finds the same elements as it travels through them. Scientific analysis of his paintings indicates that there may be an underlying fractal character to them—meaning that as you view smaller and smaller sections of the painting, you continue to find similar structures. This is fascinating from both a scientific and artistic aspect. Yet I must admit, Pollock’s paintings say nothing to me. I find them messy, formless, and utterly lacking in interest. I disagree with most of the critics, but that’s my right. You have to make up your own mind on such issues.

I have several photographs that are not easily seen or comprehended at first. One that I title “Camouflage” is almost like a Jackson Pollock painting, intended to have the objects of interest hidden from view (figure 2-6). Another, “The Beggar Woman” (figure 2-7), features a center of interest that is so small (the woman sitting and begging at the cathedral doorway) that the viewer hardly notices her at first. But once noticed, she immediately becomes the center of interest.

Figure 2-6: Camouflage
This is, perhaps, the closest thing I’ve produced to a Jackson Pollack painting. Can you decipher what it is? Did you see it immediately, or did it take some time?

I have brought up these points so you can think about them, incorporate them when appropriate to your way of seeing and thinking, and discard them when inappropriate. This process should become part of your own philosophical approach to photography. Photography is not simply the act of picking up a camera, pointing it at something, and pressing the shutter. It is a process of thoughtful consideration of your own point of view overlaid upon the scene. It requires creative thinking, which is not easy. The ideas expressed here are simply a means of stimulating further thought and creativity on your part.

Figure 2-7: The Beggar Woman
From inside the Cathedral in Oaxaca, Mexico, I saw the beggar sitting on the stone entryway beyond the frosted etched glass panels. While heart-wrenching, there was a compositional unity created by the strong lines of the light pouring into the cathedral. Yet the beggar is the center of interest, but you don’t see her initially. She’s too small to be seen immediately. Once discovered, the image takes on a different character.

===== FILE 10/28: Text%2fchapter03.xhtml =====

Figure 3-1: Lay Brothers’ Refectory, Fountains Abbey
This subject presented a perplexing dilemma: do I lower contrast to retain interior detail, or maintain contrast and lose outside detail? I chose the latter, eliminating the manicured bushes outside. The center of interest is this 100+ yard long refectory (i.e., dining hall) used by the nonecclesiastical workers (the lay brothers) who worked there. Although your eye follows the perspective lines directly to the blank white opening in the distance, that opening is surely not the center of interest. Importantly all interior detail is retained.

CHAPTER 3
Elements of Composition

IF COMPOSITION IS THE MEANS OF LEADING VIEWERS through your photograph and holding them there until they see your message, there must be methods of composing to achieve maximum strength in your imagery. There are indeed such methods, and they can be put to use by identifying and understanding the elements of composition.

The following is a list of the many elements of composition. We will discuss them and consider how they can be used to enhance a photograph.

Light
Color
Contrast and Tone
Line
Form
Pattern
Balance
Movement
Positive/Negative Space
Texture
Camera Position
Focal Length
Depth of Field
Shutter Speed

The following two key considerations must always be included to tie all of these elements together:

Involvement with the scene
Relationships

Light and color will be discussed separately in later chapters, for these two elements are so important that they deserve special attention. For readers who are primarily interested in color, the following discussion, seemingly applicable only to black and white, is extremely important for the concepts apply to color just as much as they apply to black and white.

Contrast and Tone

These two subjects are so closely intertwined that it would be nearly impossible to separate them. Every scene has its own inherent contrast range, but it can be increased, decreased, or maintained in either black and white or color photography. Methods of contrast control are explained in chapters 8, 9, and 10 employing traditional methods, and in chapters 11 and 12 for digital means. At this point, suffice it to say that surprisingly large—effectively, limitless—alterations can be made in the contrast level in black-and-white using film (figure 3-1). Contrast control is also possible in color, but to a more limited extent through traditional film methods. Contrast in both black-and-white and color is also exceptional using digital methods.

Contrast is not a true element of composition but rather a technique that derives its importance from the way the eye and the brain work together to see the world. In the previous chapter, we learned that the eye jumps randomly—not in a prescribed manner like a scanner or other such device—from one key area in the scene to another, filling in the spaces of lesser importance in a rather fuzzy manner. The eye doesn’t move randomly about in any specific scene, but it can be considered random in general because it responds to each scene differently. With few exceptions, the eye jumps immediately to the point of the scene possessing the highest contrast. White against dark gray or black is extraordinarily powerful. Black against light gray or white is equally strong. Light gray against a darker or midtone gray will not attract the eye as immediately, nor will a dark gray against a midtone or light gray. The knowing artist employs these devices as desired, going with stronger contrasts for impact and softer contrasts for subtlety.

High contrast gives photographs “snap” and excitement; low contrast usually imparts a gentler mood. Each one has its place, and each has a great effect on the final mood of the image, no matter what the subject matter may be.

Contrast is determined not so much by the range of tones, but by the way they relate to one another. Transitional middle grays soften the contrast of a print that possesses both deep blacks and brilliant whites, making it a medium contrast print. A print lacking either extreme may appear quite high in contrast if the darkest grays are placed next to the lightest grays. This high-contrast effect will be heightened if midtones are absent elsewhere in the image.

It will come as a surprise, but in fact there is no relationship between the tonal range of an image and the contrast of that image. To illustrate this apparent contradiction, suppose you’re a traditional film/darkroom photographer, and you expose a sheet of enlarging paper under the enlarger to white light (with no negative in the enlarger), but first you cover the paper with heavy black cardboard. Then you slowly pull the cardboard across the paper, turning off the enlarger just before the paper is fully revealed. When you develop that sheet of paper, it will run the full gray scale from black (at one end) to white (at the other end) with all midtones in between. Digitally, you can accomplish the same effect by using a gradient tool to create and smooth a range of tones from maximum black at one side of the image file to pure white at the other edge. Though the print or digital file has a full tonal scale, it has no contrast whatsoever! The reason is that contrast implies a juxtaposition of different tones, but every spot on that print is adjacent to a tone that is exactly alike or imperceptibly lighter or darker.

If, on the other hand, a small object (a penny, let’s say) were placed on the enlarging paper on the side that was first revealed when the cardboard was slowly withdrawn, there would be a blank white circle surrounded by black and very deep grays. Digitally, of course, you can create the same effect by simply plunking a white circle down near the dark edge of the file. Though the tonal range remains the same, the print now has high contrast. If the white circle were placed in the middle of the otherwise smooth black-to-white image, it would be surrounded by medium grays, giving the print or digital file moderate contrast, but again it possesses exactly the same tonal range. And, of course, if the white circle were placed at the light end of the enlarging paper, the white circle would be surrounded by very light gray or white tonalities, and contrast would be very low. But the tonal range still remains the same. So image contrast depends on tonal juxtapositions, not on tonal range. An image that goes from white to black may still have an overall “muddy” appearance. Some prints without either a pure white or maximum black have great “snap” and contrast. While tonal range and contrast are often related, exceptions abound.

An image may be high key (with lighter tones predominating), low key (with darker tones predominating), or mixed. Are the moods similar in a high-key and a low-key image? Most likely there will be a wide emotional gulf between them. Two photographs from my English cathedral studies (figures 3-2 and 3-3) illustrate several points about contrast and overall tone. Though the images are quite similar in content, and even somewhat similar in design, the print from Durham has deeper overall tones and higher contrast (though the tonal range of the two images is nearly equal—they both go from white to black). To me, it also has a more brooding tone, while the image from Hereford allows more hope and optimism—despite the fact that the statue at Durham depicts a man reading, and quite alive, while the one at Hereford depicts a dead knight.

Figure 3-2: Statue and Nave Columns, Durham Cathedral
The dark tones convey the mood—the overall darkness—of Durham Cathedral. The statue of lexicographer Samuel Johnson shows a man who was quite alive, though contemplative, yet a brooding, somber quality dominates the image.

Does this mean that dark tones invoke somber moods and light tones invoke greater optimism? Not necessarily, but I suggest they point in those directions more often than not. This is not stated as a rule (always avoid rules because they fail too often), but as a generalization: it tends to be true quite frequently. When you give it a bit of thought, you realize that our everyday language almost equates the two: we speak of a “sunny mood,” of a “dark mood,” of a person with a “bright disposition,” and of an ominous mood as “dark clouds gathering.” This should be understood, because in a photograph, it translates to a significant part of our visual language in conveying our feelings. Overall, high-key images tend to impart a more positive, optimistic mood, whereas low-key images tend to be more somber, sometimes even pessimistic.

Figure 3-3: Tomb of an Unknown Knight, Hereford Cathedral
Middle and light gray tonalities dominate this image, as sunlight pours through the unseen windows at the left. Despite the foreground tomb of a dead knight, this image conveys greater optimism than the one from Durham Cathedral. The lighter tonalities may be the reason for this difference.

Photographs often are hurt by inappropriate contrast or tone that conflicts with the intended mood. I believe the problem can be blamed in part on the unwritten “rule” that states all photographs must have a pure white, a pure black, and tones in between (except in the case of graphic black-and-white photographs, in which case the midtones can be dropped). Not only should this rule remain unwritten, but it should be ignored as well. Two examples will help illustrate this point.

The first example is Sunlight, Capitol Park, Sacramento (figure 3-4). As I set up my camera on the steps of the California State Capitol Building looking into the arboretum that morning, I felt that everything in the scene was filled with light—as if each tree, each blade of grass, each leaf was a source of light. There seemed to be no darkness anywhere. I wanted my image to mirror that feeling of brilliant light and glare. The tones range from white to middle grays; there is no black, and none is needed. I feel that dark tones would be decidedly inappropriate. They would compromise the mood of the morning. Conveying the mood is far more important than complying with an arbitrary rule.

Another photographer standing in that same spot may have experienced a feeling of brilliance, and that feeling may have been translated into a very different image. I have often seen photographs of sunlight pouring through trees in which the trees are silhouetted. That type of rendition would have been perfectly valid and could have been used here, but only by someone who responded differently to the feeling of light.

The second example is drawn from England. Gatehouse, Lanercost Priory (figure 3-5) has no whites and hardly a light gray. It was photographed at dusk with a misty rain falling. In the fading light, it required a 30-second exposure. Though it was a gloomy time, it did not impart a depressing mood.

Figure 3-4: Sunlight, Capitol Park, Sacramento
The darkest portions of this print are barely middle gray. Dark tonalities would have been inappropriate; they would have negated the feeling of light suffusing the scene as morning fog gave way to sunlight. The unwritten rule that prints must have a pure white and a pure black should be ignored, as should all rules dealing with art and personal expression.

Figure 3-5: Gatehouse, Lanercost Priory
The lightest portion of this image, the sky at the horizon, does not approach white or even a very light gray. At dusk, beneath heavy overcast skies and a light drizzle, detail in the gatehouse and tree was barely visible. Bright tonalities would have been inappropriate. As in “Sunlight Capitol Park” (figure 3-4), the rule that a black and a white are both needed is ignored.

When I first printed the image, I was concerned about the lack of whites (not because of the way it looked, but because I had never made a print without whites or very light grays, and I had so often heard that “all prints need a white, a black, and a good range of midtones”). So I tried printing it in different ways. First, I attempted higher contrast in order to obtain lighter grays while maintaining the dark tones. Then I printed it lighter in tone overall. Neither version conveyed the feeling I had in mind. I returned to my original print of the image, realizing that for the mood I wished to convey—quiet, calm, contemplative—white or light gray was undesirable.

A well-conceived high-key image usually conveys a feeling of enveloping light and overall airiness, and perhaps a degree of optimism. The creative photographer can sometimes use the same tones to convey a somber mood, however. I have seen such effects, and I feel that each photographer should discover when, where, and how they could be achieved.

Can a low-key image impart a feeling of openness and optimism? Ansel Adams’s Moonrise, Hernandez, New Mexico is dominated by deep tones, yet the print overflows with brilliance and optimism. His print is highlighted by gleaming whites and light tones in the moon, the clouds, and even the tiny hamlet and cemetery in the foreground. Could the inherent optimism have been achieved without the brilliant light tones and without the high overall contrast?

In general, deep tones tend to convey strength and stability, and sometimes pessimism, mystery, and somber moods. High contrast imparts brilliance and drama while low contrast imparts quiet. Of course, these statements are true in general! With skill, the creative artist can turn these generalizations around effectively, in a way that enhances the effect because of its unexpected character.

Many photographers, beginners in particular, overemphasize high contrast in most of their images. Rich blacks and gleaming whites usually cause people to have an immediate positive reaction to images because of their eye-catching nature, but often after that initial response, the viewer is left with empty feelings concerning the emotional impact of the image. Unfortunately, the beginner is encouraged by the initial reaction and continues printing or editing with excessive contrast, often with tonalities that are too deep. I cannot count the number of times I have seen student prints at workshops that were printed unnecessarily dark and brooding in an effort to impart dramatic or mysterious effects, only to end up as prints that were unnecessarily dark and brooding! This seems to be a common trap for beginners (myself included) who wish to become an instant Ansel Adams, Brett Weston, or Yousuf Karsh. Only those who are analytical and objective enough to look past the reaction of others to their own reactions can recognize that a more subtle approach may improve many images. Some do require low contrast. And some really require high contrast. It is always better to match the tonalities and contrast level to the desired mood rather than to a standard formula.

What about the midtones, the middle grays? These are often the tones that are hardest to deal with because they can be amazingly boring when used incorrectly. Middle gray, just by its very name, seems to elicit yawns. But consider that those tones can also be middle silver! When the middle grays begin to glow as middle silvers, the photographer has truly achieved something extraordinary.

Subtlety and brilliance in printing comes from all tonal ranges. Too often the midtones are skipped over as mere transitional elements between the “important” black and white tones, but they can be the heart of the image. In portraits, the midtones can convey the character behind the face with richness and authority. Usually, it is not the blacks or whites that carry a portrait, but the midtones that show the smoothness or cragginess of the skin, every pore of the cheeks and nose, and the curves or angularities of the features. Jay Dusard, with whom I have worked for years, is the ultimate master of turning the middle grays into middle silvers. From a distance, many of his prints seem subdued, sometimes even muddy in character, but on closer inspection those tones tend to glow with an internal richness. He tends to have shimmering midtones throughout his imagery, both portraits and landscapes.

Midtones are equally important in landscapes, studio setups, still lifes, product and architectural photographs, and every other conceivable subject matter. In a real sense, the midtones need the greatest care of all because they can be the death of an image. They can also give the image its most subtle characteristics.

You can alter the tonalities of any scene to most effectively express yourself. You can print any image lighter or darker than a literal rendition. This involves the concept of visualizing the final print as you stand there looking at the scene, a concept that will be explored in depth in the next chapter. The print is your creation, and you are free to do whatever you want with your own creation. But always beware of the enticing trap of pushing too hard in an attempt to create a mood, for it will often end up as an artificial mood. Get in tune with your honest feelings and work toward conveying them with the most appropriate tones and contrasts. You will get your strongest photographs with the honest approach.

 When the middle grays begin to glow as middle silvers, the photographer has truly achieved something extraordinary.

Line

After contrast and tone, which largely set the mood of the image, we come to line, which is possibly the strongest element of composition. Lines are compelling pulls for the eye, as artists learned in the Renaissance when perspective was first discovered. It was quickly seen that the eye follows a perspective line into the distance as if there were no choice. In essence, there is no choice! The eye will follow a line from beginning to end unless it becomes so convoluted that it is no longer a simple line.

Diagonal lines have powerful compositional effects because of their inherent instability. They create tension. They are not stabilized in either a standing (vertical) position or a reclining (horizontal) position. In effect, diagonal lines are in the process of falling, which gives them powerful dynamics. Both vertical and horizontal lines possess a reduced feeling of dynamics but a heightened feeling of permanence or stability (or even a static feeling, if used in an uninspired manner). Curved lines, too, can be very dynamic or quite relaxed. Tight curves tend to carry more drama than wide, sweeping curves.

Figure 3-6: Circular Chimney, Antelope Canyon
This was my first slit canyon photograph. I did not see it as a canyon of eroded sandstone, but as a floating site in space-time surrounded by cosmic forces. The central black form (a black hole, perhaps?) is surrounded by tightly curved bright lines that grow dimmer as they move away from the center of the image. The eye is immediately drawn toward the central area because of its high contrast, and then spirals outward from there.

Figure 3-7: Fallen Sequoias
The fallen giant creates a strong movement from lower left to upper right, with the branches in the lower-right corner mirroring that angle. Remove the fallen sequoia, and the scene has stately grandeur but is not dynamic. The brightest portion of the print has just a bit of tonality to it, revealing fog; the darkest portion is just as black as the deepest black in “Circular Chimney, Antelope Canyon,” yet the image is not high contrast because the tonal extremes do not come in contact. Much of the image is dominated by middle gray tonalities. Contrast is not determined by the range of tonalities, but by their juxtapositions.

Of course, these tendencies must be considered in combination with other compositional elements. Dominant diagonal lines in a low contrast print may appear to be less dynamic than horizontal or vertical lines in a high contrast print. As each element of composition unfolds in this discussion, it must be considered in relationship with the others (more about this toward the end of this chapter), and ultimately in context with the subject to make real sense. The value of understanding the elements of composition in their pure, abstract form is to ultimately match them with the subject and strengthen the statement you are trying to make.

Two examples will help illustrate the points made so far. Circular Chimney, Antelope Canyon (figure 3-6) directs the eye to the center of the image, where contrast is greatest; the deepest blacks come directly in contact with the brightest whites, and the curving lines are tightest. From there, the eye spirals rapidly outward from the high-contrast, inner curves toward the lower-contrast, outer curves. The combination of high contrast and curved lines makes this image very dynamic.

Fallen Sequoias (figure 3-7) is dominated by the strong diagonal of the fallen tree and its repeated angle in the cluster of branches at the lower right corner that contrasts with the standing trees behind. In this image, the standard associations of vertical and diagonal lines hold true. Remove the diagonal fallen tree and logs, and the photograph becomes one of a primeval forest in fog, strong and permanent, but surely not dynamic.

There is nearly a full tonal range in the print, but it does not have high contrast. The standing trees recede gently into the enveloping fog (which is light gray, not pure white), while light and middle grays dominate the image—except for the upper part of the fallen tree and the branches below, which attain dark grays and blacks. This serves to add three-dimensionality to the image and impart a sense of presence.

Do straight or curved lines have the same emotional feel as jagged lines with pointed edges? Surely not. Do sweeping curves have the same emotional feel as a series of vertical, straight lines? Again, no. Try to fit various types of subject matter into the abstract line structures just mentioned to see how the line structures you envision work with the subject matter. (This can, of course, include curved lines as well as straight lines.)

There are no rules for the emotional connotations of any specific type of line. In conjunction with the subject and other compositional elements, such as contrast and tone, lines can help determine the overall mood of a photograph. In portraiture, often the slight turn of a head can change a straight, stern facial line into a softer, mellower line—and vice versa. Carefully placed and controlled lighting, either harsh or soft, can further accentuate either effect. So the astute portrait photographer thoughtfully controls the angle of the head in relation to the lens of the camera, where and how the hands are placed, the clothing that is worn, where lighting is placed, and the type of lighting used (whether ambient or artificial) to help convey his or her feelings about the person in the portrait.

Be aware of strong lines that pull the eye out of a photograph. Perspective lines, in particular, can often be the culprits, for the eye will follow the line to the edge of the photograph and beyond. Before you know it, you have lost the viewer. Surely you want to hold your viewer’s attention, so strong lines must be carefully controlled, just as loud musical passages must be adroitly balanced with quieter passages, or fast passages must be balanced emotionally with slower passages.

On the other hand, beware of reading lines into a photograph when they exist too faintly or not at all. A photograph often turns out poorly because the photographer overestimated the continuity of lines, particularly when the alleged line ran through several objects, such as a plant and its shadow. Reading weak lines into a photograph is much like reading nonexistent moods into a photograph: it never works. It’s too easy for a photographer to read a series of objects as a line when, in fact, there is no line visible to the viewer. It’s like a connect-the-dots picture we played as children before the dots are actually connected. The photographer may wish for the viewer to quickly connect the dots he wants to be connected, but in reality, they do not beg to be connected.

Sometimes there are enough clues to push the viewer to connect the dots. It turns out that not every line has to be a continuum, like the vertical trunks or diagonal log of Fallen Sequoias, or the sweeping curves of Circular Chimney, Antelope Canyon. Some lines can consist of a sequence of forms that closely relate to one another. In such cases, the eye will truly “connect the dots.” Sometimes such lines can be very fascinating, indeed. They can also create problems. For example, a series of forms might not relate to one another in a scene because they are of different colors. However, if they are translated into similar gray tonalities in a black-and-white photograph, they suddenly relate to one another quite strongly. In some cases, the line may prove to be highly beneficial to the composition, but in other cases it may seriously distract the viewer from the photographer’s intended vision.

Conversely, a series of unrelated forms in a color image may produce a line if they are all of the same color, or closely related colors, especially if they contrast significantly from other colors dominating the image. These are things to watch for, recognizing that they could be quite beneficial for your purposes, or they could be quite destructive.

Form

Simple geometric forms—triangles, circles, rectangles, etc.—create strong designs. Repeated use of these forms and variations of them can add further strength to compositions, especially if there are variations among them in size, tonality, color, texture, or orientation. Of course, forms don’t have to be geometrically simple to be eye-catching when repeated. The forms can be oddly shaped, but seen repeatedly they become visually attractive . . . so much so that they may become the most visually attractive aspect of the image.

Some photographers tend to build their compositions out of an array of forms (or shapes, if you prefer that term), somewhat like a mosaic or a jigsaw puzzle. Jay Dusard tends to organize his image space in this manner. Dusard often uses small forms pieced together in a complex and intricate manner. Other photographers may use larger puzzle pieces. I often find it difficult to build with forms, so my prints generally have strong lines dominating the composition, though there are exceptions.

All photographs have both lines and forms in them (the edge of anything is a line, and the thing itself is a form), but some photographs are clearly dominated by lines while others are dominated by forms (figure 3-8). From these clear distinctions they tend to grade into one another. Is one type inherently stronger than the other? The answer is surely a matter of opinion. I feel that line-dominated images are more assertive than form-dominated images; a line is a dynamic visual attractant, forcing the eye to move along it, while a form causes the eye to stop while studying it. Line-dominated images have greater flow and motion to them. Furthermore, it strikes me that form-dominated images move the eye about in jumps, forcing it to hop from form to form and piece the image together afterwards, whereas line-dominated images move the eye about in smoother, faster sweeps. I have no scientific evidence to prove these observations, but they seem correct to my way of seeing and thinking. Your feelings about my observations may indicate an inclination on your part to one type of composition or the other.

Figure 3-8: The Louvre, Dusk
The dominating forms in this image are the clean triangles of the pyramid (the entry to the museum) and the shapes created by the walkways. These forms also provide a visual counterpoint to the ornate architecture of the old palace. The print is toned to brown to subtly enhance its mood at dusk. (Note the setting sun through the pyramid’s glass.)

Line, Form, Contrast, and Emotion

Before continuing with the other elements of composition, let’s pause for a moment to consider the ramifications of lines, forms, and contrasts on the emotional content of an image. This is of the utmost importance because even the most technically perfect print is meaningless without emotion.

First, imagine two photographs in which the first is dominated by strong whites and deep, rich blacks while the second is characterized by middle gray tonalities. The first photograph will be more active. It will jump out at you. The second will be quieter, more muted, and more passive in feel.

Next, imagine two photographs in which the first is filled with jagged lines and hard-edged forms while the second has curved lines and softly interacting forms. The first photograph of this pair will immediately grab your eye, whereas the second will have a quieter, more passive mood.

Now, let’s combine these qualities to explore the extremes. A photograph with jagged lines, hard-edged forms, and strong blacks and whites will have a raucous, wild, frenetic feel, perhaps even a sense of being out of control. One with curved lines and softly interacting gray tonalities will be relaxing, quiet, and perhaps run the risk of being boring.

This tells us that jagged lines are far more active than curved lines, which themselves are more relaxed. High contrast is far more active than low contrast. Middle gray tonalities impart the quietest, most relaxed mood of all. So jagged, sharp lines or even tightly curving, twisted lines combined with high contrast will be intensely active and highly charged. Gently curved lines along with softly modulating tonalities will impart a quiet, relaxed mood.

I cannot overemphasize the importance of these tonal and line issues because they form the basis of a universal language understood by people worldwide. It doesn’t matter if you’re from Manhattan, France, Botswana, Russia, the Australian outback, China, or Brazil—you’ll read these combinations of line, form, and contrast the same way. It is, in fact, the only universal language on Earth, which adds immeasurably to its power and communicative ability.

Any thinking photographer will use this universal language to his or her advantage. If you want a quiet, reverential mood, you’ll do well to work with curved lines, rounded forms, and subdued contrast. For example, if you want to convey the warm, soft qualities of a person in a portrait, diffused indoor or outdoor light would serve your purpose. But if you want to convey harsher qualities, spotlighting or strong sunlight—highlighting every wrinkle and crag—would be the lighting of choice. Soft light, gray tones, and pastel colors on rounded hills impart the feeling of a gentle, pleasant, livable landscape, whereas strong sidelight on sharp, craggy rock spires imparts excitement and adventure, perhaps even a feeling of foreboding.

Years ago a student at a workshop presented images made at a Japanese Buddhist monastery. I asked him what mood or feelings he had while at the monastery. He said, “Bruce, it was the most peaceful place I’ve ever been.” Though his compositions were beautiful, I focused on the harsh, high-contrast tonalities he employed in his printing. They negated the peaceful mood. We discussed this at length, prompting him to say, “Nobody ever talked about this previously.” He agreed that the high contrast detracted significantly, and that he simply needed to reprint the negatives at a lower contrast level to successfully convey the mood that the monastery evoked.

My experience with students over the years is that there is a tendency—in fact, an overwhelming pull—to drift toward high contrast. The reason seems to be a desire to produce a “rich” print, an exciting print, an eye-catching print, a dramatic print. But maybe what you really want is a quiet, contemplative mood, one that makes the viewer sit down and think rather than jump up and shout. High contrast fights that mood; sharp-edged forms fight that mood.

You’ll do better to create a mood rather than to produce blacks and whites simply for the sake of showing the world that you can produce blacks and whites. With color, there is a similar pull to go for the most saturated colors or strongly clashing colors, such as deep purples against bright yellows, or saturated greens against saturated reds, etc. None of this helps an incisive photographer convey her points with conviction. My advice is to remain true to the mood you want, and when soft pastels are called for, use soft pastels. Photography, like all other art forms, is a means of conveying your thoughts nonverbally, so stick with the appropriate means, not the ones that always elicit an initial “wow” reaction. Keep those in abeyance for the appropriate images that need to be exciting, not for those where the message should to be softer and quieter.

Figure 3-9: Thrusts, Westgard Pass
Eastern California rock columns create a visual rhythm with no apparent scale discernible. The metallic sheen produces a rich tonal palette not often found in nature.

Pattern

Repeated use of lines or forms is the start of pattern. The vertical trunks of a grove of aspen trees may set up a visual pattern, while the horizontal lines of their shadows set up a second pattern in counterpoint to the first. A photograph of this group of trees and shadows is a good example of a photograph that is held together by a “unified thought” rather than a center of interest. The viewer’s eye is not drawn to any one tree (or its shadow) but to the pattern of trees. If one of those trees were removed, the pattern would still exist. In essence, nothing would have changed. Variations in both the vertical and horizontal lines—verticals due to separations between trees as well as their distance from the camera, and horizontals due to irregularities of shadows on the ground—would add further interest to the image.

This is but one example; there are an infinite number of others. Many of my studies of English cathedrals feature a seemingly infinite array of columns and arches from the immediate foreground to the distant background, which set up a pattern of forms and textures that allows the viewer to translate qualities, such as texture, from the closest columns to those in the distance (figure 3-1). The tonal variations in the columns, arches, and shadows set up an interesting interplay within the patterns. Figure 3-9 shows an example of a pattern in nature, not one created by man.

Figure 3-10: Choir Stalls, Chester Cathedral
Note the differences in the faces carved on the choir stalls. At first glance these are not apparent, but on closer inspection they give the carvings, and the photograph of the choir stalls, far greater interest than a quick glance would indicate.

Man-made patterns tend to be regular and repeated, but sometimes with subtle variations, like the carved faces or designs on the choir stalls in English cathedrals (figure 3-10), and most old structures featuring repeated design elements. It’s unlikely that modern architecture or its details would exhibit such interesting variations. Natural patterns, of course, are varied, and sometimes so astoundingly irregular, abstract, or subtle that the patterns are often overlooked as being patterns (figures 3-11 and 3-12).

Such variation is the key to interest in the pattern. Repetition can be strong to a point, but then it can rapidly degenerate into tedium. If the pattern is not broken up in some way, it could just prove to be boring, leading the viewer’s eye into the pattern, through it, and out of it in an instant. You want to avoid such monotonous patterns. Studio still lifes offer great opportunities to create wonderful patterns and variations because the photographer can arrange things precisely as he desires. Landscapes tend to be a bit more arbitrary; you cannot rearrange things, but you can use camera placement and lens focal length effectively to organize the scene into a pleasing pattern.

William Garnett, the noted aerial photographer, once found an ideal situation that lent itself to monotony of pattern as “the strongest way of seeing.” He made a series of aerial photographs of a sprawling housing tract near Los Angeles before, during, and after construction. The photographs are blatantly monotonous, perhaps as much as the housing tract itself, which looks like something out of an old Monopoly game. The monotony is the strength of the photographs because it so perfectly captures the utter dullness of mid-twentieth century suburbia. The fourth photograph that completes the series includes not only the tract in question, but also the entire urban sprawl of Los Angeles as seen from a point southeast of the city. The sameness seems to spread without end. It is magnificently dull!

Figure 3-11: Bristlecone Wood Detail
Can these be old fishermen’s ropes lying in a decaying pile? They almost have that appearance. Yet a closer look reveals wood is the substance. There is a flow and a pattern here, one that would be unlikely in a typical man-made structure.

Figure 3-12: Vortex and Boulder, Little Death Hollow
Little Death Hollow is one of the myriad side canyons of the Escalante River, itself a tributary of the Colorado River. Here in the narrowest section of the canyon, the viewer’s eye is drawn to the near walls framing the nearly circular flow of walls surrounding the large boulder at the center, which sits in the middle like a bullseye. That implication of concentric circles converging toward the boulder is the essence of the image’s inherent pattern.

This is an important example because it shows that even a seemingly strict “rule” (such as “strive for variation within patterns”) always has an exception. The only worthwhile rule is: avoid rules!

Balance

Balance means equality between the left and right halves of a photograph. This can translate into tonal balance or subject/interest balance. Just like a child’s seesaw, in which a heavy object near the fulcrum balances a light object at the other end, an important object near the center of the image “balances” objects near the opposite edge. Dark tones on one half of the image are balanced by dark tones on the other half. An important object, either large or small, placed near the edge of a photograph without a comparably important object on the opposite side creates a distinctly unbalanced photograph.

Imbalance of either tonality or subject interest often creates tension within the viewer, while balanced compositions are more relaxing, more comfortable. Do you want all of your photographs to be comfortable? I don’t. Sometimes I want to create a degree of tension through imbalance. Some photographers strive for imbalance regularly in order to create a feeling of strain or discomfort.

The simplest way to achieve balance is through symmetry (figure 3-13), but unless symmetrical compositions are handled deftly they can be terribly boring. If overused, or used improperly, symmetry becomes hackneyed, and far less than “the strongest way of seeing.” So symmetry is decidedly a double-edged sword, alternately beneficial or harmful, depending on the photographer.

Asymmetrical balance is more difficult but usually more exciting. Figure 3-14 (Malheur Round Barn) appears symmetrically balanced at first glance. Quickly, you notice the large beams in the lower left to be the opened gate into the circular horse exercise area, and then you notice that the entire support structure for the roof is slightly off-center to the left, where the upper-left circle is completed outside of the two support posts while the right side remains between the two large posts. So we have asymmetrical balance, but seeming to be symmetric in many ways.

Figure 3-15 (Indian Head Bas-Relief, Wolverine Canyon) is center-oriented, but decidedly asymmetrical. The viewer’s eye is immediately drawn to the obvious Indian head in profile, seemingly with its headdress, and perhaps even to the ghost images to its left, but it’s the large half-arch sweeping up over the head from the lower right that breaks up any symmetry, while retaining strong balance within the image.

Balance, like the other elements of composition, should be carefully considered so as to be compatible with the desired mood. If you wish to create a strange, mysterious, or disquieting feeling, imbalance may be more effective than balance. Consider this along with the thoughts about lines, forms, and contrasts to help create a mood in your imagery. In addition to the underlying feeling of excitement or relaxation imparted by lines, forms, and contrasts, balance or imbalance can help create comfort or discomfort. The combination can be very powerful indeed.

Figure 3-13: Three Bridges, Venice
Though not exactly symmetric, it is close enough to be viewed as a symmetric image. The white marble bridge railing in the foreground sets the basic tenor of the image, with dark walls converging toward the distance, first to a high bridge between buildings and then to another farther away, just above the water. The camera was carefully placed to take advantage of the inherent symmetry, but to make it just asymmetrical enough to break true symmetry. The key to camera placement was highlighting the central white marble cone of the railing against a dark background, rather than placing it against the reflective brightness of the canal.

Figure 3-14: Malheur Round Barn
Originally a horse barn and now part of the Malheur Wildlife Reserve in eastern Oregon, the noticeable, yet not overt asymmetries give the image a slight imbalance, where true symmetry is violated, creating a more interesting image.

Figure 3-15: Wolverine Canyon Indian Head Bas-Relief
Wolverine Canyon, yet another side canyon in the Escalante River complex of canyons, harbors this astounding American Indian bas-relief (or perhaps an ancient Egyptian king or queen), visible only under soft lighting (i.e., no direct sunlight). I’ve hiked through this canyon several times without ever noticing this bold form, but it jumped at me under the appropriate lighting conditions.

Figure 3-16: Hills and Clouds, Central California
All of the interest in the image is in the lower half, as the sky is pure black. A top/bottom imbalance is not bothersome, but a left/right imbalance is indeed bothersome. Tonal imbalances can create uncertainty and disorientation, but apparently only left/right imbalances can do this.

Figure 3-17: Liquid Ribbons, Coyote Buttes, Utah
Parts of Utah are like outer space: unearthly and seemingly in motion. It appears as though the land is spinning and spiraling around wildly. Unique formations such as this are found nowhere else on earth, and they deserve protection as natural artistic masterpieces.

What about top/bottom balance or top/bottom imbalance of tonality or subject? This is not a problem. The word “balance” implies a left/right equality; “imbalance,” a left/right inequality. In figure 3-16, all of the real interest is in the bottom half of the photograph, with the top half solid black. Tonal or subject imbalance seems to be quite apparent and often disconcerting when it occurs in a left/right orientation, but hardly noticeable when it occurs in a top/bottom orientation. Maybe it’s just the result of the fact that our bodies, faces, etc. have left/right symmetry but not top/bottom symmetry. Perhaps we simply notice differences far more in the left/right direction than the up/down direction.

Movement

The way in which the eye moves through a photograph—along the succession of lines, forms, contrasts, and objects—defines the movement of the photograph. In many of my slit canyon photographs, the movement occurs in a circular, almost spiral fashion, whereas in many of my forest studies the movement comprises up/down verticals along the trunks of the trees. The great conifer forests of the Pacific Northwest consist of noble, straight trees that convey a feeling of stability and strength, whereas the oak forests of the Southeast have intricate, curved forms that convey a range of feelings from wild abandon to gentleness. Movement causes excitement, and the stronger the movement, the greater the excitement.

As seen earlier in this chapter, in Circular Chimney, Antelope Canyon (figure 3-6), the movement occurs in a circular, almost spiral fashion. In Fallen Sequoias (figure 3-7), the movement is strongly upward and to the right, along the trunk of the fallen giant. The same upward, rightward movement is seen in figure 3-9.

In Liquid Ribbons, Coyote Buttes, Utah (figure 3-17), the movement rolls around, apparently bubbling up in the lower center and curving around the diamond form in the upper center. The image almost seems to be in motion, which is true of the land itself. Movement causes excitement, and the stronger the movement, the greater the excitement.

Figure 3-18: Siena Duomo Geometrics
The image has obvious pattern in the repetition of geometric rectangular blocks and parallel black and white marble lines, all punctuated by the three dark gothic windows. Yet each rectangle is different, including the blank one of the sky in the upper left—which does not strike the viewer as out of place because so much light (nearly white) texture relates to it so strongly. There is ample eye movement from block to block, but no fluid movement because of the hard geometric shapes forming the image, somewhat like a mosaic. Further study reveals the three statues and other fascinating variations of pattern.

Movement and balance are interrelated. If movement is from right-to-left, for example, greater weight can be placed on the right to maintain balance, for the leftward movement counterbalances the imbalance on the right. Movement can also be used to create imbalance and tension, and with it a greater degree of excitement.

In the past, I demanded movement in most of my own work, yet my attitude toward the importance of movement has opened up a bit to other possibilities as I have seen more and more fine photographs that stand on their own without a strong directional flow. Perhaps this change of attitude paved the way for my studies of urban centers throughout the United States and Canada. These images rely on the static, cold architecture that now dominates our urban environments. For the most part, the images from this series avoid directional movement and instead search for geometric patterns. Lack of movement does not imply lack of quality. Movement, like contrast and tone, must be compatible with the mood of a print (figure 3-18; also see figure 1-7).

Positive/Negative Space

The light and dark areas in the scene before your eyes, and those same areas in your photographs, are the so-called positive and negative spaces. For the moment, the positive spaces may be thought of as rocks in a stream and the negative spaces as the flowing stream. Does the stream flow? If not, are the interactions between the positive and negative spaces exciting or dull? Are the forms of the positive and negative spaces elegant or inelegant? Are the flow lines interestingly patterned, or static, disconnected, or broken? An easy way to check is to squint your eyes and blur the image (or, if you wear glasses, take them off) so you see only the major forms but not the finer details. Then ask yourself those questions. The general forms and patterns of the interactions are extremely important in the overall design of your photograph.

Also, while the image is blurred, see if the overall effect of the tonal interactions is satisfying or dissatisfying to you. We often get so involved in the details of an image that we fail to see its overall forms and patterns, or the interactions of the positive and negative spaces.

Do the positive and negative spaces balance? This is not to ask whether the image is 50 percent light and 50 percent dark, but rather how the positive or negative spaces on one side or corner compare to the other. Look to see how balanced or unbalanced the photograph may be in terms of positive/negative space.

Figure 3-19: Fern in Grotto, Cloud Forest, Mexico
The ferns constitute the positive space; the black hole in the upper center constitutes the negative space, where there is nothing to see, but a pleasing shape, nonetheless.

In the image Fern in Grotto, Cloud Forest, Mexico (figure 3-19), the black space above the unfolding from toward the bottom of the image, and held in by the hanging ferns to the right and left, is the negative space in the image, while the ferns create the positive space. Here the dark area is the negative space; the light areas, the positive. These roles and tonalities can be reversed.

The negative space can be bright as well as dark. As a simple example, if you look at the interior of a room with windows looking out on a bright, blank exterior, the window areas are negative spaces within the image. Looking back to figure 1-6, you’ll see that the near columns and arches are the positive spaces, and the distant nave is the negative space.

Brett Weston was renowned for his use of positive/negative space. He often employed brilliant forms set against a glowing black background. The success of his photographs rests on the interplay of tonalities, as well as the wonderful forms of both the brilliant foreground object(s) and the black background areas. Without the lyrical forms that are so apparent in Weston’s work, the positive/negative interactions would likely come across as little more than excess contrast, but he turned them into elements of rich, flowing design.

Texture

Texture is often overlooked as an element of composition. It can be a most compelling visual treat. Whether it is the roughness of rock, the fluidity of water, the smoothness or cragginess of skin, the sheen of a metallic object, the soft modulations of clouds, or any of an infinite number of other textures, their detailed delineation will immeasurably enhance any photograph (figure 3-20).

Often, two elements within a photograph lie side-by-side with similar tonal values and only textural differences to distinguish them. In nature, a boulder pressed against a tree trunk could be such an example. Textural differences may well be enough to hold the viewer’s attention to a study of nature.

Edward Weston was a foremost exponent of texture. Many of his famous nudes on sand and his rocks at Point Lobos are studies of textures and forms. His unexcelled still lifes, too, are remarkable studies of texture, form, and light. Photographers often underestimate the importance of texture, but in the hands of a master like Weston it becomes a prime element of fine art.

Textures are rarely assertive elements. They must be sought and dealt with carefully and thoughtfully. Used effectively, they can be impressive elements of composition. They can also have the strength to hold a viewer to the photograph as he studies the rendition of textures in their most revealing details. As noted on the first page of this book, the inherent realism of photography is one of its greatest strengths, and studies of texture placed within a well-conceived image can impart surprising strength.

The noted photographer Frederick Sommer cautions that textural studies alone fall flat. He points out that texture is a surface quality, and that if the photograph fails to delve beneath the surface, to uncover inner truths, or ask probing questions, we end up with a print as superficial as the texture. Texture for texture’s sake shows little more than technical competence, but texture used to help bring out a deeper message, a more insightful image, can add realism and pertinence to a photographic statement.

A good photograph is a visual statement, and all the elements of composition are simply the tools used to strengthen it. No compositional element has meaning by itself. Each must be employed in concert with the others to contribute to the unified thought discussed in chapter 2. Toward the end of this chapter, I will discuss this idea further under the subheading “Relationships.”

Figure 3-20: Rocks, Pebble Beach
The smooth, reflective rock textures stand out sharply against the background of small pebbles. There is an overall movement from the lower right to the upper left created by the rippled lines on the foreground rock. The wet rocks reflected a clear, pre-sunrise sky. After sunrise, brilliant specular highlights and deep shadows made the scene virtually impossible to photograph.

Camera Position

Camera placement is critical for bringing out the most in compositional elements. Because we live in a three-dimensional world, objects are arrayed in front of us with some in the foreground, some in the middle ground, and some in the background. As you move, the visual relationships among them change constantly. The optimum camera position is where the relationships are strongest. Sometimes, a change of camera position by merely a few inches makes the difference between an ordinary and a great photograph. Careful positioning can reveal patterns that were otherwise missing, or can create a more interesting interaction between foreground, mid-ground, and background objects (figures 3-21 and 3-22). With clever camera placement, unwanted background objects can sometimes be obscured behind important foreground objects. Precise placement can also be used to create a continuity of lines or forms, which would not exist otherwise, and this is particularly critical when dealing with obstacles in three-dimensional space.

Placing the camera in a specific location in space may reveal (or create) a particularly pleasing, surprising, or poetic relationship between foreground objects and background objects, as I found in the pre-dawn minutes in Toscana, in 2015 (figure 3-23). The fog overlaid the entire scene with a soft blue-gray, but the color was of little consequence. The forms drew my eye, and the connect-the-dots trees in a line on the right became the focus of my attention. It seemed to me that placing the camera in just the right location highlighted that line of trees in the most compelling manner. Camera position may create interesting patterns or relationships of forms or lines that simply don’t exist from any other vantage point. When this occurs, you must be in exactly the right spot, not just close to it. Too many people always shoot from eye level, simply because that’s where they see the world as they pass through it. They rarely investigate the view from waist or knee level, to the left or to the right of their line of travel, or any other unusual point of view, which may prove to be much more exciting or visually compelling. Fortunately, the ever-shifting fog opened up for me long enough to allow an exposure with that full line of trees visible.

Figure 3-21: Branch and Canyon Walls, Unnamed Canyon
I felt a dynamic photograph could be made by crawling under this cottonwood branch that was wedged between the slit canyon’s walls. During the 10-minute exposure, I realized the real dynamic was missing: the low camera position was wrong.

Figure 3-22: Log Between Walls, Unnamed Canyon
Moving the camera to eye level and a foot closer to the branch created greater dynamism. That was my goal. The log explodes toward the viewer, confronting the viewer directly. The only difference between the two images is camera position.

Shortly after exposing figure 3-23 the sun rose, changing everything. Figure 3-24 shows a totally different composition from less than 75 feet away, aimed in a different direction, with the relationships of the warm, sunlit nearby colors contrasted with the cold blue-gray fog in the distance. Thus, I responded to a wholly different set of relationships based on color, not form. See chapter 6 for more on color and color relationships.

During my studies of English cathedrals in 1980 and 1981, I repeatedly used precise camera positioning to bring out the most lyrical interactions between the curve of a foreground arch and the multiple curves of ceiling vaulting in the background. Often, my camera was positioned to block out distractions within the cathedral, such as electronic loudspeakers hung on columns, or visitor signs. Many of my compositions were the result of time-consuming studies of camera positions that would effectively reveal the harmonious interactions of the stone tracery in the foreground with the arches and tracery in the middle ground and background. Not only was it a thoroughly enjoyable effort, but in the process I became intimately aware of the exquisite craftsmanship and genius of invention on the part of the stonemasons who created those masterpieces. For me, virtually all the distractions were modern additions; the original architecture was astoundingly harmonious.

Figure 3-23: Toscana Dawn; Cypresses, Hills & Fog
The viewer’s eye immediately jumps to the three darker forms on the right, where contrast is highest and the forms are most prominent. Prior to sunrise, fog moving in and out, alternately dense and thin, finally cooperated by revealing the trees as I had hoped. They attract the eye instantly, effectively forming a compelling line. Following that, the eye roams to the soft horizontal curves of the layers of hills, and to the home near the upper left and the line of small trees leading from the home toward the tree in the upper right. Further study of the image reveals additional ridges in the far distance, well beyond all trees, yet relating subtly to the near ridges.

Figure 3-24: Toscana Sunrise with Fog
The moment the sun rose the morning I photographed figure 3-23, everything changed, and I did, as well. I put down my 4×5 film camera used exclusively with black-and-white film and picked up my digital camera for color work. The remarkable thing was how the brilliant colors of nearby flowers and elegant weeds disappeared into the soft bluegrays of the more distant fog, a fog bank that barely moved for a period of at least half an hour. You’ve got to roll with the flow, and the flow told me that the earlier black-and-white opportunities had yielded to color immediately after sunrise.

I want to re-emphasize a thought expressed in chapter 1. When you encounter a scene that grabs you—one that has a special magic, that makes you want to shoot it immediately—it is imperative that you respond instantly and spontaneously to that impulse. But that doesn’t mean you instantly shoot the scene. Rather, you immediately investigate it. Take the time to refine your seeing and improve the composition. Avoid the urge to look and snap; instead, investigate and photograph. Those few seconds or minutes spent in refining your seeing will not diminish your spontaneity, and they will surely enhance your imagery. See if the composition would be stronger two inches or two feet to the left or right, higher or lower. Check whether the lines, forms, and patterns are more exciting if you step to one side or the other. You do not have to check through the lens. Put the camera down and check without it. After all, you initially spotted the scene without your eye glued to the viewfinder or ground glass. Move to the left or right, squat down or stand on your tiptoes, edge forward slightly or move back a bit. Where is the composition strongest? When you find it, place the camera there and make your exposure.

 When I feel that a scene is worthwhile, I carefully look at it from numerous possible camera positions—an inch or two forward, up and to the right, back and down, etc.—until I find the best possible location for the camera. All this is done with my camera in its case and my tripod in hand.

Of course, if you’re shooting with a standard or digital SLR, don’t hesitate! Shoot quickly; then, assuming you have the time, refine the camera position, the seeing, the exposure and even your thinking for additional, better shots. If you are using a small, handheld camera, you are probably after the immediate action rather than the “perfect” composition. With motor drive or a digital camera you can snap off a series of exposures rapidly, then leisurely pick out the best of the series at a later time. (This is where editing becomes the prime tool.) This can be of tremendous value for transient, passing events when you may not have a second chance at composing carefully. Yet, even with motor drives or a digital camera, there is a possibility you can improve on the initial exposures by moving to the left or right, forward or back, up or down—even just by mere inches—before reeling off a few more frames. By doing this often enough, you will evolve into the type of photographer who almost automatically sees the strongest compositional structure as you bring your camera to your eye.

For studio compositions, the subjects as well as the camera can be moved. Place the subject and camera carefully for your initial analysis and composition, then proceed to rearrange the setup—both the scene you intend to photograph and the position of lights (as well as the type of lights used). Move the camera until you achieve the strongest possible composition. The closer you are to your subject, the more critical camera placement becomes.

In a distant panoramic landscape, it is often inconsequential if the camera is moved a foot or two in any direction (unless, of course, the distant panorama includes nearby elements that relate to the distant ones in essential ways). However, such movement can prove pivotal in architectural or portrait photography, and fractions of an inch may be critical in tabletop or any other closeup photography. They certainly proved critical in my cathedral and slit canyon images as well as all detailed imagery within a larger landscape.

Because camera position is so important, I have developed a method of searching for the right location and placing my tripod with real precision. When I feel that a scene is worthwhile, I carefully look at it from numerous possible camera positions—an inch or two forward, up and to the right, back and down, etc.—until I find the best possible location for the camera. All this is done with my camera in its case and my tripod in hand. As soon as I determine the best position, I hold the tripod head at my chin and drop its legs down to the ground. When the camera is placed on the tripod, it will be just where my eye was. All too often I see photographers put their cameras on tripods and then search for the best location. That approach does not work as well.

Focal Length of Lens and Cropping

Camera position must be considered in conjunction with the focal length of the lens used to expose the photograph. Together, the two determine the perspective of the image.

Long focal length lenses (telephoto or similar lenses) tend to compress space, crowding objects together that may be separated in reality. Short focal length lenses (wide-angle lenses) tend to exaggerate space, separating objects that may be close together in reality. Clever use of these effects can produce exciting images of scenes that most people may never see in reality. A high percentage of modern lenses are zoom lenses, each covering a wide range of your field of view—from wide angle to telephoto. No high-quality zoom lens covers the full range from extreme wide angle to long telephoto, but generally two or three will cover the full range. With such convenience, you can quickly zoom from one focal length to another to analyze which gives you the exact coverage you require. Your choice of focal length, along with the type of lighting that exists naturally, or lighting that you produce artificially, can dramatically alter the spatial characteristics of a scene.

If all lenses were infinitely sharp and films were grainless, or if there were an infinite number of pixels on camera sensors, we could easily get by with one wide-angle lens and just crop to the image we really want! That would give us plenty of time to comfortably determine how to approach every image. Unfortunately, we do not have that luxury, so we must burden ourselves with heavy equipment and make decisions on the spot. A key question is this: what should be included in the image, and what should be excluded? Once your decision is made, use the lens that includes what you want, and little, if any, excess.

What about the excess? My approach is to always try to compose full frame, but also to recognize that doesn’t always work. If I feel an image can be improved by cropping (i.e., removing) any portion of it, I don’t hesitate to crop. Sometimes the best image lies between focal lengths of the fixed focal length lenses I am carrying with my 4×5 camera; in that case I use the shorter lens, which includes all of the pertinent imagery plus some excess, then remove the excess. My next longer lens might eliminate an important element of the image. My digital camera gives me zoom lens capability, so I can get closer to achieving the exact image I envision. But, of course, not every image I want to create is the exact proportion of either my 4×5 film camera or my 2 : 3 ratio digital camera, so cropping still may be necessary.

When my camera format is wrong for the image—for example, if I find a long, narrow image of real interest within a 4×5 format or my digital format, or if a square image of real strength appears within either format—I crop to get the image ratio I want. In any case, there is no reason to include the whole frame when a portion of it is considerably stronger. There is no reason to be a slave to any particular camera format. God did not create the world in a 2:3 ratio, a 2¼ square format, nor a 4×5 format! Sometimes after composing full frame, I may discover later that a far stronger image lies within a portion of the frame. In such cases, I crop. I urge you to never hesitate to crop an image in order to make it stronger. It’s no problem. Cropping is legal.

Figure 3-25: Corn Lily Curls
I’m drawn to corn lilies (false hellebore) like bears to honey. Their forms resemble those of slit canyon walls. Allowing the background to softly echo and oppose the foreground forms, with much out of focus, makes an effective portrait of this plant.

Some photographers always feel compelled to present full-frame images. If you can compose full frame as powerfully and as often as Cartier-Bresson did, then do it! But I don’t advise it. Suppose, for example, that you find a camera position that creates a magical relationship between a foreground and a background object, but it includes some major or minor distraction (or even useless, excess information) along one edge. If you print full frame, you get the great relationship, but you’re stuck with the junk on the edge. If you move the camera just a bit, you may be able to eliminate the junk, but the primary relationship isn’t as compelling. What do you do? I advise you to shoot from the best position and crop rather than compromise by either including the distraction or losing the compelling relationship. Remember Edward Weston’s statement, “Good composition is the strongest way of seeing.” An insistence on shooting full frame images may compromise that strength.

Depth of Field

Depth of field and shutter speed (to be discussed next) are the two elements of composition unique to photography. (Camera position is somewhat analogous to a painter choosing a “viewer’s position” for a painting.) A photographer has the option of bringing virtually everything into sharp focus by closing down the lens to its minimum aperture (i.e., f/22, f/32, f/45, etc.); or, of limiting sharp focus to one plane by opening up the lens to its maximum aperture (i.e., f/2, f/2.8, f/4, f/5.6, etc.) and allowing objects in front of the plane and behind it to fade out of focus. I rarely resort to limited depth of field, though I have on rare occasions (figure 3-25). In general, I tend to prefer imagery that allows the viewer to peruse the scene and get information out of every part of it, but I don’t make a rule of that. Limited depth of field can be employed brilliantly.

A lens focuses the image at a fixed distance from the camera, somewhere between the closest possible plane of focus and infinity. By closing down the aperture, you have the option of bringing more than the initial plane of focus into true sharpness. (At maximum aperture, sharpness falls off rapidly in front of and behind the plane of focus.) If you want to attain sharpness throughout the image, and the scene includes objects relatively close to the camera as well as quite far away, it is best to focus approximately ⅓ of the distance from the closest object to the farthest one. This is known as the hyperfocal distance. Then close down the aperture to the minimum opening. As the aperture closes down from its maximum setting, sharpness increases both in front of the plane of focus and behind it, but not equally. Depth of field (i.e., sharpness in front of and behind the initial plane of focus) increases from the original plane of focus roughly half as fast toward the camera as it increases away from the camera. That explains the reason for initially focusing ⅓ of the way into the scene.

If you focus on the farthest object and then close the aperture, you gain no benefit from increased sharpness behind the farthest object because there are no more distant objects! If you focus on the closest object and close the aperture, you gain no benefit from increased sharpness in front of that object because there is nothing in front of that object, either! By focusing on a plane approximately ⅓ of the distance between the two, you may be able to get all objects into sharp focus as you close the aperture down toward the minimum setting.

There are limits to increased sharpness with smaller apertures. As apertures get progressively smaller, diffraction sets in. Diffraction is the bending of light waves due to the small aperture, which makes the sharpest possible focus progressively less sharp (even at the initial plane of focus) as apertures decrease. At some very small apertures, nothing is really sharp while your depth of field increases . . . or, to put it another way, everything is “almost sharp” but not truly sharp. This is an especially vexing problem with digital cameras; diffraction interacts with digital sensors in ways that can decrease overall sharpness so much that everything becomes quite unsharp at small apertures. It’s important to understand how your equipment works—and how each lens responds—at small aperture settings.

With large format cameras that feature movable parts, you can change the plane of sharp focus from one that is parallel to the film and lens planes (which are parallel in fixed cameras) to one at an angle. For example, by using tilts and swings properly you can focus on a receding plane, such as a road going off to the horizon, and obtain complete sharpness from the nearest point to the horizon line at maximum aperture. By using these camera movements, you can obtain the best compromise plane of sharp focus before closing the aperture down, at which time the depth of field increases perpendicular to the plane of sharp focus, both above and below the initial plane: ⅓ above the plane for every ⅔ below the plane. It is often possible to obtain full sharpness with large format cameras when it would be impossible otherwise. Numerous source books fully discuss the use of these movements, but instruction from an experienced large format user is the best way to learn them.

Sometimes you may want to have objects fade out of sharpness. Perhaps you want a flower in sharp focus close to the camera with distant objects appearing blurred. In that case, simply focus on the flower and close the aperture just enough to get its various parts into sharpness. Everything else will turn into soft-edged blurs that may be thoroughly out of focus and indistinguishable.

I have heard of painters lamenting their inability to create the soft edges and subtle gradations of tonality or color that are the hallmark of soft-focus photographs. Soft focus can be a striking effect, indeed, when well executed. But it must be employed with the greatest care and understanding of its unique effect. Unfortunately the soft-focus aspect of photography is rarely used well despite the fact that it is so frequently employed. Too often, limited depth of field is used as a cover-up to mask unwanted background distractions rather than as a compositional device to create unity among forms and tones. This is especially common in 35mm photography and less so in larger formats. Evidently, many photographers feel a blurred distraction in the background is acceptable whereas a sharply defined distraction is unacceptable. Both are distractions, and both are unacceptable.

Shutter Speed

Shutter speed can be chosen to create a variety of effects. Photographs of moving objects, such as a flowing river, have astonishingly different visual and emotional impacts depending on shutter speed. With a fast shutter speed of 1/500 second, the individual drops in a small cascade may show up clearly. At ½ second, they disappear and are replaced by soft, flowing lines from level to level in the cascade.

Figure 3-26: Clouds at Mt. Rundle
At sunrise, clouds were flying rapidly over the western slope of Mt. Rundle while other clouds were being created off the eastern cliff face. A three-stop neutral density filter and a small lens aperture allowed a 15-second exposure, producing an image my eyes never saw.

At 1/500 second, the tonalities and even the textures of water and rocks may merge. At ½ second, the flowing lines of the moving water differentiate it from the stationary rocks. There may be other situations in which variations of shutter speed are the only effective way to separate objects.

Years ago, Wynn Bullock produced a series of time studies of the ebbing and flowing of the ocean surf on the Pacific coast. The exposures were several minutes in length, allowing the waves to move in and out many times. The effect is surrealistic. Objects that were alternately covered and revealed lie isolated, looking like apparitions surrounded by clouds of dry ice. In viewing these photographs, I was led to deep philosophical questions about the nature of reality. Is reality the scene as it would have appeared at 1/500-second shutter speed? Would reality have been 1 second? Or is reality the lengthy rendition that Bullock revealed? Wherever reality fell for me, my questioning of it while studying Bullock’s prints expanded my world and my thinking. His images extended my horizons. To me, that is the essence of creative photography. His method was unconventionally long shutter speeds. Simple enough, but it took a great deal of insight.

Anything that moves within the image area can be altered via long exposures (moving water, clouds, vehicles on a road, people walking across a plaza, etc.). Drawing on the idea of Bullock’s images of moving water, I tried to apply the idea to clouds. In figure 3-26, I put a three-stop neutral density filter on my camera to prevent overexposure; then I made a 15-second exposure of fast moving and newly forming clouds at this exceptional summit in the Canadian Rockies. The long shutter speed conveys the impression of tumultuous activity in the atmosphere, exactly my intent in making the photograph.

Figure 3-27: Swift-current Falls, Glacier National Park
My initial goal was to “capture the thunderous sound of the waterfall” by nearly stopping the motion through use of a fast shutter speed. But I made a second exposure at the longer shutter speed, as well. Ultimately the initial goal failed to hold my interest, but the “back-up” proved to have far more staying power for me. Its ethereal cloud-like qualities proved to be a far more evocative feel of the waterfall.

In figure 3-27, I used a relatively long shutter speed (one second) at the fast-flowing Swiftcurrent Falls in Glacier National Park to create an impression of clouds rather than water. It’s almost as if the rock ledges, over which the water is flowing, emerge out of the clouds. In fact, I made two separate exposures; the one-second exposure and another at ⅓ second. The shorter exposure created a bit of flow on the waterfall itself, but virtually stopped the action in some of the eddies amidst the wild bedlam at the base of the falls. Ultimately, I chose the ethereal aspects rendered by the longer exposure as the more effective image of the two.

Most of the time, photographers are concerned about eliminating movement in their images. Landscape photographers may wait a long time for a breeze to stop so that leaves, grass, or branches stop moving. Portrait photographers try to make sure that their subjects do not blink or move and harm the image. Surely this is appropriate at times, but there may be more latitude for movement during the exposure than some photographers allow. We have all seen photography in which moving cars are blurred streaks, or experimental photographs in which movement is incorporated into the image. With film cameras, the look of the image cannot be determined until the negative or transparency is developed. With digital cameras, it can be seen almost instantly. This obviously affords benefits to the digital photographer: you can immediately check to see if the shutter speed you chose gave you the effect you desired . . . and you can try a variety of shutter speeds to finally arrive at the desired effect. (But let me suggest that if you try this, don’t discard all the exposures you didn’t like, because your thoughts about the best shutter speed may change a year or two down the road.) It may be worthwhile to experiment with shutter speeds and open yourself up to visual experiences that can be attained photographically, such as Bullock’s extended surf exposures, ones that cannot be seen with the naked eye.

Sometimes movement can create a surprising departure from reality as we perceive it. Try photographing a tree at one-second shutter speed (or longer) on a windy day as a gust sweeps through the branches. The branches and leaves may appear as a series of swirled lines, but the lower trunk may appear sharp and unmoving. It could prove to be an opening for other creative imagery.

Relationships

We have now run through all the elements of composition (except light and color, which are covered in chapters 5 and 6). We have looked at them as individual entities separate from one another, but we have briefly mentioned them in relation to the others. In reality, compositions invariably combine these elements to create the total visual effect. They cannot be considered as isolated entities in practical usage.

The relationships within a photograph are the things that make an image sing or fall flat. This includes how much space is taken up by the elements that are most important and by those that are supportive or unimportant. As a quick example, how often have you seen photographs of a cityscape or an old Western town in which the road in the foreground takes up ⅓ or more of the image? It’s generally a waste of space, with nothing of importance within that space. So if all the real importance is above the empty road, you should eliminate most of the road. Make every element within your photographs count, and make them interact strongly with other elements within the image. That’s what holds the viewer’s attention and makes him think about the meaning of the photograph.

Lines interact with other lines and forms, within and without patterns. Textures play off one another. Lines radiating out of forms create balance or imbalance; forms relate with other forms to create movement, depth, and variation of pattern. Tonal variations superimposed over lines, forms, and textures create visual interest.

Of course, in well-crafted photographs these elements (lines, forms, etc.) are not abstract things but real things (tree trunks, faces, clouds, buildings, shadows, tools on a tradesman’s wall, etc.). A good artist relates real things to one another as abstract elements to see if they work together successfully, or if they fail.

Let’s look again at Fallen Sequoias (figure 3-7) as an example of a photograph that works successfully for me. In making the photograph, I walked all around the cluster of standing and fallen trees before choosing my camera position. From that location, the line of the dominant, diagonal sequoia tree was effectively echoed by a clump of fallen branches lying diagonally in the lower-right corner. That relationship created a wonderful dynamic in opposition to the stately vertical lines of the standing giants. Lighter lines (trees in the background receding into the fog) and the lines of the small dead tree on the right (vertical trunk and horizontal branches) lend variety and tonal interest to the near uniformity of the vertical trees. All of these things, taken together, make the image work for me.

Sometimes a building, or other backdrop, serves as nothing more than a good stage setting, but has little interest without some interactions within the scene, whether human or otherwise. There is no rule (as there never is) as to when a structure tells a story by itself, or whether it requires some activity in front of it. Such may be the case in figure 3-28, in which the house’s facade by itself may or may not be of real interest. But the curious interaction between the strutting chicken and the utterly nonchalant dog, with its front paws crossed in apparent indifference, lends an element of interest—perhaps some humor—that the structure, by itself, lacks.

For portraiture (outside of studio settings) it may be wise to pick a good backdrop first—a stage setting, you might say—in order to assure interesting visual relationships between the portrait subjects and the rest of the image. If the backdrop is one that relates to the person being photo-graphed—perhaps something closely related to his or her known line of work—then the relationships could be very strong, indeed.

Figure 3-28: Dog and Chicken, Ollantaytambo, Peru
Without the interplay between the dog and chicken, it’s unlikely that this house’s facade, by itself, would prove to be a strong image. But the apparent interaction between the two subjects takes the image to a higher level of interest.

Always consider the elements of composition in combination. A line, by itself, is not a photograph, nor is a texture. Balance or imbalance implies a relationship between at least two elements. Photography flowers when relationships exist, when they are made evident either subtly or boldly. To me, the essence of photography—of all art—is in the relationships that are created. A musical note is meaningless unless combined with others. Rhythms, harmonies, timbres, and other aspects of musical composition must be added before a musical work emerges. The same is true of photography.

Just as the sciences advance by finding relationships within their realm of endeavor—and sometimes beyond it—photography and the other visual arts become most meaningful when they relate objects and forms to the viewing public in ways that have never been shown previously.

I cannot overemphasize the importance of this statement. When a photograph includes a bunch of things but shows no compelling relationships among them, it simply fails. It doesn’t matter if you walked 15 miles and nearly killed yourself to get the image; if it has no interesting visual relationships, it fails.

All too often a photograph fails because it is strictly an “object” photograph: an isolated object of visual interest. The object exhibits no interesting relationship to anything else in the photograph, and the remainder of the image is strictly background. With rare exceptions, such photographs are mere documentation of objects; lacking internal relationships, they fail artistically. Perhaps the most famous exception of all is Edward Weston’s Pepper #30, in which case, the convoluted forms of the store-bought green pepper prove to be so evocative of human emotion that the image takes on a solitary significance transcending the fact that it’s still just a green pepper. (After photographing it, Weston chopped it up and ate it as part of dinner.)

Even if there is a central object of overwhelming importance, a photograph of it is usually enhanced when it can be related, however subtly, to other elements in the image space. Visual relationships spawn visual harmonies and impart heightened interest. Most photographers start out with an overriding concern with subject matter. As time goes on and they become more sophisticated, their emphasis turns more toward studies of light and form and the wonderful relationships that exist among the elements of the scene—even in the context of a particular type of subject matter that intrigues them.

 Balance or imbalance implies a relationship between at least two elements. Photography flowers when relationships exist, when they are made evident either subtly or boldly.

This does not imply that you should avoid relationships of “things” in your images. The relationships between objects in any scene are of primary importance, but they will become even stronger if they not only relate in terms of object relationships, but also in terms of visual relationships brought about by lines, forms, colors, lighting, etc.

Involvement with the Scene

Just as you must consider the relationships between the various elements of composition, you surely must also consider your basic interest in the scene. In my case, I could possibly put together a well-composed photograph if I think strictly in terms of the elements of composition; but what meaning would it have? Probably none. It surely would not excite me if I have no real interest in the subject.

My interest in nature and the landscape initially pulled me into photography. My interests expanded to architectural objects quite early in my career. Along the way I have periodically done portraits, delved into multiple-negative imagery, experimented with fragmented, cubist images, and worked with toning and chemical coloration of images, which increasingly fascinated me. These genres are not the central focus of my photographic efforts today, but they’re part of my output, my thinking, and perhaps one day will again be a major part of my work. Where I will go in the future is anyone’s guess. My main interest is the interrelationships of light and form to create visual dynamism. I find my most pleasing subjects in nature and architecture. I naturally gravitate to those areas, and not surprisingly, I feel that I make my strongest statements there. But I try not to be static in my approach, no matter what I’m photographing.

Yet there are areas I have not delved into and never expect to because they have no interest for me. The abstract details of walls that Aaron Siskind did so well do not move me enough to want to photograph them. The grotesque cadavers and flabby women of Joel Peter Witkin actively repulse me. Whether I like or dislike the subject matter, I will not attempt to produce meaningful work with it if I am not moved by it. At best, I could produce a well-composed but meaningless composition, much like a grammatically perfect speech that communicates nothing. My photograph would have no internal conviction, and I seriously doubt that it would stir much of a reaction in anyone else. It shouldn’t, in fact!

All this relates to the ideas presented in chapter 1 about understanding what interests you and how you respond to those interests, and then conveying your thoughts through a photograph. Unless you have that gut-level involvement, you’ll probably take pictures but you won’t make photographs.

If photography is truly a nonverbal form of communication (as stated in the opening sentence of this book), then it’s best to learn what interests you most, and to understand why it does. When you get a handle on both, you have a far better chance of conveying your thoughts to others. As a means of promoting this type of thinking in my workshops, I ask students the following question when reviewing their work: “What are you trying to say, and what are you trying to communicate in the work you’re showing us here?” The reason for the question is to push students to think about and express the relationship they feel to their subject matter. In essence, I encourage students to focus more deeply on their own interests, for unless you know yourself well you’ll always be groping around for subjects to shoot. You will produce little of interest until you find your area of interest.

Rules, Formulas, and Other Problems and Pitfalls

Before ending this chapter, I’d like to examine several pitfalls that can ruin potentially fine photographs. The first—and worst—is looking for, or following, “rules” of composition. Rules are foolish, arbitrary, mindless things that raise you quickly to a level of acceptable mediocrity, and then prevent you from progressing further. Several of the most well-known rules—the rule of thirds, the rule of avoiding a horizon in the center of an image, the rule of having an image read from left to right, the rule of not placing the center of interest in the center of the image, and so many others—are undesirable constraints with no validity. (Just look at Ansel Adams’s “Moonrise over Hernandez” to see how many rules are broken.) Again, heed Edward Weston’s words that “Good composition is the strongest way of seeing.” If your composition happens to adhere to rules, fine! If it happens to break rules, fine! Forget the rules; just make strong images.

Related to following rules is the common pitfall of following formulas. As an example, if you successfully increased contrast on a softly lit cloudy day, does that always indicate that you should increase contrast on a softly lit cloudy day? Of course not! Sometimes it works; sometimes it doesn’t! If you dramatically enhanced contrast by using a red filter on a sunny day with deep blue sky and puffy white clouds, should you always use a red filter on that kind of day? Certainly not. If increasing color saturation by moving the slider to the right gives you a better image on the photograph you’re now working on, should you always move the color saturation slider to the right? Again, no! Sometimes it works; sometimes it doesn’t! No two images say exactly the same thing, nor should they. Your goals may change from day to day—even under similar circumstances—and changing conditions may force a change in your approach. Avoid rules. Avoid formulas. Look at each individual case on its own merits.

Another common problem is the inadvertent inclusion of distracting areas or objects in an image. As photographers, we often get so involved with the object of prime importance that we fail to see distractions that intrude into the frame. How often have you seen pictures of spectacular landscapes marred by such things as power lines in an upper corner or a yellow trash can in a lower corner? Or pictures where the top of a camper-trailer peeks into the bottom of the frame below the waterfall? Or pictures of a friend or relative with a distant tree or phone pole appearing to come right out of the top of his or her head?

These annoyances can be avoided by studying the composition for just a few seconds before tripping the shutter. Run your eyes around the edge of the image—all four sides—to see if there are intrusions that pull your eye from the important areas. I have dubbed this “border patrol.” See if there are strong contrasts or bright objects at the edges or corners of the monitor, viewfinder, or ground glass that may prove distracting. You may be able to block them out by moving your camera position slightly so that a meaningful object of importance serves as a blockade for the intrusive one. You may be able to crop them out later during image editing or you may be able to deal with such distractions effectively in printing, but it’s best to beware of them when exposing your image.

 Rules are foolish, arbitrary, mindless things that raise you quickly to a level of acceptable mediocrity, and then prevent you from progressing further.

Forget the rules; just make strong images.

Study the whole frame to see what percentage of it is visually interesting. If the frame is filled with unnecessary or distracting elements, eliminate them entirely or at least reduce them significantly. If you cannot reduce these distractions, just enjoy the scene and make a “mental image” of it. You may be attracted to the distant mountain with its mantle of gleaming snow, but it may be 30 miles away and even your longest lens will take in too much of the landscape in front of that peak. You may still want the picture, but when you show it to others—people who weren’t at your side when you took the shot, and who are responding only to the photograph—they may not react as positively as you expect because you fail to show them anything exciting. You are showing them an expanse of flat land with a little spot of white in the center where that distant mountain stands.

A good memory is better than a bad photograph any day! Discipline yourself to put the camera away without taking the picture. This is also true for standard and digital SLRs. One of the greatest pitfalls of being able to work quickly is snapping off far too many exposures. It can be almost addictive. But it’s rarely productive. Putting the camera away without making a photograph is often the hardest thing to do. Most people seem to have an uncontrollable need to take a picture once they pull out the camera. It’s like drug addiction. They quiver and shake if they put the camera away without first pressing that little button on the top. Once they press that button, all is well. It matters little that the image is awful, it was taken and that’s what counts!

Of course, that’s not what counts. What counts is saying something meaningful, producing something with impact and insight. Millions of people each year take pictures in places of outstanding natural beauty and show them to friends and relatives afterwards. And they say, “You really should have been there.” It’s undoubtedly a true statement, because the snapshots fail to tell you anything. It was a beautiful scene, to be sure, but not a well-conceived photograph. These snapshots are constantly taken by people with no understanding of the elements of composition that form the basis of a real photograph.

Blurred objects are another pitfall to watch out for. When shooting with 35mm or digital cameras, stop the shutter down to the f/stop at which the picture will be taken just to see if there are any blurred or unseen objects close to the lens that could become fuzzy intrusions once the shutter automatically stops down to the pre-set aperture. This may occur in a forest, for example, where there are cross branches everywhere. As you position your camera, the branch that is inches from the lens and unseen at f/2 becomes an ugly blur at f/16.

The human eye’s three-degree angle of sharp vision makes it easy to overlook the distractions that are in the frame, away from points of high interest. You must be aware of the entire picture space in order to direct the viewer’s attention to the important areas, not to the distractions. The distractions can often be avoided before the photograph is exposed, but rarely afterwards. Look for such distractions as much as you look for the good compositional interactions because they represent weaknesses in your image. Every good photograph reduces the weaknesses while accentuating the strengths; the finest photographs eliminate the weaknesses entirely.

Sometimes a simple cropping of the final image is all that is needed. Photographers who work digitally or in the darkroom regularly crop their images, but many 35mm slide shooters seem to abhor that concept with a passion. To them there is a pervasive religious feeling that God created the world in 35mm format and nothing should be allowed to violate that sacrosanct shape. Today, however, some of that thinking has thankfully been overcome by those who scan original film transparencies for digital printing, and then they seem more amenable to cropping the scanned image. That’s a real step forward. If cropping strengthens the image, crop it! There is no reason to avoid a long, narrow composition or a square format if it enhances the total effect. You may even want to break all the rules by considering a non-rectangular format!

One final technique of composition that is blatantly misused (to the point of abuse!) is the technique of “framing” the photograph. Its misuse can best be explained by example: a distant range of mountains is set in the center of the frame, and along the left edge is a massive, nearby tree trunk, with one branch of the tree hanging in the sky over the mountains. To most people this type of composition is wonderful. To my way of thinking it is atrocious!

Why? Because the dark tree has no tonal, object, or form relationship to anything else in the photograph. If you look at it from a purely compositional point of view, a heavy line or form (the tree) stands at the edge of a lighter form (the mountains), but the two do not interact in any way. True enough, both the tree and the mountains are natural objects, but rarely is there even one other tree in sight that could start to form a compositional relationship. The tree relates no more to the mountains than a lamp post would. Furthermore, there is nothing aesthetically pleasing about cutting off the image with the dark mass of the tree trunk. Unfortunately, this wretched misuse of compositional technique is so widely seen that most people accept it and many even love it. I strongly urge you to avoid it!

Generally, framing is used in an attempt to create an impression of depth and “presence,” yet framing of that type is meaningful only in the scene, not in the photograph. The intent may be good, but the method used to achieve it is inappropriate. It is the perfect example of the difference between merely “seeing” and “photographic seeing.”

Framing a scene can be highly effective if the framing element relates to the scene in terms of object, or tone, or both. A tree along the left edge could relate to a forest of other trees. An abandoned piece of mining machinery seen through the doorway of the mine entrance could be appealing, if not compelling. Examples of effective framing abound. They should be used. But use them when they have compositional integrity with other elements in the frame. Unify the photograph with elements that interact logically, not with objects that disrupt the overall composition.

Figure 3-29: Abazio St, Antimo, Italy
The marble floors, columns, and walls of this small monastery in north-central Italy seemed almost translucent in the midday light. I wanted to concentrate on the overwhelming feeling of light throughout the space, while imparting a feeling of translucency to the marble.

===== FILE 11/28: Text%2fchapter04.xhtml =====

Figure 4-1: Machu Picchu in the Mist
The Inca understood spectacular landscapes, locating major centers in awesome settings, but none comparable to Machu Picchu. My intent was to highlight the mystical scenery with little more than a reference to the structural remains for context.

CHAPTER 4
Visualization

THE CONCEPT OF PHOTOGRAPHY as a form of nonverbal communication is a philosophical one. But it’s a very important truth, based on the fact that we all show our pictures to others and we all want to get a response. That alone proves it is indeed a form of communication.

The meaning of composition and its specific elements are theoretical. Both are forerunners of actual photography. They form the foundation for fine photography—and for all visual art—and they must be understood by all creative photographers.

The actual making of a photograph starts with visualization, which consists of five steps:

Photographic looking and seeing (two very different things)
Composing an image
Envisioning the final image
Suggested procedures for those who have difficulty envisioning the final image
Planning a complete strategy to attain the final image

Let’s look at each of these steps in turn and then we’ll look at some alternative approaches.

Step 1: Photographic Looking and Seeing

Visualization starts with looking and seeing—in-depth looking and seeing, rather than the casual perusal that we all do in our everyday lives. We go about our daily tasks in a routine manner, allowing visual input to slide in and out of our eyes and brain. It is not important to note every detail about a doorway in order to walk through it without smashing your shoulder on the doorjamb. If we stopped to analyze our visual input at all times, we would never accomplish anything. But when we turn to the effort required of photography, our seeing must be much more thorough and intense. In photography, we accomplish nothing unless we analyze everything, even if the analysis is a quick—almost instantaneous—effort. We must search for those elements that can be put together to form a photograph.

A corollary to this is that when you look for things to photograph, you start to see everything more intensely. You and your eyes are not just wandering aimlessly, for if you randomly look without carefully inspecting and thinking you see nothing and learn nothing. Photography requires work. The work begins with careful looking, analyzing and thinking. Soon you start to see things in areas you would have overlooked previously. Of course, when you put these “overlooked” items into a photograph, you have to make that photograph compelling enough that the viewer wants to stop to look at it! Let’s face it; if your photograph is as easily overlooked as the items themselves, you’ve accomplished nothing.

You’ll find it important not only to look carefully, but also to draw on your interests to provide deeper, more personal meaning to what you see. I feel that this combination of elements has given me greater appreciation of my surroundings and has led to photographs I may not have made otherwise. My experience is not unique. Yours will probably be similar if you follow your interests.

“Looking” is one thing; “seeing” is quite another. Two people can look at the same thing and one will see a great deal while the other sees nothing. (Of course the person sees something, but finds no meaning.) Just as an experienced detective can inspect a crime scene and find numerous clues that the average person would overlook, so the perceptive photographer can see compositions where others look but see none. The difference between seeing and not seeing is insight. Insight is the element that separates the detective from the layman, the great photographers from the ordinary ones. Whenever you gain further understanding and insight into the subject matter you’re photographing, you’ll make photographs that progressively penetrate deeper into the essence of that subject. Furthermore, as you gain insight into your own areas of interest (i.e., what excites you, why it excites you, how it excites you), you’ll discover new areas to photograph—perhaps not immediately, but in due time.

Of course, much of this is inevitable. I don’t know a landscape photographer who doesn’t learn about geology, natural history, weather patterns, and other things related to the landscape. Portrait photographers gain insight into people and how to work with them more effectively as time goes by. The same is true of photographers in every other specialty. Look at the astounding work of Henri Cartier-Bresson to see how he gained insight into events as they unfolded, developing an uncanny ability to snap the shutter at “the decisive moment.” With increased insight, you’ll be able to analyze a situation more quickly to determine whether it’s worth pursuing and how to best approach it.

Step 2: Composing an Image

Once you’ve decided to make a photograph, you proceed to the second step of visualization: composing the image. At this stage you choose your camera position and lens focal length (see chapters 2 and 3). You determine whether the image is strongest where you have the camera, or whether you can strengthen the visual relationships by moving it to the left or right, up or down, or forward or backward a few inches or several feet.

Consider several things while studying the scene. First, how well do the objects relate to one another compositionally—their overall balance, the relationship between positive and negative spaces, and the thrust or movement of forms and lines within the composition? Do the objects have cohesive forms, or is one or more objects distinctly different and out of character? That may be precisely what you want, but always be aware of what you want as opposed to what you actually have! For color photography, look at the objects as abstract masses and analyze their color balance and the blending of colors within the composition. (This will be fully discussed in chapter 6.) For black-and-white photography, consider the gray tonalities and their relationships. Beware of tonal mergers, especially those that may not be apparent to the eye in a colorful scene.

Second, in both color and black-and-white, search for distractions in the foreground and background. Look for “dead areas” where nothing is happening compositionally to enhance the image. Reduce and eliminate those problem areas wherever possible. As the noted American painter and teacher Robert Henri said, “The eye should not be led to where there is nothing to see.”

Third, envision the contrasts of the final print and see if your desired tonalities are even possible under the existing circumstances. It is rare that the scene—and the lighting on it—gives you exactly what you wish to show in your envisioned print. You may want to brighten one area or darken others. These alterations may be possible. If you’re aware of the shortcomings while you stand behind the camera, you can begin to formulate a plan to cope with them in the exposure and development of the negative and in the printing of that negative.

For example, in 2009 I made my first trip to Peru and the storied Inca ruins at Machu Picchu. Though I had seen many photographs of it, and thought I knew what to expect, I was stunned by the reality—or shall I say the unreality—of it. My first photograph there was intended to show the almost dreamlike quality of the setting: mountains upon mountains upon mountains, mostly hidden in the mists of the Western Amazon cloud forest. But contrast was low in those distant mists, so I had to envision how I could enhance that low contrast while revealing a bit of the Inca ruins—just enough to put them in context—and then allude to the remarkable setting that appeared like an apparition (figure 4-1). A full discussion of the technical steps needed to properly expose a film negative or a digital capture and then enhance the contrast is found in chapters 8 through 12.

Analyze the light on the scene, seeing how it is at the moment versus how it could be if it were perfect for your intentions (chapter 5). In other words, is it highlighting exactly the things you want highlighted, and is it doing so in the intensity you would prefer? Outdoors, where you likely cannot control the light, see if unfavorable lighting conditions can become favorable (e.g., if passing clouds might move to locations that would improve the relationships of light and shadow). Indoors, where you may or may not have complete control of the location of lights, the type of lights (e.g., diffuse, direct, reflected, spotlights, floodlights, and flash), and their intensity, you must optimize the lighting to suit your purpose.

 As the noted American painter and teacher Robert Henri said, “The eye should not be led to where there is nothing to see.”

Also determine whether any filters can enhance the image (see chapter 7 for a complete discussion of filters). Filters are valuable tools that can alter the tonal balance between items of various colors in a black-and-white photograph. Digitally, you can alter relationships between colored objects later via channels in Photoshop or ACR (Adobe Camera Raw) or Lightroom. Try to be aware of how you can accomplish that while you’re behind the camera, for that’s a critical part of visualization. In traditional color photography, filters can either retain or alter the color balance that you want for the overall scene. But color balance can be altered greatly during printing, both traditionally and digitally.

Finally, select the optimum aperture and shutter speed to give you the depth of field you want, along with the ability to stop or blur any motion in the scene. These considerations must be made carefully to obtain a proper exposure for your negative, transparency, or digital exposure.

All of these issues must be solved while you’re behind the camera. You can’t alter the camera position or the lighting after you’ve left the scene. You have to determine right there on the spot whether or not they’re working for you.

Step 3: Envisioning the Final Image

It should be obvious from the title of this subsection, as well as the writing that precedes it, that these three steps are done simultaneously rather than in succession. For example, Step 2, composing an image, depends on envisioning the final print in order to determine if a filter will enhance the image, or what type and intensity of light is best for your purposes, or if contrast needs to be increased, decreased, or remain the same. (See the next section for recommendations if you have trouble envisioning a final print while standing at the scene, and see chapters 8, 9, and 10 for discussions of contrast control with traditional film photography, and chapters 11 and 12 for digital photography.)

It turns out that the most difficult part of visualization is envisioning the final print you wish to make while looking at the scene—i.e., translating the scene into the photograph. Unless you made a tabletop model to photograph or are posing subjects for portraiture it’s highly unlikely that you created the scene in front of your camera; yet, you are always the creator of the photograph. The scene is three-dimensional; your photograph is two-dimensional (even though it alludes to three-dimensionality). The scene has color in it; your photograph may be black-and-white. If so, you may want to increase or decrease the inherent contrast of the scene. You may want to darken or lighten portions of the image in relationship to other portions. If you’re working in color, you may want to alter the contrast, light/dark relationships, and the overall hue of the scene, as well as intensify or subdue the color saturation.

There are profound differences between the actual scene and your image. In fact, the differences are considerably more profound because your response to the scene also depends on nonvisual sensory input—sounds, smells, temperatures, breezes, and the feel of things near you, as well as your state of health and your state of mind. These things are not visual, yet they all contribute to your reaction. So how can you possibly distill all this sensory input into an 8 × 10, 11 × 14, or 16 × 20 two-dimensional image with any hope of capturing the original? In a very real sense, it cannot be done! The photograph is distinctly different from the scene, and as a result it is foolish to attempt to “capture the scene.” Instead, attempt to convey the mood that the scene impresses upon you.

Be aware of the fact that even our language tends to confuse us about the profound differences between the scene and the photograph. For example, we often look at a photograph and hear, “That’s my son Billy playing football” or “That’s the cabin where we stayed at Grand Canyon.” Of course, it’s not Billy, but a snapshot of Billy, and it’s not the cabin, but a picture of the cabin. Thus, our very words tend to confuse the photograph and the scene. Beware of this trap! Do not confuse the two! (See figure 4-2, which is not the Arni Marble Quarry in the mountains of northern Italy, but a photograph of it as I envisioned it in April 2001.)

Figure 4-2: Arni Marble Quarry
The mirror reflection transformed the 500-year-old quarry—perhaps the source of some of Michelangelo’s greatest statues—into a kaleidoscope. Without the reflection, the photograph would have lacked the explosive force. To produce the effect, the reflection is printed at significantly higher contrast and much lighter than it would have been without darkroom manipulation. This is not the scene I saw, but one I created through exposure, development, and printing.

We must be able to distill from the scene those elements that can translate to a visual image capable of conveying the desired mood. This involves the elements of composition discussed in the previous chapter, along with the elements of understanding of your own viewpoint discussed in chapter 1. By combining your perceptions of the scene with your reactions to it, then using the tools of photography to present your interpretation to the viewer, you may be able to convey the mood you actually felt. You may even be able to heighten that mood.

As it turns out, most people are stuck at the level of “reproducing” or “being true to” the scene. True photographers go well beyond the scene, using it as a springboard for their own creative/interpretive goals. If your goal is to replicate nothing more than what you’ve seen, your opportunities for creativity are limited. Those who take pictures without looking at the compositional elements or thinking about the final print (or those who shoot because the husband or wife said that we really should have a shot of this!) are just taking snapshots. Rarely do passing tourists think about lighting, or how the light will change in another hour or tomorrow morning. Rarely do they consider the underlying elements of composition. Usually, the motivation is to shoot now because they won’t be there later, so “better get it now!” Too often that attitude leads to exceptionally boring snapshots.

I suggest that it’s better to have a good memory of a wonderful scene than a bad photograph of it, which will eventually become your memory of it. If you’re willing, able, and desirous of going beyond the scene, your creative potential is unlimited. Not only can you show the viewer what is important to you, you also can create whole new worlds. Minor White said, “We photograph something for two reasons: for what it is, and for what else it is.” Those are words to live by.

Creative photographers realize that conditions may not be ripe for an effective photograph even while they enjoy the most magnificent scenes. Ansel Adams did not photograph Yosemite Valley every time he was there, though I am sure he marveled at it each time. He photographed when extraordinary conditions made it photographically meaningful.

Step 4: Suggested Procedures for Those Having Trouble Envisioning a Final Image

The ability or inability of an individual to envision a final image while standing in front of a scene varies widely. It has been found that some people cannot envision the scene in front of them if they simply close their eyes. Others may not be able to envision the final image to be derived from the scene—especially if it is planned to be a black-and-white image. Some have no ability to envision the final image, even though they may be able to recognize a fantastic scene filled with great photographic possibilities. This presents unique problems for those who cannot envision the final image while standing at the scene. I’ll confine my thoughts to the photographic issues of those who cannot envision the final image, or have great difficulty doing so, while standing at the scene.

I should start by pointing out that being able to envision a final image is something you have to work at. It is rarely an ability that comes naturally. You may have that ability, but just like trying to hit a base hit from the pitch of a skilled pitcher, you have to work at it. So, if you initially have problems envisioning that final image, don’t quickly give up and say you just can’t do it. Instead, work hard at learning from the images you’ve made how you went from that scene (assuming you can remember it with some clarity) to the final image you produced. Even if the final image fails to please you, you can learn to envision that final image by reconstructing how you went from your starting point (the scene) to your end point (the final image).

Some aspiring photographers may correctly conclude that they simply cannot make that translation. Without that imaging ability, how can you determine in advance if you need a red filter to darken a blue sky? How can you determine with any accuracy if you want to increase or decrease contrast in your image? In fact, how can you determine if you want a black-and-white image while looking at a scene in color (as all scenes are in reality)?

Using traditional methods with film, such decisions are required while you have the camera in hand, or in front of you on a tripod. It seems to me that digital processes may be the appropriate path to take photographically if you cannot effectively translate the scene in front of you to the final image you want to make.

Using film, the decisions have to be made in the field. Digitally, the scene is simply recorded (or “captured,” to use a term I abhor). But from a RAW file, you can decide later if you want increased or decreased color saturation, increased or decreased contrast, a red, yellow, green or any other filter for a black-and-white image, and you don’t have to commit yourself at the scene. In fact, you can try any combination of these variables after the fact, without any loss of starting again from the unaltered original RAW file. The RAW file remains unaltered, for you to try out any number of possibilities leading to the final image that pleases you, and you can save every one of the options along the way, eventually choosing the best combinations among them.

Of course, a digital black-and-white filter used in postprocessing will not yield the same results as its “equivalent” filter put in front of the camera lens for film photography. It may be close, but not the same. It will be different, but neither “better” nor “worse.” It is simply different. Film has its own characteristics (as do the papers it will be printed on); digital has its own. While digital and traditional processes may be similar, they are rarely identical. But with digital, you can try any number of combinations after recording the image, rather than making those decisions in advance while out in the field.

Using digital procedures may be the best way to overcome visualization deficits, though I must admit to certain doubts about this recommendation.

As you’ll read in the next section, I believe that art derives from a rather clear view of the final product before the project begins. This applies not only to photography but all art forms, including painting, sculpting, composing music, writing, etc. So, while working with digital procedures after the fact may be the ticket for those with limitations in visualization, I wonder if creating a final image without the ability to envision that endpoint at the start will yield the best results. It may. And I suppose it’s possible that it could end up being as good as one envisioned from the start, but I have doubts. At the same time, I recognize that the envisioned result is not always the one you or I end up with. Often, the goal changes along the way as you work your way toward that final result and you see other possibilities during the process. That is not uncommon.

Recognizing the options for change along the way, it may be possible to begin a project with no clear vision of a goal, and end up with a wonderful image. Perhaps it can be done repeatedly. With that possibility in mind, I recommend digital processes as a means to that end because those options exist in a way that traditional processes cannot match.

Step 5: Planning a Strategy for a Final Image

The final step of visualization using traditional methods is planning a strategy for achieving your final image, or if using digital processes, trying any of the options before settling on the one that works best for you. This involves determining your optimal exposure and development of the transparency, negative or digital exposure, along with the method of printing it to achieve your goals. This may also include visualizing how you may crop out unnecessary portions of the image, especially if they simply don’t fit the format ratio of the camera you have in hand (figure 4-3). (For example if you’re using a square format camera, not all images have to be printed as full frame squares, and this hold true for all other camera rations, as well.) If you can envision the final image, this means, in essence, that while you’re behind the camera—standing at the scene—you’re thinking about how to print that photograph in the traditional or digital darkroom. (The technical aspects of these considerations are found in chapters 8 through 12.)

 While you’re behind the camera—standing at the scene—you’re thinking about how to print that photograph in the traditional or digital darkroom.

At first, the notion of thinking about the printing process while standing behind the camera may strike you as distinctly odd, or maybe even distinctly impossible. In fact, it’s essential. You’ve done much of the work already: you decided to set up your camera at a specific point in space and aimed it in a specific direction with a carefully chosen focal length lens. You may have put a filter on that lens to help achieve your desired image. You chose an exposure (i.e., a combination of aperture and shutter speed) to properly record the image and determined how to develop that negative (for black-and-white film). Digitally, you may have made more than one exposure for full image making, so you must think of how to combine them into the final image. Under these circumstances, the only remaining decision is how you’ll print it. Once you learn to do that, you’ll be mapping out a complete strategy from beginning to end for achieving the image you want. You’ll be integrating the whole process rather than doing it piecemeal.

This is how art is done. It’s impossible to imagine Bach, Beethoven, Brahms, or Shostakovich writing random notes for a major composition without a rather complete feel for the entire work. It would be equally impossible to imagine Dante, Shakespeare, Dickens, or Twain starting any major book or play without a complete idea of where the writing is going and how it will get there. Did Michelangelo start hacking away at a hunk of marble without envisioning a final product? Do you think Rembrandt, Van Gogh, Cezanne, Picasso, or O’Keeffe started dabbing paint on a canvas in the upper-right corner, then continuing toward the lower-left corner arbitrarily, or do you think each of them had a very complete idea of the finished painting right from the start? The answer is obvious. So, in the same way, it’s up to you to work through the entire process in your mind to avoid making bad decisions that could derail the whole process.

Let me give a simple example and briefly outline both a traditional film approach and a digital approach.

Let’s examine the traditional approach first. Suppose you’re looking at a landscape with brilliant cumulous clouds towering above. The ground (i.e., the landscape below the huge clouds) may be an area of low contrast, but the clouds are extremely bright. If you’re shooting film and recognize while you’re behind the camera that you can darken the clouds by “burning” them when printing (i.e., giving them more exposure under the enlarger), then you don’t have to worry about the contrast when you expose and develop the negative. But if you simply look at the full contrast range without giving thought to the printing stage, you might decide to lower the overall contrast to encompass the brightness of the clouds—which would have the unfortunate effect of making the low contrast on the ground even lower. This would give you a rather “muddy” print. That’s not what you want. When you think about printing while standing behind the camera, it creates a feedback loop that helps you determine your best exposure and development at the scene.

If you’re shooting digitally, you will need to study your histogram to see if the full scene can be encompassed using a single exposure. Even if it is contained within the range of the histogram, it could be pushing the limits at both ends. The problem is not at the high end on the right side of the histogram, where you simply have an abundance of tonal information that can be separated later in post-processing. The real problem lies at the left edge, where meager information in the dark tones will end up as irritating “noise,” with useless pixels filling in for missing information. In that case—and certainly in the case where the limits of the histogram are exceeded—you may need multiple exposures: one for the darker ground and perhaps several for the brilliant clouds. Later, in post-processing you can composite several exposures and then work on the local contrast of each portion on the computer (chapter 11). Always keep in mind that the total range is still black to white, so you can’t overlap the tonal range within each of the several layers, or you end up with visual nonsense. You have to stay within the bounds of the logic of light in any given scene. Within those bounds, your deep insight will allow you to optimize the layers so that one flows smoothly into another, and the image you present to the viewer is both alive with tonal brilliance and believable.

If you study the scene for compositional elements while simultaneously projecting forward to the final print, even while swooning over the scene, you can avoid the trap of making “record shots” (snapshots that simply tell everyone, “I was here”). When you think in terms of the final print right from the beginning, your percentage of successful exposures will rise dramatically. Without such foresight, you are simply exposing for the scene and hoping for a photograph. You’ll be lucky to get one!

Always keep in mind that you control the final image. As you begin to comprehend the extent of that control, you will see not only good scenes that can translate into fine photographs, but also ordinary scenes that can serve as a basis of equally fine photographs. Photography is a creative endeavor. The final image is your creation. Do not limit yourself to replicating the scene as you see it; start to think in terms of interpreting the scene and creating a work of art, a personal statement.

How Your Eye Differs from Your Camera

In chapter 2, I detailed how scientific studies prove that the eye sees only a small area sharply and that it jumps around a scene, seeking the important parts and filling in the rest rather casually. That scientific underpinning leads to my definition of good composition as the artist’s method of “derandomizing the eye’s motion” through an image.

Let’s delve deeper into the consequences of the eye seeing only small areas sharply while jumping around a scene. As the eye looks at a bright area, the pupil tends to close down quickly in order to allow you to see it without being blown away by the brightness. Then the brain turns down the brightness still more so that it doesn’t overwhelm you. When you glance at a dark area, your pupil dilates—or opens up—to allow you to see into that dark hole. Again, your brain helps open up that dark area so you can see it better. In other words, you look at any scene through multiple apertures.

But when you set the aperture for your camera, you expose the entire scene at one preset aperture. That’s quite different from the way your eyes see. So don’t be fooled. Your eyes do not see the scene the same way that a camera sees it. In fact, your eyes can and will fool you. Recognizing the differences can help, but the fact is that much experience is necessary to overcome them. Even then, there will be times that you’ll be fooled. That’s why it’s important to use a light meter with traditional photography or study the histogram with digital photography—the “truth tellers”—to give you factual data about the true light levels and relationships of light within a scene. Sometimes the information the meter or histogram gives you will be astonishing, telling you that something is not nearly as bright as you think it is, or that it’s much brighter than you’d thought. Knowing the true brightness level of various objects will also give you important clues about the problems you may face later in printing the image to your satisfaction.

 Do not limit yourself to replicating the scene as you see it; start to think in terms of interpreting the scene and creating a work of art, a personal statement.

Alternative Approaches

The approach detailed above of envisioning the final print while standing behind the camera, and creating a strategy for achieving it, is known as “previsualization.” I stated earlier that this is how art is done, but it turns out that there are variations and other approaches.

A different form of previsualization is regularly used in street photography. You may find a location that looks good to you, so you set up your camera, waiting for some unexpected action to take place in that setting. In essence, you’ve chosen a stage setting and you’re waiting for the actors to show up, but you don’t know who they are or what they’ll be doing when they arrive. André Kertész, Henri Cartier-Bresson, Sebastiao Salgado, Mary Ellen Mark, and Craig Richards often rely upon this form of previsualized surprise.

Previsualization can be augmented by postvisualization. Discovery by postvisualization (or “postrationalization” as some have dubbed it) can take two forms. First is the discovery of a previously unseen quality in a print, one that makes its presence known only after the print is seen. A prime example is Paul Caponigro’s study of an apple, titled “New York, 1963.” Originally intended to be a photographic tone poem of the texture of a common apple, Caponigro saw in his first prints a pattern of white dots on the apple’s skin—and ambient light reflected off the skin—that reminded him of astronomical photographs. Seeing the unexpected quality, Caponigro printed the image darker and more contrasty to pursue his new vision more effectively. The final print truly evokes a feeling of intergalactic space. Only careful scrutiny reveals the apple as the basis of this remarkable print.

Finding an unexpected quality in a previsualized photograph can be a real surprise, but it occurs periodically. If it happens to you, pursue it, because you may discover whole new worlds. Everyone has heard of scientific discoveries made because of an error in an experiment. The same thing can happen in photography if you consider the unexpected as an opportunity and ride the consequences through. In this type of postvisualization, there can be a realization that the print evokes a feeling different from—or even opposed to—your original intent. As with Caponigro, further thought may prove that the newly discovered statement is worthwhile, and a new approach to printing may further strengthen the altered concept.

The second form of postvisualization is more familiar: the unexpected discovery that cropping, or another alteration of the previsualized print, strengthens the intended statement. This is different from an expected cropping made necessary because you don’t have the precise focal length lens you need, or because the aspect ratio of length to width is different from that of your camera (e.g., you have a square format camera but you want a 4×5 image, or vice versa). This form of postvisualization should be regularly practiced by all photographers.

Another form of postvisualization is the one used by Jerry Uelsmann. He starts by shooting whatever strikes him as interesting without analyzing why it interests him, what he wants to say about it, or how he wants the final print to look. Later, he combines these images to build a final image from components of the original photographs. Sometimes he may incorporate four, five, six or more negatives to build his final image, which usually has a decidedly surreal quality. This approach relies heavily on editing or experimentation or both, and it regularly opens unexpected avenues—a rare occurrence in photography that relies on previsualization alone.

Uelsmann’s surrealism is, appropriately enough, an unusual combination of postvisualization and previsualization—in that order! He photographs anything of casual interest to him with no forethought to the final result. Later he searches through his contact proofs for potential combinations that can produce unusual, bizarre, or decidedly surrealistic effects. At that point he starts to previsualize a final image to be cobbled together from combinations of the proof prints. It is indeed an unusual approach, and undoubtedly an exhilarating one, for Uelsmann has no idea what the final result will be when he exposes a negative. He doesn’t even know if the thing photographed will ever become part of one of his photographs.

Figure 4-3: The Sawtooth, Cottonwood Canyon
Cottonwood Canyon in Southern Utah is a geological and visual wonder with new and different surprises popping out throughout its length. Severe cropping eliminated unnecessary sky and foreground brush from the full 4×5 negative, focusing attention on the spectacular set of uplifts forming the Sawtooth. This is how I initially envisioned the image.

Postvisualization is a prime ingredient of photomontage, in which a number of photographs (in combination, perhaps, with other visual art forms) are meshed together to form a final work. Multiple exposures, on the other hand, generally rely on previsualization and advanced planning. Rarely is an unintentional double exposure effective, though there are some spectacular examples of such fortuitous errors.

The conclusion of all this is twofold. First, numerous methods of arriving at the final print are valid. Second, the comments about communication near the end of chapter 1 take on added importance. Whether the final print is a product of pre- or postvisualization, or a combination of the two, your goal is to elicit a response from the viewer. It is disheartening to show a print that evokes no response other than boredom. Even a strong response that is the opposite of your intent may be better than nothing. For example, imagine the feeling that Caponigro might experience if, after altering his apple print to evoke a feeling of cosmic space, the first viewer glanced at it and exclaimed, “What a wonderful apple!”

===== FILE 12/28: Text%2fchapter05.xhtml =====

Figure 5-1: Sequoias and Sunburst
Mid-morning, with a touch of fog hanging in the air, I photographed directly toward the sun with the huge sequoia tree blocking it from the lens. The ample exposure retained full detail on the backlit trees and in the huge root ball. The unrivaled brightness range of film allowed me to hold detail everywhere, from the deepest shadows to the brightest highlights.

CHAPTER 5
Light

THE IMPORTANCE OF LIGHT IN PHOTOGRAPHY cannot be overemphasized. Light, in fact, is the central issue. The word photography was coined by William Henry Fox Talbot when he made the first negative/positive image in 1839. It was an amalgam of two Greek words, photo (light) and graphy (to draw). Fox Talbot saw photography as a means of “drawing with light.”

The only thing recorded by film and sensors is light. They have no understanding of subject matter. Film and sensors do not recognize faces, trees, buildings, sunsets, etc. They only recognize levels of light. A sharp lens focuses those levels of light on specific areas of the film plane or sensor. Neither film nor sensors recognize lines, forms, relationships among them, or any of the other elements of composition. You have to recognize those things, select them in the viewfinder, and make your exposure to maximize them. The film or sensor then records the light levels it is exposed to for the length of time the shutter is open.

Light is the essence of photography. Knowledgeable photographers realize that they are not photographing objects, but rather light and the way it delineates objects or is emitted by them. Photography is the study of light, the perception of light, and the interpretation of light. Lines, forms, and shapes appear because of the way light reveals those various compositional elements, not solely because of the forms themselves.

Light must be used as a means of directing the viewer’s eye as you, the photographer, want the viewer’s eye to be directed. In chapter 2 we discussed how the eye jumps to the brightest or most contrasty areas first. This physiological fact indicates that light alone can be used more effectively than lines or forms—or any other element of composition—to direct the eye. In fact, light is the most important element of composition because it determines form.

Figure 5-2: Silver Sunlit Dunes
Axis light—sun directly behind the camera—is difficult to work with because it tends to flatten the scene. Here, mid-morning axis light produced a pewter-like sheen on the Death Valley dunes, with sensuous forms coming to the fore.

Light determines form. It’s critical to understand this concept and to put this understanding to use.

Light is so important that it is necessary to become an expert in every aspect of light, from its bold qualities to its subtle nuances. When you are engaged in composing a photograph, there are two considerations about light that should be of prime concern to you. The first is how light distributes itself on the ground glass, viewing screen, or LCD. Look at the light and dark areas, light and dark spots, light and dark lines, etc., to see if they attract the eye toward important elements or insignificant elements within the composition. In doing so, identify the brightest of the light areas and the darkest of the dark areas—in other words, the areas that stand out the most. Those are the areas that will draw the eye most forcefully.

You must also understand the type of light (also known as the “quality of light”) available to you, and see if it is the type of light you want for the mood you’re attempting to convey. Is it strong sunlight on a perfectly clear day, hazy sunlight, overcast light, or foggy light? Is it overhead midday light, sunrise light, or low, directional sunset light? Is it backlight (coming directly toward you) or axis light (coming from directly behind you) (figures 5-1 and 5-2)? Is it ambient lighting from sources you can control, such as spotlights, floodlights, or light boxes? Is it indoor light from a window or from overhead lights or lamps? Whatever it is, you must determine whether it is compatible with the desired mood. If you’re outdoors, you can wait for the light to change to something better for your purposes; if you’re indoors, you can probably change the light at will. Don’t waste film or useless digital exposures until the desired changes occur.

It’s wise to consider the adjustable and the nonadjustable elements you’re working with. Outdoors, in natural light, you can change your camera position (i.e., your location, and then the exact location of the camera lens), your focal length, any filtration you may use, etc., but you can’t change the light (though you may be able to impart some reflected fill light into dark areas of the scene). Both indoors and outdoors you may be able to change how and where a portrait subject stands or sits, and your location in relation to your portrait subject. For outdoor portraits you can bring the subject into sun, or around the corner into a shady area. Indoors you may have complete control over the lighting, including its sharpness or softness, its directionality, its color, and other important aspects, especially in studio settings. Of course, indoors, you also have all the other controls over your camera settings and position that you have outdoors. So, your options tend to be greater indoors. In particular, light tends to be a far more adjustable factor indoors than outdoors. This points to the degree of flexibility you generally have indoors, and the limiting restrictions you may encounter outdoors.

Don’t confuse quality of light with quantity of light. Most nonphotographers equate good light with an abundance of light. They’re wrong. As any good photographer knows, you can keep the shutter open for long periods of time—from many seconds to many minutes—when the light is dim (figures 1-6, 3-6, 3-12, and 5-3).

You can have extremely short shutter speeds—1/125, 1/250, 1/500, 1/1000, or shorter—when the light is excessively bright (figure 5-4). So you can control the quantity of light under almost all circumstances. But you may not be able to control the direction, color, sharpness, or diffusion of light in all cases, and those are the things that fall under the category of quality of light. If you want strong cross lighting from the sun to bring out the crags in a mountain, but it’s an overcast or hazy day, you’d be better off enjoying the view of the mountain than photographing it. If you want strong cross lighting to bring out the crags in a person’s face, but you have only soft room light rather than a sharp spotlight to work with, you should walk away from that photograph as well. Only when the quality of light you want and the light you actually have coincide can you make the photograph you want (figure 5-5).

Figure 5-3: Pews and Columns, Durham Cathedral
The interiors of all English cathedrals were dark, none more so than Durham Cathedral. But they all possessed a quality of light that was exceptional, so much so that none really seemed dark. They all seemed infused with light. Still, exposures ranged from 5 to 20 minutes. Here, the magical light takes your eye past the near columns and folding removable side pews to the far reaches of the interior, with its wall carvings, columns, and deep-set stained glass window . . . then your eye returns to study the nearer columns and wall once again.

Figure 5-4: St. Mary Falls, Glacier National Park
The range of light here was extraordinary, from sunlit white water to deep forest shadows. Sunlight was also illuminating mist kicked up by the next higher of the series of stair-step falls just out of view upstream, with shadows of tree limbs punctuating the sunlit mists. A short shutter speed—just enough to retain shadow detail—virtually froze the motion of the water while retaining all essential detail from the brightest highlights to the deepest shadows.

Figure 5-5: Whorl Mountain
This craggy mountain rises starkly above one of several north/south trending canyons in Yosemite National Park. At sunrise, sunlight hits it directly. But at midday (the time most landscape photographers avoid), sunlight edges its numerous crags, yielding the relief that makes it such a grand spectacle. An afternoon thunderstorm was quickly gathering, and the unusual form of the square, dark cloud adds an additional, unexpected surprise to the image.

Therefore, it is necessary to understand how these qualities of light can be modified photographically. By first recognizing the qualities of light as they exist, and then understanding how they can be maintained, intensified, or subdued, you place yourself in firm artistic control. You also place yourself in the position of determining a strategy to achieve your goals. Just as a painter controls what goes on the canvas, a photographer must control what goes onto the camera’s sensor or photographic emulsion first, and onto the final print in the end.

Looking at Light

The perceptive photographer first looks at the distribution of light within the frame, and then looks at the objects—the things—in the picture. Of course, you’re first drawn to a scene because of the objects, but once you grab the camera, you must stop thinking in terms of objects and concentrate on light. If the light alone draws the eye to the proper objects—the ones you want to emphasize—the composition may be very strong. (Remember that good composition is the art of directing the viewer toward the most important elements of the photograph.)

Furthermore, the light should serve to hold viewers within the photograph rather than catapult them away from it. It’s so easy to get caught up in subject matter (the “things” within the picture) that you fail to notice that the brightest area is the upper left corner or the right edge. An oversight like this can undermine the photograph entirely. It’s possible that there is a valid reason to place the brightest area in the upper left corner or the right edge or any other location within the image (after all, there are no compositional rules in photography), but you should be aware of it and do it deliberately with a purpose in mind. Accidental compositions are rarely successful.

 Most nonphotographers equate good light with an abundance of light. They’re wrong.

Not only should you study where the brightest lights are distributed throughout the image area, but you should also see how bright they are in relationship to other areas—and, conversely, how the darkest portions of the scene compare to other areas. Can you work with those areas? Can you keep them in play? Or are they so far out of line that they can’t be worked with, no matter how hard you try? Some of the answers come from basic sound thinking, some of them from experience. You’ll have to try and fail a few times—and learn from those failures—to know the limits of what you can and cannot do. Furthermore, as your technical skills improve (either traditional or digital), you’ll expand the range of what you can work with.

Don’t be repetitive in your use of light. It’s wise, for example, to fight the urge to place the brightest area at, or near, the center of every composition or, alternatively, a third of the way in and up, as some photographic “rules” may suggest. Such compositions quickly become boring and they indicate an inclination to “play it safe” artistically. You can play it safe for only so long before viewers lose interest or patience. It’s not a good idea to compose according to a predetermined formula, but rather to judge each photograph according to its unique circumstances. For example, it may be powerful to direct the eye to a corner of the image by clever placement of light. Sometimes such unusual and risky lighting can be immensely effective. Above all, you must fully recognize the overriding importance of light and its placement within each composition.

 You’re first drawn to a scene because of the objects, but once you grab the camera, you must stop thinking in terms of objects and concentrate on light.

Exercises in Learning to See Light More Accurately

Here’s a good exercise to improve your understanding and perception of light. Whenever you think of it—driving to work, sitting at the office, out with friends—quickly frame a scene and determine the brightest and darkest spot within the frame. This may seem trivial at first. It isn’t. As you continue with the exercise, you will start to see things you missed at first. While stopped at a red light on your way to work, you might frame a scene that includes cars, buildings, street signs, and other common urban objects. Immediately, you note that the painted white line on the street is the brightest thing, but further study shows that the glint of sunlight off a car’s bumper is far brighter. Similar surprises may occur on the dark end of the scale. The black asphalt of the road may initially seem to be the darkest thing in the scene, but the open end of a ventilation duct on the side of a building may prove to be far darker.

As you continue with this simple exercise, you sharpen your seeing immensely. You then realize that you are seeing every aspect of a scene much more intensely. If you have a 1° spot meter with you to check your perceptions, that will help a great deal. For example, you’ll be amazed to see how sunlit black asphalt on the street turns out to be extremely bright, even though you perceive it to be black.

Next, you can speculate about what would happen under other lighting conditions. On a cloudy day, there would be no glint of light off the bumper. What would be brightest object in the scene under those circumstances? As you peruse the scene for the answer, you start to envision it under alternate conditions. You begin to understand how different lighting would affect the scene.

Depending on the digital editing software you’re using, you can try a variation on this exercise on your monitor by looking at an image and picking out the brightest and darkest spaces . . . then check your guess with the eye-dropper or other appropriate tool that gives you an exact reading right on screen. You’ll find surprises, such as a bright object that jumped out at you simply because it was surrounded by darker objects turns out not to be as bright as other parts of the image that register higher numbers, but are all located together, so none of those jump out at you. These exercises sharpen your vision immensely, and they are very much worth doing. This helps, but not quite as much as doing the same exercise in reality, where you’re looking at things in real life, and sharpening your vision of what you’ll encounter with a camera in hand.

If you are out photographing, you can begin to envision how the scene would look under altered conditions as well as under the circumstances at hand. You may determine that the photograph would be better if it were made under other conditions. An hour’s wait would put the sun lower in the sky and perhaps produce an enhanced effect. It may turn out that cloudy conditions would be best of all. If you determine that conditions are not optimal, you may be able to wait for them to improve. If you aren’t sure, make an exposure under existing conditions and again under the desired conditions, and then compare the two to determine which works best for your purpose. Along the way, you will learn a great deal about light and about your response to various types of light.

Light Determines Form

Look carefully to see how light affects lines, forms, and the relationships between objects in a scene. You’ll see that light is the determining factor. As an example, start with a single tree that has two branches, one above the other. Let’s suppose it’s a dead tree or a deciduous tree in winter, i.e., a tree with no leaves. The branches are smooth and clean. What’s the difference in appearance between the two branches at noon on a sunny day versus noon on an overcast day?

On a sunny day, the upper branch may cast its shadow across the lower one, but the upper branch may be fully lit by sunlight. Both branches are physically continuous, of course, but the lower branch appears photographically discontinuous because of the shadow that interrupts its tonal continuity. It’s sunlit at one end, suddenly dark in the center, then sunlit beyond the shadow. For photographic purposes, it is effectively broken into three distinct sections. The upper branch has no such tonal discontinuity, so it is both photographically continuous and physically continuous.

On a cloudy day, however, where no shadows are cast, both branches are photographically continuous and physically continuous. There are no tonal breaks along their entire lengths. This shows how light alone can alter the form of an object for photographic purposes. In fact, from a photographer’s point of view, light determines the form of those two branches. On a cloudy day, the branches are photographically and physically continuous, but on a sunny day the lower branch is no longer photographically continuous, even though it is just as continuous physically.

There are also other subtle differences. On the sunny day, the sunlit upper portion of each branch is extremely bright, then there is a sharp tonal jump to the shadowed lower portion of each branch. Yet on a cloudy day the brightness on the upper branch gradually grades to a slightly darker bottom. Thus, a cross-section of the branch on a sunny day could just as well be that of a diamond-shaped object as a circle, but on the cloudy day, the soft gradation of light reveals that it is indeed a circle.

This simple example tells you that when you get behind the camera you have to look at light rather than at subject matter. “Photographic seeing” is very different from “everyday seeing.” In everyday seeing, there are two branches coming out of the trunk that are physically continuous. In photographic seeing, you recognize that on a sunny day the lower branch appears as three separate pieces; the two end pieces relate to one another, but the shadowed piece in the center does not relate to either of them.

Now visualize a whole forest of trees under sunny or cloudy conditions. On a cloudy day, each trunk and limb is physically and photographically continuous. This means that as you follow each branch from beginning to end, there are no abrupt tonal changes along its entire length. But on a sunny day, spots of light break up each trunk, limb, and branch into patches of light and dark. Visually, the spots of light on one trunk relate more to the spots of light on other trunks than they do to the rest of the trunk that is shaded. As a result, the visual continuity of each trunk, limb, or branch is lost.

A photograph of the forest under such spotty conditions may look more like a pizza than a forest. The photographic situation no longer parallels the physical situation. The physical lines and forms of the forest are the same under cloudy or sunny conditions, but from the point of view of photography, everything has changed. Continuity has been lost. Light alone has made the difference. Light determines form . . . and sometimes soft light makes things possible (figure 5-6).

Can you photograph a forest on a sunny day with any semblance of success, or is it just something that inevitably leads to failure? Of course you can, but you have to see (i.e., understand) exactly what the light is doing. One of the key strategies that I employ is backlighting, or photographing directly toward the sun, thus looking at the shaded side of the trees. With the sun coming toward me, the trees in front of me are completely in shade, with those slightly off to the sides are just edged by sunlight. This tends to make everything far more cohesive and controllable (figures 5-1 and 5-7). But, you might ask, won’t the contrast be excessive, making it impossible to photograph? No, not a bit, as figures 5-1 and 5-7 attest. (See chapters 8, 9, 11, and 12 to understand how to control such light traditionally and digitally.)

Figure 5-6: Live Oak Forest, Sapelo Island
A thin, overcast cloud cover evened out the light on the live oak trees, bent like well-manicured bonsai. Sunlight would have created a patchwork of light and dark splotches. Soft light allowed each trunk, branch, and leaf to stand out unbroken and undisturbed by shadows from higher limbs. I had full control of contrast through negative exposure and development and printing techniques, but I could not have altered the light had it been patchy.

However, I also caution against using this suggestion of backlighting as a formula or rule to employ on sunny days. Backlighting is one strategy I employ in a forest on bright, sunny days, but it’s not the only one. What I recommend is looking carefully at the light and the forms as you walk through a forest, because all the right things may converge at some point to make an unlikely situation occur—such as an opening that allows cross light to shine on a group of trees exactly where you need it. Don’t discount that possibility, for it can happen.

In the foregoing discussion I stress one aspect of outdoor nature photography: forests. I do that because it presents vexing problems under various lighting conditions. Also, in most outdoor photography, you cannot change the light, so you have to fully understand the light given to you on any day, and consider your options carefully. You must be a keen observer of light. I ask the reader to extrapolate from the examples given to other outdoor subject matter, including other natural settings, architecture, portraits, and even still lifes outdoors. Then bring the lessons from outdoors inside where you may have greater options to control the lighting as you wish. With the right equipment in a studio, you can control the amount, direction, sharpness, diffusion, and virtually all other aspects of the light. When you combine that control with your camera position, the position of a portrait subject indoors, her body language and facial expression, and either a simple or complex backdrop, you can make a serious statement about your portrait subject, your still life, or any other subject matter you choose to photograph.

Figure 5-7: Altamaha Cypress Swamp, Sunrise
Using the same basic approach to bright, harsh sunlight in a forest as in figure 5-1, I aimed my camera directly toward the sun, using a foreground tree to block it out. On a very cold December morning, with fog steaming up from the sunlit swamp, I placed the darkest shadows high on the exposure scale. This allowed me to convey the magical feeling of light emanating from everything in the scene.

It has been my observation over 40 years of teaching that most beginners—as well as many experienced photographers—look at objects, not light. Furthermore, most photographers tend to avoid soft, even light because of their belief that such light produces flat, bland photographs. This common perception is simply untrue. Soft light eliminates sudden breaks of tonality, but contrast can always be increased via a variety of photographic controls. Especially in close-up scenes, soft light is often the only usable light, for it is the only one that can be fully controlled (figure 5-8). Soft light implies continuity of form, but it does not imply or impose blandness.

Figure 5-8: Dance of the Corn Lily
Made in late afternoon under the shadow of a nearby mountain, this image captured a ballet-like feeling in the twisting corn lily leaves and a protective or warm feeling in the leaf sheltering them. No shadows broke up the graceful forms, allowing uninterrupted visibility.

Figure 5-9: Thanksgiving Square, Dallas
Amidst the Dallas skyscrapers, this spiral monument was edge-lit by the sun. A diagonal shadow across the building behind the monument (which came from a building to the right, out of the frame) created compositional interest, far better than if everything had been in sunlight or shade. Note the tones of the monument against those of the buildings behind.

Just as the lines of branches on a tree may be disrupted by strong directional lighting (such as sunlight), shapes of objects can be similarly altered. Consider an architectural subject like a modern office building. Its straight, clean, rectangular facade can be changed by the shadow of a nearby building falling diagonally across it. Instead of a rectangular array of windows, there could be two triangular areas of windows: one shaded, one sunlit. Physically, the building is still rectangular; photographically, it is a pair of triangles (figure 5-9). As always, this is not necessarily undesirable or wrong. This effect may be your intent. Just be aware of the effect created by the light, so you can use it for your interpretive ends. As stated near the beginning of this chapter, observe how the light is distributed before looking at the physical entity of the building.

As you grow to notice the visual changes objects assume under varied lighting conditions, you will become aware of how each type of light affects your feelings about an object. It is surprising how much more deeply you will understand the essence of things by studying the light that falls upon each one. You will discover changes of meaning with every change in lighting. This will reveal ways to interpret those objects most appropriately for the message you wish to convey.

Types of Lighting/Quality of Light

You can best understand light by categorizing the infinite variety of lighting into a few distinct types. Directional and nondirectional light can be the two major categories. Let’s see how to work with both of them outdoors and indoors, starting with outdoor lighting.

Outdoors, sunny weather provides directional light, as do dawn and dusk light from the east or west. Yet there is a difference between sunlight and dawn or dusk light (before sunrise or after sunset), both of which are devoid of the deep shadows associated with sunlit conditions. Overcast weather provides nondirectional light, though early morning or late afternoon hazy (shadowless) clouds may be softly directional. Directional light can be broken down into cross lighting (light directed from the side), axis lighting (light from behind the camera), and backlighting (light from behind the subject). Each of these categories merges gradually into the next, but each has its own unique character, its own quality (figure 5-10).

For any outdoor photograph, it is worthwhile to quickly compare the current lighting situation versus other possibilities, in order to envision how the same scene may differ and perhaps improve under alternate conditions. Under partly cloudy conditions, see if spotty sunlight highlights the important areas of the scene, or if a change in the cloud positions would better highlight those areas. If so, wait for the desired situation (and hope that it will occur!). It may be worthwhile to make several exposures as conditions change, subsequently choosing the best of the lot as your photograph. On the other hand, additional thought may indicate that full sunlight or full shade would better reveal the scene. If so, save yourself some useless exposures and return when better conditions prevail.

Consider, for example, the various types of lighting on a panoramic mountain landscape. Under clouds, the mountains could be a mass of mid-gray tones with little delineation of internal structure, while the cloudy sky—the source of light—would be a nearly featureless light gray. It may prove to be a dreadfully dull photograph, despite the spectacular mountains.

With axis light and a deep blue sky, the mountains may appear brighter than the sky. But lacking shadows, the crags and crevices of the mountains would be invisible. The scene could still be photographically dull. Backlighting could make the peaks stand out in silhouette against the bright sky, but again, the slopes and buttresses below could be featureless, with no light and no life photographically. Strong cross lighting could bring out each pinnacle and buttress in bold relief, and the photograph could begin to have real excitement and vibrancy.

Figure 5-10: Mt. Whitney and Alabama Hills Boulders
Strong directional late-afternoon light coming toward the camera from the left side highlights the huge boulders of the Alabama Hills in the foreground, and even a few of the numerous granite towers, like a picket fence, leading to the summit of Mt. Whitney. The dramatic lighting, together with the incoming thin layer of clouds behind the mountain wall, combines to give the scene the grandeur it needs.

But consider, too, the lighting not only on the distant mountains, but on the foreground as well. Do the foreground forms relate to the mountains, and does the lighting on the foreground enhance the core of the scene photographically? Do the supportive foreground elements—the nearby trees and low hills, the farmlands, the city buildings, etc.—add to the scene or detract? Does the lighting throughout the scene blend nicely, or does it conflict? Do you want a smooth blending, or would a lighting conflict serve you better?

Partly cloudy conditions could produce additional possibilities as well as additional problems. Selected patches of sunlight could highlight some of the more spectacular aspects of the mountains, directing the eye to them immediately. Yet a spot of bright sunlight at the edge of the frame or on an unimportant foreground area could pull the eye away from the main body of the photograph. Under rapidly changing outdoor conditions, be aware of the effect of each change and be prepared to shoot when conditions meet your desires. This requires a combination of patience, awareness, and quickness.

Consider a portrait under the same variety of outdoor lighting conditions. Under midday overcast or in open shade, the subject’s face and body would be evenly lit. There would be a wonderful smoothness and softness. This type of light hides nothing and is a very “revealing” light for portraiture as well as close-ups of nature (figure 5-11). Under bright midday sun, there could be deep shadows under the nose and in the hollows of the eyes. This could be either a major problem or a very effective light for the appropriate subject.

Axis lighting could be quite beautiful, with the center of the face brightest and a fall-off of brightness on either side. But there could be a harshness that makes it appear a bit chalky, unless handled deftly. Edward Weston used axis light with great success for many of his nudes. Cross lighting could pose problems, for the sunlit side of the face may be excessively bright compared to the shadowed side; or, the shadowed side could lose detail in the dark grays and blacks, while the sharp demarcation line between the sunlit and shadowed sides could be highly distracting. It could, however, have an intriguing abstract quality that may well suit your purpose. (Always consider the creative possibilities that “wrong” lighting may produce.) Soft cross lighting, perhaps just after sunset, could impart a luminosity, smoothness, and dimensionality unmatched by any other form of outdoor light. The brighter side of the face would not overwhelm the darker side with light, and there would be no sharp shadow line between the two sides.

For any other subject matter in outdoor settings, consider the same variety of lighting possibilities and try to mesh your perception of the scene to the effect that each type of light will have on it. Look at the following photographs presented in this book for examples of various types of lighting:

Soft, directionless lighting: See figure 3-7, Fallen Sequoias
Soft, directional lighting: See figure 1-4, Ghost Aspen Forest
Cross lighting: See figure 1-2, Mt. Clarence King
Backlighting: See figure 3-4, Sunlight, Capitol Park, Sacramento
Axis lighting: See figure 5-2, Silver Sunlit Dunes

Axis lighting is rarely used in landscape photography because it often yields flat, uninteresting imagery, but every rule has its exception. While it may to difficult to find a compelling landscape under axis lighting, it is not impossible.

When you begin thinking about how light can affect a scene, or about how the scene in front of your eyes can change under different lighting, you will no longer be thinking in terms of recording a scene, but rather in terms of interpreting a scene. You will no longer be showing merely what you saw, but how you reacted to it. You will no longer be reporting on scenes; instead, you will be commenting on them. In short, you will be using photography as a means of personal expression.

Figure 5-11: Reginald McCoy
On a bright sunny day at the ghost town of Bodie, California, I photographed Dr. McCoy. We chose the shaded side of a building, at a wall with especially strong wood textures. Under the soft light, I was able to retain the textures of the wood, Reggie’s face, and his shirt.

 When you begin thinking about how light can affect a scene . . . You will no longer be reporting on scenes; instead, you will be commenting on them. . . . you will be using photography as a means of personal expression.

Indoor lighting is similar in its basic categories. It can be soft or harsh, directional or nondirectional. The major difference is that you generally control the light, whereas outdoors you are usually at the mercy of nature. In indoor lighting situations you can control the intensity of light, the direction of light, the combinations of light, and, in general, most aspects of light to best achieve your goals. Furthermore, controlled lighting is unchanging as long as you choose to maintain it. (Outdoors, it often changes as you prepare for the photograph, and that can be extremely frustrating!)

Direct floodlights or spotlights provide harsh, directional light. Light boxes or bounced light off reflectors, walls, or ceilings provide soft, directional light or soft, nondirectional light. Combinations of direct and reflected light can be used to create virtually any lighting effect imaginable, and a wide variety of equipment is available for such purposes. Let’s proceed with the assumption that your only limitation is imagination, not equipment.

With that in mind, now let’s be specific about the interpretive aspects of light. Suppose your subject is an old man with rough, craggy skin. How would he appear in strong cross light? The wrinkles and crags, the moles and warts, would stand out glaringly. High-contrast cross light would further accentuate the effect. He could be made to appear quite sinister and menacing. Soft, enveloping light would have an entirely different effect. All features and blemishes would be softened; he could be portrayed as a vastly different type of person.

This understanding will allow you to convey the character of the man as you perceive it. You cannot change the man’s face, but you can alter the lighting on it indoors, or wait for the desired light outdoors; your choice of light is an interpretive choice. Coupling this with the expression on his face, his position, your choice of camera lens, and your distance from him will give the viewer a perception of the man. He could easily be depicted as kindly and benevolent, or as disagreeable and malevolent. While there are many things that add up to the final depiction of character, lighting is certainly one of the most important.

Not only are the directionality and the harshness or softness of light pivotal to a character study, but also the amount of light has emotional connotations. Subdued, soft light creates a very different mood from soft but bright light. Subdued light can convey a mood of loneliness and isolation, whereas brighter light can convey a feeling of openness, accessibility, and, perhaps, friendliness. All of these things must be considered if you are to engage in photography that goes beyond typical studio portraits and expresses your perception of the subject’s character.

You may or may not be able to control the intensity of light, but you can control the amount of light hitting the film or sensor during the exposure. Thus you can interpret light quite differently from the light you encounter. A dimly lit subject (human, architectural, still life, etc.) can be made light and airy, if desired, by a long exposure or open aperture. A brightly lit subject can be made dim by a short exposure or closed aperture, or both. With experience, you will begin to see opportunities for manipulating light and interpreting scenes that an untrained observer would never imagine.

The several examples of lighting discussed to this point indicate possible benefits of harsh light over soft light and vice versa, and of cloudy conditions over sunny conditions and vice versa. Most important is the understanding that no lighting situation is inherently good or bad. Some types of light are perfect for some scenes but poor for others, and even these may change as your specific needs and goals change. For certain purposes, you may wish to have bright sun in a forest scene or overcast in a mountain scene. You must recognize the lighting and its effect on the subject matter, then try to create a photograph that reflects that mood and perhaps even enhances it. Lighting may be the element that most profoundly determines the mood of your photograph. Good lighting alone cannot make a great photograph, but inappropriate light will surely destroy one.

There is no such thing as “the best time” to photograph. Outdoor photographs can be made at sunrise, midday, afternoon, sunset, dusk, and even at night. Cloudy weather, sunny weather, fog, or any other natural lighting can offer optimum conditions for specific scenes. Anyone who feels that the hours between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. are photographically useless is locked into preconceived ideas about “acceptable” and “unacceptable” photographs. As soon as you start to look for and think about the unlimited possibilities each type of lighting offers—about close-range subjects, abstractions, lines, forms and textures, and, in general, about things photographic instead of things scenic—you can find ample reason to keep the camera out at any time.

Light as Seen by the Eye and by Film or Sensors, and the Inverse Square Law

Finally, you must learn a disheartening fact: the light that the eye/brain combination sees, and the light that film or digital sensors see, is often quite different. This was discussed in the previous chapter, but it’s so important that it bears repeating. There are additional aspects to be considered as well. As the eye peruses a scene, moving from bright areas to dim areas, the iris of the eye (its aperture) contracts and dilates to compensate for the changing light levels. This tends to soften the contrasts and blend the discontinuities of the scene, making it more understandable and acceptable. The eye/brain sees each part of a scene at a different aperture—a larger aperture for dark areas, a smaller aperture for light areas, and a still smaller aperture for the brightest area. Film and sensors, on the other hand, see the entire scene at the preset aperture you choose. There is no mechanism like the eye/brain combination to smooth the rough edges, i.e., to subdue the harsh bright spots or brighten the darkest areas. The camera is an optical robot lacking the human ability to see under an incredibly varied range of light levels.

Figure 5-12: Chair and Shadow, Convento San Miguel
An enormous structure, built shortly after the Spanish conquest, stands in the tiny village of Maní in Mexico’s Yucatan Peninsula. It is a church, a ruin, a school, a convent, and a town center. When I saw the wooden folding chair in a large side room, in the light of an open door, I imagined a story unfolding: Pablo Casals had just finished playing one of Bach’s “Suites for Cello” and had walked out the open door. The music was still echoing off the walls. It was magic. The inverse square law of light created a serious lighting imbalance. To overcome it, I dodged the wall’s darker right half, then burned the wall nearest the door.

The problem is disconcerting in both indoor and outdoor situations. Indoors, we must deal with the “inverse square law,” which states that as the distance from the light source (open window, lamp, floodlight, spotlight, reflector, etc.) to the subject increases, the amount of light decreases in proportion to the inverse square of the distance between the two (figure 5-12). In practical terms, this means that if three subjects are placed one foot, two feet, and three feet from a light source, the second subject receives only one-fourth the light of the first (1/22 = 1 / (2 × 2) = ¼) and the third subject receives only one-ninth the light of the first (1/32 = 1 / (3 × 3) = 1/9).

As the eye scans the scene, the iris progressively opens as the light decreases. The brain further equalizes the differences, so we note only slight changes in light levels. We do not see the full extent of the decrease from the first to the third subject. The film or sensor, however, sees it as it truly is, for it sees everything at the aperture that has been set. (The specifics of this issue are discussed at the end of chapter 8.)

Outdoors, the inverse square law does not apply (because the sun is so far away), but another problem arises. The light of the sky is considerably brighter than the light on the land, especially on cloudy, overcast days. A magnificent scene may end up as a photograph with a disappointingly dark lower half and a surprisingly bright sky. It may be close to blank white in the print. Careful light meter readings or analysis of histogram displays will indicate the potential problem, where the histogram of this scene will have a large bulge toward the left, another bulge or spike on the right, and with little in the middle. Almost immediately, the wise photographer recognizes this histogram display as a graphic indication of a challenge ahead. The eye, in concert with the brain, is a wonder of practical deception that helps us get through life by smoothing over problems like these.

There are even times when the eye/brain combination actively deceives us because of its lifelong experience. You can try the following experiment to prove it to yourself: have two people stand next to a doorway, with one outside in sunlight and the other just inside in shadow. The person outside must wear a very dark shirt (preferably black), and the one inside must wear a very light shirt (preferably white). Let’s assume the shirts are made of the same material, so they have the same surface reflectivity. Now see which shirt appears lighter to you. You know the white shirt is lighter, but in the shadow it receives far less light. If you are like 99 percent of the people who try this, the white shirt will truly appear lighter, but meter readings will always show that the black shirt in sunlight is the lighter one. The eye/brain combination has learned to overcome the fact that the black shirt in sunlight is brighter than the white shirt in shadow, because experience has taught us that the white shirt is lighter than the black shirt!

Film and sensors can never match this human ability, so you have to learn to see the way they see. You must begin to recognize amounts of light as they actually are, not as experience tells you they “should be.” You must begin to see continuities and discontinuities of lines and forms caused by light, as well as changes in scenes that result from altered lighting. This is the heart of the difference between seeing and photographic seeing. The photographer has to learn how to see the light! It will prove to be a lifetime study.

===== FILE 13/28: Text%2fchapter06.xhtml =====

Figure 6-1: Burnt, Corroded Metal
The devastating Agoura-Malibu and Mandeville Canyon fires occurred on the same day in 1978, burning 30,000 acres in 24 hours. In the Mandeville Canyon fire, an old, corroded metal shed, now burnt, had amazing colors. Despite looking like a Hubble Telescope cosmic photograph, it’s just junk on the ground.

CHAPTER 6
Color

THE FIRST FIVE CHAPTERS DISCUSS a variety of practical and philosophical topics, all applicable to both black-and-white and color. In chapter 3, I specifically delayed a discussion of color as an element of composition due to its exceptional importance. This chapter deals with the profound compositional considerations that color brings to photography, and also with some specific considerations of color as applied to both digital and traditional approaches.

This chapter also marks a significant break from the first edition of this book. In the first edition much discussion revolved around indoor and outdoor color transparency film and their respective qualities, a few words about color negative film, plus a review of digital approaches to color. Today, much of that discussion is largely irrelevant. Color indoor transparency film has virtually disappeared, though a few remain and some photographers are actively and successfully using them. Outdoor color transparency film is also on the wane.

The limited availability of indoor transparency film was a personal blow to me because I was exposing color on indoor film (even for outdoor scenes, with an appropriate filter to convert the indoor film to outdoor color balance) because the indoor film accommodated a wider brightness range, giving me more detail in the shadows or highlights or both. Color negative film still exists, but with fewer options than in the past and far fewer options for size availability (i.e., from 35mm format to large format). And finally, color printing materials have also declined, as evidenced by the end of llfochrome printing paper, which used to allow for direct printing from a transparency to a display print.

As a result of these changes and constrictions in traditional color film and print imagery, color traditional methods strike me now as having limited value for personal expression. Despite my own decades of shooting color transparencies, I have now fully switched to digital means for my color work. I have scanned and converted all my important transparencies to digital files, and now shoot digitally for all of my imagery.

In later chapters I will fully explain why I have made no such switch for my black-and-white work, nor do I foresee any in the future.

In this chapter, and others to follow, I will first discuss color as a concept, as a means of personal interpretation, and as a tool, and then I’ll discuss how digital means offers the best options today for working in color. But I’ll also discuss these considerations with color film since there are still options and they still produce fine results. That said, let’s get back to the discussion of color photography as an art form, and as a form of personal expression.

I feel that color photographs and black-and-white photographs are essentially two different art forms, effectively as different from each other as photography is from painting. (Without going into any further detail, let me qualify the statement in the previous sentence by noting that while I recognize that painting requires skills in drawing and hand-eye coordination that are unmatched—maybe unneeded—in photography [among other obvious differences], the final result of a color photograph compared to a black-and-white photograph is about as different as a color photograph to a painting.)

I approach color and black-and-white differently, I see them differently, and my goals are different in each. To me, the emotional connotations as well as some of the compositional elements involved with color have no analogy in black-and-white. Rarely can I photograph the same scene successfully in both media—so rarely, in fact, that I almost always choose between color and black-and-white before making an exposure. In my early years in photography I often shot a scene both ways, but since I was never equally satisfied with the results, I have discarded the dual approach. I consider this a form of discipline that requires me to be fully in tune with my feelings about the scene and my thoughts about expressing those feelings (figure 6-1).

The benefit of this approach is that I can concentrate fully on the choice I make, rather than giving partial thought to both color exposures and partial thought to black-and-white exposures. I do allow for exceptions, however: if I encounter unusual conditions that I feel allow both color and black-and-white exposures of real significance, then I may consider exposing the scene both ways.

One reason to photograph a scene in both color and black-and-white would be a purposefully altered coloration that brings a new reality to the scene, or an unusual effect in black-and-white that makes it a vastly different image from its color counterpart. Sometimes, of course, the image simply has merit for both approaches, but I’ve never yet seen an image have the same feeling both ways. And sometimes I simply can’t determine which way I like it better, so I do both (figures 6-2a and 6-2b). But I limit those exceptions quite severely.

I base my choice of black-and-white or color primarily on the importance—or the lack of importance—of color in the photograph. I feel that for a color photograph to be successful, color itself must be a central element. There must be something compelling about the colors, about the relationships among the colors, about the intensities of the colors, and about their placement within the scene that makes them essential to the photograph. On the other hand, if color is merely present in the scene—as it always is—without lending needed support, and if it can be eliminated without losing the compositional essence of the image, then my choice is black-and-white. This does not mean that the color has to be intense or brilliant for it to be important—it can, in fact, be subdued or nearly monochrome—but it must be important! (Figures 6-3 and 6-4.) Sometimes the compositional elements of black-and-white are so compelling that the presence of color actually detracts from them, in which case I also choose black-and-white.

Figures 6-2a and 6-2b: The Keyhole, Lower Antelope Canyon
This is one of the few photographs I have successfully made in both color and black-and-white. After exposing the black-and-white negative I noticed overtones of color that were barely visible to the eye—in particular the blue-purple tinges that are reflections of skylight off the canyon walls. Realizing that color film could materially enhance those colors, I exposed a single transparency as an experiment. It worked. The two images, though compositionally identical, carry different messages and feelings.

I have to make a candid admission. If my mindset is to look more intently for either color or black-and-white, I tend to overlook strong possibilities of the other without even being aware of it while in the field. In other words, if I’m thinking in terms of black-and-white, I may pass up a good color composition simply because I’m “thinking black-and-white.” Conversely, if I’m somewhat fixated on color, I may pass up a good black-and-white opportunity. To put it another way, I find what I’m looking for and completely miss what I’m not seeking. While this may not be surprising, it helps illuminate just how narrowly the human mind can focus. This, of course, is the subject matter for a Ph. D. dissertation, not a discussion here, but it may be worth thinking about when you’re in the field doing your own work. However, it surely is worth emphasizing that while I may be seeking either a black-and-white or a color image at any moment, I never look for a specific image; instead I look for what is interesting to me, not knowing what I will see next. I avoid seeking a specific image for two reasons: First, it may not exist, and second, while stalking it, I may pass up numerous possibilities that I have blinded myself to in the search for the nonexistent image.

 Color doesn’t have to be intense or brilliant for it to be important—it can, in fact, be subdued or nearly monochrome—but it must be important!

Figure 6-3: Sheep Flock, Tuscany
The green color is almost monotone, but necessary because of its emerald-like intensity (step aside, Ireland!). The riparian foliage creates an interesting shape, providing the compositional interest. The flock of sheep in the upper left provides an unexpected surprise.

Figure 6-4: Skrova Grass in Snow
This image contains no strong coloration, yet the colors are important. The soft blues in the snow shadows impart a feeling of cold to the image. The basic simplicity of the image also jumps out, with just a single blade of grass, with its attendant strand of grass peeling off to the left, adding a layer of interest to the image.

In years past, I looked upon color primarily as a medium of beauty, and black-and-white as a medium of drama. There was always a degree of overlap in my mind, for I have seen plenty of dramatic color photographs and beautiful black-and-white photographs. I won’t attempt to define either beauty or drama—it’s always been basically a gut feeling for me—and your own definitions will suit you better than mine. My perceptions of drama in black-and-white or beauty in color were simply generalizations that I found to be true in a majority of cases.

I no longer maintain that dichotomy of thinking about the two media. I have come to more fully understand the control that can be exercised over color, especially with today’s extraordinary digital controls. That, combined with the enormous emotional changes wrought by even subtle variations of color, has changed my attitude.

Yet it should also be recognized that the degree of control acceptable in color is probably not as great as in black-and-white because color is one step closer to reality and cannot be altered as easily. When dealing with realistic images such as human skin, the sky, foliage, etc., there can be wide variation in black-and-white, but these types of subject matter must be rendered within narrow limits in color or they simply appear “off.” In some cases, “off-colors” create a tension or imbalance that can have a profound emotional impact, but these effects must be used with great care so as not to be perceived simply as bad color.

Pure color abstraction, on the other hand, allows any variation from realistic colors. When you’re in the realm of pure abstraction, who cares if the greens are rendered as pink or the blues as orange (figure 6-5a)? Here we are dealing with color as an element of composition alone, and the only considerations are the relationships, intensities, and balances of colors. (See chapter 16 for more thoughts on abstraction and art.)

 I have to make a candid admission. If my mindset is to look more intently for either color or black-and-white, I tend to overlook strong possibilities of the other without even being aware of it while in the field. In other words, if I’m thinking in terms of black-and-white, I may pass up a good color composition simply because I’m “thinking black-and-white.” Conversely, if I’m somewhat fixated on color, I may pass up a good black-and-white opportunity. To put it another way, I find what I’m looking for and completely miss what I’m not seeking.

The Color Wheel and Color Sphere

The next several sections will deal with the theory of color, what it is, how it affects us, and how it can be most effectively used. This may be considered an attempt to talk about color as a concept, as a means of affecting the way we see the world, and the way we try to convey our feelings about it through the photographs we produce. Everything in the next few sections applies equally to digital or traditional. It is about color as a major compositional element.

Let’s begin the study of color composition with some basic definitions. Colors can be grouped into families by the color wheel: a circle on which the three primary pigment colors are separated by 120 degrees. (There are other primary colors based on light rather than pigment, but a discussion of them is unnecessary for our purposes here. Most people understand pigments better than light, and that will serve our purposes quite effectively.)

Between each primary color is the color created by mixing the adjacent primaries. A “color family” is any set of colors on the circle within a pie-shaped wedge cut from it. Colors opposite those in the wedge are simply called “color opposites.”

Diagram 6.1: The Color Wheel

Diagram 6.2: The Color Sphere

Understanding the color wheel helps you decide how to alter color balance for the effect you want in a color photograph. It will also be a great help when post-processing a black-and-white digital file (chapter 12) or when deciding which filter to use when exposing a black-and-white negative (chapter 7). The color wheel—together with the color sphere—will help you understand how the use of related or opposite colors can create mood and emotion in your images.

So, let’s expand the concept of the color wheel to that of the color sphere. The color sphere is a sphere like the earth with the color wheel as its equator. The north pole is pure white and the south pole is pure black, while the axis between the poles is the gray scale from black to white. As you move along the surface of the sphere from any color on the equator northward to the pole (along a longitude line, as the case may be), the color becomes progressively lighter until it merges with pure white at the pole. Moving southward, it grows progressively darker until it merges with black at the south pole. As you travel from any point on the surface, where colors are most saturated (pure hue), directly inward toward the axis (at the same latitude) the color becomes progressively less saturated, “grayer,” and colorless until it becomes its own gray tonal equivalent at the axis. (This means that when we talk about the “tone” of any specific color, we are talking about its gray-scale equivalent on the sphere’s axis.) It should be apparent that the color sphere contains all colors and tones on its surface or within its interior.

On the sphere, as on the wheel, a family of related colors corresponds to a wedge-shaped piece cut out from the surface to the axis, as you would section an apple or an orange. Opposite colors or opposite families of colors are simply wedges cut from the opposite side of the central axis.

Color Composition

With an understanding of the color wheel and sphere, let’s look at the issues to consider when creating color photographs. All of the compositional considerations discussed in chapter 3—line, form, pattern, balance, movement, the relationships among these items, etc.—apply to color as well as black-and-white. Color adds a dimension to the elements of composition that has no black-and-white equivalent, that of color, itself.

Lines of color are just as attracting to the eye in a color photograph as tonal lines are in black-and-white photography. In color, however, a series of unrelated objects—perhaps even unrelated in form—may create an apparent line if they are all of the same, or closely related, color. If such a color image were translated into black-and-white, the apparent line may disappear completely (especially if it is composed of forms that are tonally different from one another, or if they merge with the surrounding tonalities), yet the line can be prominent in color.

The intensities of related colors and their placement within the frame must be considered with care and sensitivity in order to make the photograph say what you want it to say. The degree of saturation of the colors along with their depth of hue (e.g., whether they are dark and highly saturated, high key and pastel, or relatively midway between the two extremes) makes an immense difference to the overall character of the photograph.

Figures 6-5a and 6-5b: Mono, Peru, Door with Windows
The turquoise and reddish colors of the door are nearly opposite colors on the color wheel, with the turquoise the more heavily saturated of the two. In the color image, they stand apart from one another brilliantly, but in black-and-white—without filtration to separate them effectively—they nearly merge. The color image has its own life due to the colors and the strong geometric shapes; the black-and-white has no interest because there is no separation of tonalities, and the geometric shapes are lost.

Figure 6-6: Vinca Field
In a field of green ground cover called vinca, the blue flower in the foreground immediately grabs the viewer’s attention, despite the fact that these are not “opposite colors.” The simple fact that the flower is a different color from everything around it makes it stand out prominently. After a while, the viewer will notice several other blue vinca flowers farther back.

Figure 6-7: Dog and Chair, Pisac
In the Peruvian town of Pisac, upstream from the famous ruins of Machu Picchu, members of our workshop group stopped for a midday snack. A cute, fuzzy local dog saw this as an opportunity for some free snacks. His dark gray hairs and pleading eyes were irresistible, especially as he pushed his face through the bars of the brilliantly painted red chairs of the outdoor café.

 The eye will jump toward an opposite color within a composition just as quickly as it will jump in a black-and-white photograph to a white within dominant dark tones, or a black within dominant light tones.

Furthermore, the eye will jump toward an opposite color within a composition just as quickly as it will jump in a black-and-white photograph to a white within dominant dark tones, or a black within dominant light tones. For example, if you photographed green foliage in a forest, but there was a cardinal perched on one of the branches, the viewer’s eye would immediately dart to that spot of intense red amidst the sea of green. The bird and the foliage may be exactly the same tone in a black-and-white image, but color separates them dramatically (figures 6-5a and 6-5b). The dramatic power of an opposite color, and its location within a composition, must be one of your prime considerations when you begin composing a color photograph. If you want a quiet, subtle mood, a sharp color contrast may be too powerful, too overwhelming. But if you’re looking for drama, it may be exactly what you want (figures 6-6 and 6-7).

Let’s consider another hypothetical example. Suppose there is an area of red in the lower right of the image (not necessarily the cardinal, but any red object). Are there other reds, perhaps reds of less intense saturation, or alternatively red-oranges, magentas, or other similar colors within the image that relate to the red object in the lower right? If not, can such a color relationship be arranged, perhaps by changing the camera position? Is it desirable to have that solitary red object stand alone, unrelated to any other color in the frame? What element of composition ties the lower-right area to the rest of the scene? In other words, does it relate compositionally to the rest of the image?

Unless a related form of a different color (or several such related forms) exists, or a strong line leads from that lower right area to elsewhere in the image, that corner of the photograph will be heavily imbalanced. It will not relate visually to the rest of the image, but rather will stand apart and draw your eye strongly to it. Of course this may be your intent, but you should be aware of this effect. A strong, unrelated color can create either a powerful attractant or a harmful distraction.

Figure 6-8: Choprock Canyon Wall Sweep with Diamond
The camera position from farther up Choprock Canyon, looking obliquely at the magnificent wall, rather than looking almost straight at the wall, allowed me to include the full bas-relief sweep carved into the wall, as well as the wonderful diamond-shaped form that so beautifully ended this natural work of art.

Too many color compositions include unfortunate distractions because they were attractive to the eye at the scene, such as a solitary thing in the lower-right corner of your image. The simple expedient of turning the camera so the object is farther away from the corner or edge can relieve the imbalance and improve the image, but only if the elements around it add visual interest and work well in relationship to it. Sometimes a small spot of a related color elsewhere in the image sets up a powerful visual relationship that is enough to balance it successfully.

Camera position can change a random array of colors into an organized composition with interesting lines, patterns, color placements, and color relationships. Sometimes using a wider or narrower focal length lens can bring in or eliminate unrelated objects from the image. It’s worthwhile to quickly check such options before snapping off an exposure. Resist the urge to quickly shoot a scene that has pleasing colors. Instead, first explore where your camera can be placed or determine what the optimum focal length lens is that will help move the eye around related colors in a directed fashion, or reveal a subtle pattern or visual rhythm not seen from any other viewpoint.

In 2016, on my annual backpack workshop, as I hiked up Choprock Canyon, one of the many side canyons of Utah’s Escalante River, I saw a stunningly curved and swept wall pattern, easily 100 yards long. I photographed it in both color and black-and-white, for both seemed to have real potential. Then, as I continued up canyon just a short distance, I looked back, noting that the more distant view allowed me to better incorporate a diamond-shaped form at the right end of the magnificent wall sweep into the composition. Only from the more distant camera position did the two forms come together so perfectly, allowing the curved bas-relief to end in the elegant diamond shaped structure, together with its many echoes (figure 6-8). You may not be able to rearrange the objects and their colors, but a change in camera position can alter their relative positions with respect to one another and may be sufficient to bring about greater compositional interest.

Repetitions and subtle echoes of color throughout an image set up visual rhythms. They help tie the image together as a unified whole. They must be sought and considered from the start. Too often color is included in a photograph simply because it’s there, without adequate consideration given to its placement within the scene. Whether the composition is indoors or outdoors, arranged or found; colors, line, and light can (and should!) be used to hold and direct the viewer’s eye (figure 6-9).

Figure 6-9: Autumn Aspens, Late Afternoon, Sierra Nevada Mountains
Yellow-golds dominate this image, yet subtle variations into browns (toward the bottom) and greens (toward the top) create a visual flow. It’s the light streaming around the trees and the strong shadows that create the movement. Kodak Ektachrome 64T indoor film held the high contrast of the scene so that the near side of the trees retain a wonderful glow, despite being shaded.

Figure 6-10: Bird and Stands
Negative space is often the dark areas—often the unimportant areas—between or behind the more important lighter areas. In this disorienting image, it is the opposite: the black stands, the bird, and the bird’s spindly legs, which relate magically to the stands, constitute the positive space. The sunlit grass is the negative space.

The eye will follow a series of color-related objects in the same way that it follows a series of related forms in black-and-white. Just as related forms of the same tonality can produce interesting visual rhythms in a black-and-white composition, related forms of different colors can produce exciting visual rhythms in color photographs. In fact, in color this can happen with the same color but with different tonalities (such as light and dark greens amidst oranges), or with different but related hues or saturation levels of the same color against lighter or darker tones of color opposites. Such visual rhythms should be sought out or exploited whenever you find them, for they are so visually revealing and appealing. These are the things that can open up new vistas to the viewer, who may have subliminally seen such relationships in passing without ever stopping to really notice or think about them. Now, you’re pointing them out! The viewer instantly sees what he or she has never consciously seen or thought about previously. You’re expanding the viewer’s horizons. That’s an achievement, and it shows that you have the eye to notice such things and bring them to the fore.

Positive/negative space, discussed in chapter 3 as the interplay between light and dark areas of the image, has an interesting extension in color. Not only will light and dark areas create positive/negative interactions, but alterations of color may do it equally well. One family of colors interacting with a contrasting family of colors may set up a fascinating positive/negative interaction. In figure 6-5a the deteriorating turquoise paint on the equally deteriorated red wood could be viewed as the positive space, with the red wood serving as the negative. If the two families are opposites (e.g., blue and orange or red and green), the interplay can be vibrant and scintillating; if the two families are closer together, it can be quiet and subtle (figure 6-10).

Colors can be used effectively to balance an image. A relatively small color-saturated object—royal blue, fire engine red, etc.—toward the edge of an image can balance larger objects on the other side that are not as deeply saturated. This is the teeter-totter analogy of a small child at one end balancing a huge man on the other side of the fulcrum, but close to the fulcrum. Conversely, of course, a color placed toward the extreme edge or corner can unbalance an image, and that can be used effectively if that’s your intent. Yet those colors may not stand out as equivalent gray tones in a black-and-white image, and therefore may be compositionally meaningless in black-and-white.

The most important thing to recognize is that composition must be controlled in a color photograph. Painters have complete control over color—the overall palette, the color intensities, placements on the canvas, harmonies and contrasts between them, and all other aspects of color composition—and photographers should exercise the same degree of control. The photographic controls discussed above and the elements of composition discussed in chapter 3 contribute to that end.

Color Families, Color Contrast, and Their Emotional Effects

As you look at the color sphere, consider color families and how they can augment mood. Reds, yellows, and closely related colors are known as “warm” colors; blues, greens, and related colors are known as “cool” colors. The reasons for this terminology are rather clear. Millions of years of evolution have taught us that fire, sunlight, and a host of other things that are warm in temperature are associated with reds, yellows, oranges, and the like (figure 6-11). We have also come to associate water, ice, thick vegetation, and other cool things with blues, greens, and related colors.

People respond emotionally and physically to warm and cool colors. Artistic depictions of landscapes or still lifes dominated by cool colors actually impart a feeling of lowered temperature; those dominated by warm colors have the opposite effect. Portraits dominated by warm tones may subtly convey a feeling of personal warmth, charm, or friendliness; a similar portrait dominated by cool colors may depict aloofness or other related characteristics.

Figure 6-11: View from the Center of the Earth, Buckskin Gulch
If the earth were to split open, this might be what you would see at its center. That’s what I thought on a backpacking trip through Buckskin Gulch when I encountered this scene. The glowing reds give the impression of intense heat. It was stupendous, almost frightening, but magnetically attractive at the same time.

Figure 6-12: Mt. Lone Pine and Sierra Wave Cloud
Taken at sunrise as a dramatic cloud swept over the rugged Sierra summit, this photograph displays the warm coloration characteristic of early morning and late evening light. The same scene photographed during the midday hours would have had a cold, blue-gray color throughout. Color is dramatically different during the first few minutes and final few minutes of the day.

Figure 6-13: Sierra Nevada Mountains and Alabama Hills
Taken from a location close to that of figure 6-8, but at midday, this image displays a color balance that has changed to cooler, bluer hues. It’s surely a truer rendition of the actual colors of the scene, but the colors of sunrise and sunset can’t be overlooked.

Furthermore, people often become agitated or nervous when surrounded by bright reds, pinks, and oranges. We grow relaxed and restful among darker warm colors and so-called earth colors, and even thoughtful among cool colors. This explains why fast-food restaurants decorate in bright pinks and oranges under bright lights to move people through quickly, whereas plush restaurants use deep reds and browns under soft, subdued lighting to keep people seated in a cozy atmosphere. Libraries and other public buildings use beiges and soft blues and greens to help promote quiet and thought. Research shows that such color and lighting schemes work.

With these thoughts in mind, you can begin to consider appropriate color as an emotional boost for your photographs. You can heighten mood in the desired emotional direction through clever use of color and its available controls. First, the objects that you photograph have colors—warm or cool, intense or subdued, monochrome or varied—that should be compatible with the mood you wish to convey. In addition, the light under which you are shooting has inherent color.

Landscapes under midday light can have a cold, austere appearance, while similar scenes at sunrise or sunset can glow with warmth (figures 6-12 and 6-13). The color of sunlight changes rapidly during the first and last half hour or hour of the day, while almost no color shift takes place during the rest of the day—only the sun’s direction changes.

Let’s consider two examples of color and tonal manipulation, one with nearly imperceptible subtlety and one with astounding boldness. It may be difficult to notice minor color temperature shifts as the day goes on, such as in forests, but changes do occur. An image I made at the head of a forest trail on my home property (figure 6-14a) may not appear to be overly blue in character, but it is. Here, simple post-processing to adjust the color tint and temperature slightly warms up the image (figure 6-14b), bringing out more yellow and green, while subtly subduing the blue, and bringing the image in line with the scene as I remembered it. You may prefer the colder (bluer) rendition or the warmer (yellower) rendition, and since both are fully believable, the choice is yours.

Figures 6-14a and 6-14b: Forest Trail, North Cascade Mountains
Figure 6-14a, digitally captured, was made in the early evening under cloudy skies, giving it an overall blue cast. Using basic global Photoshop adjustments—hue, saturation, and contrast curves—figure 6-14b shows how I brought in the colors that my eyes saw at the scene (note the path). I made no attempt to aggrandize the colors or saturate them needlessly, but rather to show the scene realistically.

Now consider a radically different example. Sand dunes in the middle of a typical sunny day or under overcast skies possess soft lines, low contrast, and rather bland colors (except for a few renowned ones with quite wonderful colors, such as those in Namibia). As such, they have little emotional impact imparted via their color. But the same dunes at sunrise or sunset can be alive with reds, yellows and oranges, and their shadows give them greater tonal contrast as well.

If you are seeking higher emotional impact, shoot near sunrise or sunset. If you want to heighten the mood—or even create a mood—during midday or cloudy light, when conditions can be extremely bland, you can extensively increase the contrast in digital post-processing, but this will work only if the underlying forms are interesting (figures 6-15a and 6-15b). (It should be noted that similar, or even greater, contrast increases are available for black-and-white images via traditional film/gelatin-silver print methods.)

Along with the emotional effects of color families and their degree of saturation, another feature of color that must be considered in order to fully evaluate its emotional effect is contrast. To do this properly, let’s first distinguish between color contrast and tonal contrast. The two may or may not be related, depending on the situation. For example, leaf green and fire engine red possess high color contrast (they are on opposite sides of the color sphere) but low tonal contrast because both translate to medium gray on the black to white tonal scale (see figures 6-5a and 6-5b again). On the other hand, light blue and deep red have high color contrast as well as high tonal contrast, since the deep red translates to dark gray while the light blue translates to light gray. Light blue and dark blue have no real color contrast but only tonal contrast, and for this reason they stand apart. It may be easiest to think of color contrasts as two colors being on opposite sides of the sphere, and tonal contrast as being far apart on the sphere’s axis (where maximum tonal contrast is north pole—white—and south pole—black).

Figure 6-15a: Dune Layers, Morning Overcast (RAW File)
The first image shows the untouched digital RAW file made under overcast skies, showing how uninteresting the image may have seemed to the untrained eye. But recognizing the possibilities available through both traditional black-and-white and digital processes, I made several exposures that morning.

Figure 6-15b: Metallic Dunes (Post-Processed File)
In the second image, the use of curves in digital color post-processing plus dramatic reduction in both vibrance and saturation yields an exciting image without oversaturated colors, to create a successful image from an apparent dud. This is the photographic equivalent of turning a sow’s ear into a silk purse. When contrast is greatly increased using digital processes, there tends to be greatly enhanced color saturation accompanying it, often necessitating reductions in saturation to keep the image believable.

High color contrast occurs when color opposites are placed against one another; low contrast occurs when related colors are juxtaposed. Pastels within a family possess the lowest color contrast of all for they are both light in tone and not deeply saturated in color, and hence will have a soothing emotional effect (figure 6-16), while deep-toned opposites have high contrast, and a jarring or exciting emotional effect. Yellow placed against orange, brown (which is basically dark orange), or light green is seen as low contrast, but against blue it exhibits higher contrast. Taxicab yellow placed against royal blue or deep purple will pop your eyes out with contrast. Sometimes a single dominating color can impart such strong emotion that it’s almost viewed as high color contrast, as the dominating oranges and yellows can be seen and felt in Sunset, Abazio St. Antimo (figure 6-17). The emotional impact is immediate.

In summation, each level of contrast and each degree of color saturation possesses a different degree of emotional impact. High contrast has snap and pizzazz; low contrast has subtlety. Just as the eye jumps to light and contrast in a black-and-white photograph, it jumps to high color contrast in a color photograph. Just as tonal contrast can control the mood of a black-and-white print, color contrast together with color saturation can control the mood of a color photograph.

Figure 6-16: Whidbey Island Lake, Morning Fog
A light fog engulfs this scene on the largest island in the Puget Sound. The subdued light and soft coloration—almost nonexistent, yet visible—of unsaturated blues and greens, along with the lacy foreground grasses and glass-smooth water, impart a feeling of undeniable calm.

Figure 6-17: Sunset, Abazio St. Antimo
The pervasive moisture—often fog—in the Tuscany region turned sunset into a wash of golden light as the sun set over the monastery of Abazio St. Antimo and the surrounding hills. It was a magical moment. Yet the color is soft, and somewhat monochrome, nothing to avoid in a color image.

Subjectivity and Mood of Color

Color renditions of every film type and digital sensor are different. Printing papers vary as well. Which combination is best is a matter of purely subjective judgment. My favorites may prove to be those you dislike most. By working with these variables over long periods of time, you become familiar with their characteristics—their strengths and weaknesses—and learn to exploit their advantages while minimizing their shortcomings.

It has been my observation over the years that all too often photographers tend to push color saturation beyond acceptable limits. This is a critically important issue that I intend to stress throughout this book. (As a related aside, let me note that most of today’s TV screens reinforce that tendency toward oversaturation with colors—such as human skin tones—that are unrealistically brilliant, thus making everyone a “person of color.” Remarkably, TV controls to increase or decrease color saturation have been removed, so the viewer cannot reduce the saturation level of skin tones to those that people you meet everyday actually have.)

The oversaturation problem manifests itself most grievously in recognizable, realistic imagery including portraits, landscapes, architecture, etc. As stated near the start of this chapter, it is my contention that realistic images require realistic colors, and as the imagery becomes progressively more abstract, the necessity for color realism drops accordingly.

Sometimes, the issue of color saturation and realism can even go the other way . . . toward extreme subtlety. As an example, I have always disliked Polaroid color print film. In my opinion, the colors are erratic and muted. Yet Marie Cosindas produced a large body of outstanding color Polaroid portraits and still lifes. By working with the inherent characteristics of the film, she produced images that can be likened to paintings of the Baroque and Romantic periods. She often dressed her subjects in lavish costumes, used flowers or ornate objects for embellishment, and tended toward darker tones and muted colors, while leaning toward the warm tones of browns, oranges, soft reds, and yellows; but her images always tended toward low saturation to create a lush and intense mood. Often one brilliant color stands out against the prevailing deeper tones. In the hands of many photographers the results could prove outlandish or absurd, but in hers they are magical. Much of the credit must be given to her painstaking patience in learning the characteristics of the material.

Cosindas’s Polaroid prints eloquently point out an aspect of color work that often escapes color photographers: it is not necessary to have the entire color spectrum in each photograph. In fact, it can often be destructive. Color harmonies—colors of a single family—can help create unity in a color composition, and color contrast can help create high drama.

Intensity of hue is also of major importance in creating a color photograph. Just as in black-and-white, lighter colors tend to impart a brighter mood while darker colors tend to impart a richer, more serious, or even somber mood. A slight exposure decrease can intensify colors and mood simultaneously; a slight exposure increase can do the opposite. Needless to say, large exposure changes can ruin an image by washing it out at the upper end of the scale or muddying it at the lower end. Subtle changes, however, can have a remarkable effect on overall mood. It’s always wise to heed Ansel Adams’s observation that “There is often a small difference between a print that’s acceptable and a print that’s exceptional.”

Control of color balance, intensity of hue, and contrast levels are major means of creating expressive color photographs. Few photographs require garish or overly saturated colors, though the fad today is to saturate all colors. It seems that garish, neon colors sell in today’s market, leaving serious photographers with the unfortunate conundrum of choosing between true personal expression or sales. (I’ve seen too many books about how to sell your photographs via the use of high color saturation, and most of them turn me off quickly.)

Sometimes monochrome or near-monochrome renditions can be extremely effective. At other times, a subdued color palette with one contrasting color can have tremendous strength. Use of subtle coloration, when appropriate, or saturated coloration, when appropriate, conveys a command of the medium and a personal insight that the discerning viewer will appreciate.

Working with Color Digitally

Now, with those color considerations in mind, let’s see how they can be implemented effectively, first via digital processes, then via film. I recommend reading about both, even if you work purely with digital or traditional methods, for the discussion will open your thinking up to ideas that are common to both.

 An aspect of color work that often escapes color photographers: it is not necessary to have the entire color spectrum in each photograph.

For best results, every digital exposure should be made in 16-bit RAW files, not as 8-bit JPEGs. JPEGs, of course, have great value for sending things out quickly, but the whole premise of this book is based on quality, not speed. So I will be discussing RAW files exclusively, not JPEGs.

I should point out, however, that the monitor on the back of the camera displays that of a JPEG, which is not the same as the RAW file you are exposing. The image shown on the monitor will lose recorded detail in both the highlights and the deep shadows, detail that may be recorded in the RAW file, and can be worked on in post-processing. So it is necessary for you to learn how far beyond the range shown on your monitor you can expect to get in your RAW files. Keen observation coupled with experience will tell you the additional range the RAW file will encompass.

Let’s start at the beginning, when you’re making your initial exposures. Digitally you can set the white balance on your camera (e.g., sunny, cloudy, tungsten, fluorescent, etc.) to closely approximate ambient lighting conditions as seen by the eye. In an indoor studio, you’re in full control over the lighting, so your white balance starting point should be obvious. Outside of the studio, things may be quite different, especially if you’re in mixed lighting (perhaps a mix of tungsten and fluorescent, or indoor room lighting with open windows allowing daylight into the room). If you’re outdoors you have to work with the temperature of light provided by nature: whether it’s sunny, cloudy, foggy, or any other condition, and whether it’s dawn or dusk, sunrise or sunset, or midday. You can quickly switch between various white balance starting points to see which approximates the actual conditions or your artistic vision best. In doing this, understand that there are situations in which none of the white balance choices will be perfect for your situation. Not all sunny days have exactly the same ambient color temperature; not all cloudy days are identical. Tungsten and fluorescent lights possess many variations in color temperature. So, when choosing the closest white balance setting, don’t expect to be exactly on target. Such “near misses” may be corrected with post-processing adjustments.

For example, I have found in my many forays into the slit canyons of Utah and Arizona, none of the white balance options yields the colors my eye sees. The two that come closest are “cloudy” and (surprisingly) “fluorescent.” Yet the former yields colors that are overall too yellow/gold, and the latter colors that are too blue (but not as blue as “sunlight” white balance). However, if I make two separate exposures with the two different white balance starting points, I can achieve virtually the same finished TIFF file through post-processing adjustments. They’re not exactly the same, but they’re very close, with each one closely replicating my memory of the colors as I saw them.

You can go from your RAW files directly to the computer using the powerful tools of Lightroom, Photoshop, or another such image-editing application. It’s easy to alter whatever hues and balances you’ve captured to correspond more closely to the colors as you remember them, or as you wish to adjust them to impart the mood you want to convey. But I advise using such adjustments with subtlety, with major exceptions always available, such as the sand dune example earlier (figures 6-15a and 6-15b). Digital tools today are extremely varied and powerful. They offer exceptional control. They should be used with wisdom and subtlety, not with reckless abandon and lack of artistic integrity. Too often the latter is the case. It doesn’t have to be that way.

This is a caution—perhaps even a warning—already stated but requiring repetition throughout this book. I regularly see color photographs that go well beyond realistic colors and far into the realm of neon brilliance. While I support sensible efforts to heighten the emotional impact of an image, digital tools make it extremely easy to alter or increase color balance and saturation, and far too many practitioners apparently succumb to the lure of such intense coloration.

Technique should be invisible. This means that the viewer should be unaware of the techniques you employed because everything appears natural and correct. The viewer should have the feeling that “you were in the right place at the right time”—in other words, you were simply “lucky” to have been there—leaving that viewer completely unaware of all the maneuvering you may have gone through to achieve the image being viewed. When used intelligently and effectively, none of those maneuvers should be evident. When technique becomes apparent, the image, itself, is lost. This is true not only of color rendition—including both the colors you produce and the degree of color saturation you decide upon—but every other aspect of your image, including contrast, tonalities, burning and dodging (see chapters 11 and 12), and all the other variables of the printing and editing process. Your images should appear natural and unmanipulated . . . unless you’re dealing with fantasy, for which obvious manipulations may be perfectly acceptable.

Over the past several years I have scanned all of my important color transparencies, and in doing so, I have been able to digitally re-create the original color balances for those transparencies that have faded or color-shifted dramatically over the years. In essence, I have brought back to life many transparencies that had largely faded to uselessness. Now I have them all as digital files for future use. Included in this book are examples (with some being noted as original film exposures).

Digital methods have two great advantages not available with traditional color materials. First, scenes of extremely high contrast can be photographed twice, with one exposure for the shadow area and another for the highlights. Then, using image-editing software, the two exposures can be combined into a single image file, thus increasing the usable range over that of a color film transparency. In fact, three exposures can be layered as well: one for shadows, one for midtones, and one for highlights. Actually, any number of exposures can be combined. (More about this in chapter 11.) The final print may rival the eye’s ability to encompass the full range of contrast in the scene. This offers tremendous advantages for color photography.

Caution and common sense must be employed in using such layering procedures because the full tonal range of any image can be no greater than black to white. You cannot capture the full range of a scene using several exposures and then expect detail together with high contrast within each portion of the range. So it must be recognized that encompassing the full range via several exposures means that portions of the final image must be rather low in contrast, simply because the combination of the several exposures cannot exceed the limits of black to white. If you try to cram too much contrast and pizzazz into each portion of the image, strange visual effects begin to emerge that destroy the final image.

The second great advantage of digital color procedures is the ability to vary the contrast level throughout the entire image, or selectively in different parts of the image. For these reasons I now see digital processes as the best approach available to create color imagery, and it’s the reason I have gone completely digital in my color work. I simply see no reason to work with existing traditional processes that cannot equal the flexibility or the variety of options available through digital color processes.

On the other end of the contrast range, scenes with unacceptably low contrast can easily be increased using applications such as Lightroom or Photoshop. Thus, contrast levels are easily controllable once you understand how to employ the appropriate tools (see details in chapter 12). However, there is an inherent logic to the degree of contrast that can be accepted, which varies scene by scene, just as there is with the degree of color saturation that remains logical and realistic. (Again, see figures 6-15a and 6-15b as an example of wildly increased contrast that remains visually attractive and apparently realistic). If you go too far, it simply looks contrived, cartoonish, and absurd. I recommend staying within logical limits.

 There is an inherent logic to the degree of contrast that can be accepted, which varies scene by scene, just as there is with the degree of color saturation that remains logical and realistic. If you go too far, it simply looks contrived, cartoonish, and absurd.

Color saturation presents an interesting set of problems. As stated above, all too often color saturation is undesirably exaggerated. Part of the reason for oversaturation of color lies in the original capture itself, where there is a clear increase in saturation beyond what the eye perceives. (Of course, this can happen with film too, as in figure 6-2a where film greatly enhanced the visible color during an extended length exposure of five minutes. Yet that was an unusual situation created by the long exposure, and not normally encountered.) The initial digital characteristic of enhanced color saturation goes far enough; there is rarely a need to push it further. If you accept the colors from the initial capture as your base point, i.e., your starting point—forgetting that they are already somewhat enhanced above those of the actual scene—and then you work toward further enhancement of the RAW file, you are prone to go overboard. And the ease with which you can increase saturation—simply slide the saturation or vibrance slider to the right—is apparently extraordinarily addictive, proving irresistible to most digital practitioners.

This is a problem I call the “Dr. Strangelove Effect.” Photographers need to control their baser instincts instead of spiraling down to the greatest color saturation in image after image. Sometimes a pastel is what you really want. Sometimes subtle colors convey the right mood. As photographer/instructor Jay Dusard once noted during a workshop review of color images, “Not all photographs have to look like a professional football jersey.”

It turns out that the slider can also be pushed to the left, as easily as to the right. Color saturation or vibrance can be decreased as well as increased. I find that in my post-processing, I tend to push the saturation level down more often than I turn it up. From my point of view, the image should be the thing that carries the impact, while the colors in the image should serve to enhance that mood; colors should rarely be the driver of that mood.

Keep in mind that color is inherently closer to reality than black-and-white. Unless you’re totally color blind—and very few people are totally color blind—you see the everyday world in color. So you’re somewhat constrained in pushing color balance or saturation . . . unless your imagery goes into the abstract realm. It’s hard to push colors of recognizable and realistic scenes very far from “realism” before they simply appear to be wrong, yet photographers forget this repeatedly. My recommendation is to try to remember the original scene, which will prove to give you a better basis of how far you can alter, saturate, or desaturate those colors to keep them compatible with the mood you wish to convey.

Used sensibly and subtly, the digital approach to color can offer tremendous rewards and exhibit remarkable visual power. The problem is not with the digital means, which afford all the control anyone could ask for. It’s in controlling you! Sometimes you may want the viewer to sit down and think rather than jump up and shout. In fact, subtle, subdued colors have their place. (Look at the subtlety in Japanese or Chinese paintings to see the strength of well-chosen pastels.)

What about nighttime color photography? In urban areas contrast created by the inverse square law (see chapter 5), where street lights and other point sources produce extremely spotty, contrasty situations, is a difficult problem to overcome. One clever way to overcome this is to shoot well after sunset (or before sunrise) but with enough dusk or dawn light to serve as the basic light source, and help even out the spotty lighting. In essence, it’s the dawn and dusk light that you’re dealing with, while the man-made light sources add a bit of accent to the scene.

In urban areas, after dusk or before dawn, point sources of light (such as street lights) produce the primary lighting, and several exposures followed by post-processing layering of the exposures can yield detail virtually everywhere, avoiding the “blowout effect” at and around those point sources traditionally seen in nighttime imagery. Thus, one exposure can be made to encompass the light sources and their immediate vicinity, with another exposure (or several other exposures) made for those darker areas far from the light sources, and then the two (or more) exposures can be combined.

If you’re away from human-created point sources of light (perhaps out in the countryside, at the seashore, up in the mountains, or at some other purely natural setting), moonlight photography can be quite successful. Out in nature, digital photography offers options that we’ve all seen, including full nighttime landscapes together with a sky filled with stars as myriad pinpoints of light where you can clearly see individual stars and the band of the Milky Way in such photographs. (I must admit to my own dislike of such images, for they carry a distinctly unreal and perhaps even “forged” feeling to me—the digitally exposed nighttime sky always strikes me as too bright and overwhelming—but it does clearly show the degree of flexibility that digital, alone, can offer. I also realize that the unreal brightness can be toned down.)

Working with Color Traditionally

As stated near the start of this chapter, color indoor transparency film has disappeared, as has Ilfochrome printing paper, which allowed direct printing of transparencies. The loss of these two products was a large reason for my switch to digital methods, since I had been using both for my color work. That, combined with the greater flexibility of color digital processes, tipped the balance for me. Yet, traditional color processes have merit, and are worth discussing.

Today there remain two starting points for traditional color photography: outdoor transparency film and negative film. The following discussion deals with both of those starting points.

If you’re using film outdoors, you can enhance early morning or late afternoon warm tones with a film that inherently enhances warm tones, or subdue it with films that enhance cooler tones. Choosing the appropriate film can help put your vision into your photographs. By the same token, you can intensify the cooler midday colors with films that tend toward cooler tones, or warm them up a bit with warmer-toned films.

You’ll find that the film’s response to the color of ambient light can dramatically alter the overall color and mood. Your choice of film can prove to be an asset or a detriment to your goals. Every color film has a characteristic color balance. Some are stronger in the warm colors but weaker in the cool colors (i.e., the warm colors are pure and rich; the cool colors are somewhat grayed and dull). Others are stronger in the cool colors. (Fuji Velvia breaks that mold by being overly high in tonal contrast and overly saturated with intense color, and, as you can easily guess, is a film I heartily dislike.)

Every film has its own unique palette—i.e., a combination of color balance, saturation, and inherent contrast. I strongly urge you to experiment with several color film types before settling on one as your sole medium. Since color is highly subjective, it’s best not to rely on the recommendations of others; instead, determine for yourself what is most appropriate for your needs.

When you’re using color negative film materials, the negative is never the final product but rather the halfway point between the exposure and the print. Color balance can be altered and improved during printing. Film transparencies can be the final product, and they can also be made into prints, today largely via an internegative onto negative print material. (An internegative is a direct emulsion-to-emulsion image onto negative film through the original color transparency, so that the created negative can then be printed as a traditional negative would, without any loss of sharpness from the original transparency.) Both negatives and transparencies can be digitally scanned for further digital processing, which I believe today is the best way to proceed due to the superior controls available digitally compared to those available via traditional color processes. With film, color correction can be done at the printing stage in the same way as with negatives, in which case initial color balance is of lesser concern. However, to state the obvious: the closer you come to the balance you want using the original material, the better chance you have of obtaining your desired balance in the final image you create.

Color negative film is lower in tonal contrast than transparency film, with very few exceptions, and can be expected to yield lower contrast prints than ones derived from transparencies. So color negative films tend to yield softer, more subtle final prints than do transparencies. Differences in color contrast levels can create greater emotional swings than you might expect without seeing comparisons. I strongly recommend that those using color film—either transparency or negative film—for the exposure, convert the image to digital and proceed from there with the postprocessing and printing. (As I will make clear in subsequent chapters, I do not recommend the traditional-to-digital approach with black-and-white.)

Figures 6-18a and 6-18b: Snow Cups, Sierra Nevada Mountains
These two photographs were made minutes apart at the same location; figure 6-18a under sunlit conditions and figure 6-18b as a cloud passed over the scene. These images show subtle but important differences in the film’s color balance. Figure 6-18b (in shade) exhibits a colder blue tone in both the melting snow and granite rocks on the high slopes. That color balance strikes me as more appropriate to convey the feeling of cold, as opposed to the yellower, warmer rendition in sunlight. Digitally, it’s almost the equivalent of choosing the white balance between sunny and cloudy, with sunny being the colder, bluer rendition and cloudy being the warmer, yellower rendition. In this way the initial choice of white balance can help communicate the feeling you want, not only in a scene like this, but in a wide variety of others.

Neither the degree of color saturation nor the inherent contrast of color film can be significantly altered in development (in the way contrast can be altered in black-and-white) unless you develop your own negatives or transparencies and learn some highly sophisticated, perhaps tedious, means of contrast control. (Please keep in mind that tedium is one thing and fine art is another. How many people think that Michelangelo, Shakespeare, or Beethoven avoided doing their utmost because it was too tedious?) Most photographers use commercial labs for processing, and contrast control methods are not available at most labs. Thus, the only way to alter color saturation or contrast is by changing from one film to another. Color balance, on the other hand, can be altered by choice of film or filters. Therefore in choosing a film—or several films—for your purposes, it would be wise to place greater emphasis on saturation and contrast than on color balance; while you can’t control the first two, you can control the latter.

Figures 6-19a and 6-19b: Red Mountain Heather, Sierra Nevada Mountains
Figure 6-19a was made under sunlit conditions, figure 6-19b under cloudy conditions. These two photographs show the same sun vs. shade color shifts that we see on the snow cups (figures 6-18a and b). Which version is more appropriate? To me, it’s a toss-up. I see no clear winner despite the obvious differences.

With film, you should learn about lighting characteristics in advance, or you could end up with an irreversible problem because you guessed an incorrect color balance . . . hence, garbage in; garbage out. If you are supplying the lighting indoors, you should already be familiar with what you’re dealing with, so the problem disappears.

However, just as with digital approaches, mixed lighting conditions create challenges. For the most part, you cannot properly balance mixed lighting, so you must make a choice of which way is best to be “off.” For example, when I was doing commercial architectural photography, I found it best to filter for fluorescent, and let tungsten lighting within the same room warm up those parts of the room with a golden glow, whereas if I filtered for tungsten, the green cast from the fluorescent lighting imparted a sickly look to the scene.

If you want to heighten a mood a bit, you can consider increasing the contrast. Digitally, of course, you can increase or decrease contrast, saturation, hue, and color balance quite easily on the computer, giving you remarkable options beyond those of color film. With film, if you like warm colors but want a softer rendition, use a lower contrast film and/or one that is stronger in cool colors. Also, some very exacting and sophisticated masking procedures can be employed in printing to increase or decrease contrast, but these are not easy to master (see the discussion about masking in black-and-white in chapter 10). If you want a quieter mood, shoot during the midday hours, remembering that changes in color balance or contrast among films can edge the image one way or another emotionally. (See chapter 7 on color correction filters for film.)

It’s important to be aware of the fact that all daylight color films are balanced for sunlight and they display a heavy blue tone on overcast days or in shadow areas. You’ll find much the same effect shooting digitally with a color balance set for sunlight. This blue shift may be perfect for a few subjects, but harmful for most. With film, this blue cast can be neutralized by filters (see chapter 7); digitally, this can be accomplished by initially setting the white balance or during post-processing. Only if you are aware of the color shift can you work with it to your advantage (figures 6-18a and 18b, and 6-19a and 6-19b). Beware of the effect of fluorescent light; everything takes on a strong green cast, which can be corrected only with heavy filtration.

For outdoor night photography light levels will generally be too low for your meter to respond, but you can experiment with exposure times under full moon, half moon, or quarter moon lighting. Once you lock in the necessary times for such lighting—always requiring extended exposures—you can open up a whole new area of photography that you had previously never considered (figure 6-20).

Figure 6-20: Roaring River Fall, Moonlight
Roaring River Fall in Kings Canyon National Park drops to a deep pool near the South Fork of the Kings River. In late autumn, under a full moon, and with the flow low enough to see the cataract, it turned into a magical cathedral. In order to get detail on both the waterfall and the massive granite walls enclosing it, the color transparency exposure lasted more than 15 minutes.

In Summary

Color photography requires at least as much thought as black-and-white photography; perhaps more. Color is an element of composition, and a dominating one, at that. It is also a potent determinant of mood. When making a color photograph, color balance, color placement, color harmony or contrast, color intensity, and appropriateness of color must all be carefully considered along with lighting, balance, lines, forms, textures, and all of the other elements of composition. When printing color, compatibility of the original exposure with all the post-processing and the final print material must be considered in order to obtain the proper look of the final image. If photography is to be used as an expressive extension of your own thoughts, each of these elements must be chosen with care.

 I have long felt that it may be easier to make an acceptable color photograph than a black-and-white photograph, but it may be even more difficult to make an outstanding one.

I have long felt that it may be easier to make an acceptable color photograph than a black-and-white photograph, but it may be even more difficult to make an outstanding one. Because color is instantly recognizable and is therefore more accessible to the average person, it’s easy to make pleasant images. But because color is so accessible, it’s hard to break away from a documentary image to one that is personally expressive: too often the scene dominates over the mood, the feeling, or the interpretation. Creating an image in color that is truly expressive—one that breaks away from the scene—requires a great deal of thought and dedication, as well as rapport with and deep understanding of the subject. None of this comes easily, but when it is achieved, the results can be breathtaking.

Figure 6-21: Star Tracks, Sierra Nevada Mountains
On a backpacking trip in 1976 to Sequoia National Park, I made an exposure of over three hours starting well after dark, but with a quarter moon setting during the first half hour. At this 11,000-foot elevation, the moon provided sufficient light for the immediate foreground. With the camera aimed toward Polaris (the North Star), the remainder of the exposure simply captured star trails without any subsequent exposure on the land. I could have left the shutter open longer to get even longer star trails, but I was afraid of oversleeping and ruining the exposure with too much dawn light.

===== FILE 14/28: Text%2fchapter07.xhtml =====

Figure 7-1: Mt. Samson and Peaks of the Canadian Rockies
With sunlight coming in through the hazy sky from the right, the polarizer helped separate the tonalities of the sky from those of the clouds by darkening the blue sky, which exhibits polarized light. It had little effect on the lower portions of the scene. The deep yellow filter further separated the tones of the sky and clouds without darkening the forested lower slopes. A #25 red filter would have created even greater cloud/sky separations but could have blacked out the trees. Thus the yellow filter was a better choice. Yet when I made the print, I dodged the forest throughout the basic exposure, then burned the top two-thirds considerably, and then did an enormous amount of additional burning on the top third.

CHAPTER 7
Filters

MUCH OF THIS CHAPTER’S DISCUSSION CENTERS on filters used for traditional black-and-white film exposures followed by a brief discussion of color correction filters for traditional color photography. Digital filtration is then discussed, with the recognition that digital photography rarely employs filters during exposure, but filters are applied in post-processing. (This is discussed fully in chapters 11 and 12.) Because most digital filtering is accomplished via a computer algorithm, not an optical alteration, it is not the same as filtering for film. This is not to say that it is inferior or superior, but it is simply different. I urge all digital practitioners to read this chapter fully for a better understanding of how filters work, and how their digital alternatives can be best employed during post-processing. So, let’s move ahead.

The two previous chapters on light and color lay the groundwork for this chapter. More must be added before a complete understanding of filters can be achieved. Let’s begin by looking at light from a technical point of view without getting overly technical or mathematical about it. Visible light is a small portion of the electromagnetic spectrum (EM for short). The entire EM spectrum includes other forms of invisible radiation, such as infrared light, ultraviolet light, X-rays, gamma rays, and radio waves. Within the small portion of the EM spectrum that is visible to our eyes, there is also a spectrum (or range) of radiation levels, and we see that spectrum as colors of the visible spectrum—the colors of the rainbow, if you will. Most people are aware of Newton’s experiment of refracting light through a prism and breaking white light into its component parts, the visible spectrum.

All visible objects are visible only because they radiate light from their surfaces. The reflected or emitted light is made up of some, or all, parts of the visible spectrum. Few natural or man-made objects emit or reflect light from only one portion of the spectrum to the exclusion of other portions. The spectrum of light from a red rose, for example, includes small contributions from blue, orange, violet, and even green and yellow, as well as the dominant contribution of red. Yet the rose appears to be pure red. The blue sky is not highly saturated with blue; the percentage of blue in its spectrum is lower than the percentage of red in the rose. Though the sky’s dominant contribution is from the blue portion of the spectrum, other colors are present in surprisingly high amounts.

Here we have two facts of great importance to start our discussion of filters:

White light is a combination of all colors.
Most objects radiate significant amounts of all colors of the spectrum.
Black-and-White Filters for Film

All black-and-white photographic filters (yellow, orange, red, green, and blue . . . and others) allow light waves to pass through that are the same color as the filter itself. Other colors are impeded to a greater or lesser extent depending on two things: the strength or depth of hue of the filter and the “oppositeness” of the color of the light wave from the filter. Thus, a red filter allows red light to pass through unimpeded, but it impedes yellow, green, blue, and other colors to varying degrees, depending on how close they lie to red on the color sphere (diagram 6.2).

In black-and-white, all colors are seen in terms of their gray equivalents on the axis of the color sphere. When two objects of different colors have the same gray tonal value, it may be difficult to separate them in black-and-white. The classic example of the red apple and green leaves comes to mind. There is no problem separating them in color, but in black-and-white they both translate to a middle gray tonality. Textural differences help separate them, but only through filters can their tonal values be changed to create a visual separation of the tones.

Let’s say you use a red filter during exposure of the red apple and green leaves. The predominant red rays of the apple pass through the filter, but the predominant green rays of the leaves are stopped. Because the green rays are stopped, they don’t reach the negative and the leaves are lighter (or “thinner”) on the developed negative, and therefore will appear darker on the final print. The leaves don’t become black, however, because other colors reflect off their surfaces, and those colors pass through the filter to sensitize the negative. Some of the colors reflected off the apple are stopped by the filter, but at a far smaller percentage than those radiating off the leaves. Thus, the apple appears lighter and the leaves darker. If a green filter were used, the opposite effect would occur: the apple would be darker and the leaves lighter.

Which filter would be most appropriate? This question brings us into the realm of interpretation and creativity. The green filter is the more “realistic” choice because the darkened apple appears heavier. Psychologically, we ascribe greater physical weight to dark objects. The green filter would be more in keeping with this fact, while the red filter would oppose it. Of course, there may be a good reason to purposely fight the natural, comfortable feeling. You may want to create a feeling of strangeness or a slight off balance. It’s a matter of individual preference and creativity.

When you understand what various filters do, you can use them as interpretive and expressive tools. This is crucial for creative photography. Full knowledge of your equipment is immaterial unless you use it to further your interpretive goals. And, of course, you cannot further your goals unless you first define them.

If two filters have the same color, the darker or deeper filter is the stronger one, and allows a smaller percentage of other colors to pass through it. Thus, a deep red filter allows little but red radiation to pass through and blocks a greater portion of other colors than a medium red filter. A yellow filter, which is a lighter hue than red, allows substantial amounts of colors other than yellow to pass through. (For example, the #12 yellow [or “minus blue”] filter cuts out blue light almost completely.) For this reason, the more deeply hued filters are considered stronger filters, as they have a more pronounced effect on the relative intensities of light passing through them.

All filters require an increase in exposure to compensate for the amount of light being stopped. Stronger filters require substantial increases in exposure. This exposure increase is known as the “filter factor.” A #25 red filter, for instance, requires a three-stop exposure increase over the unfiltered exposure because only ⅛ of the light hitting the filter passes through it! Ignoring the filter factor can result in a disastrous underexposure.

Because the red filter prevents ⅞, or 87.5 percent, of the light that hits it from passing through (on average), it does not truly lighten reds within the scene as most people think. Rather, it darkens everything. But because you open up three stops, you compensate for the overall decrease in light. The red portion of the spectrum is not stopped by the filter, so red objects are selectively lightened in comparison to other objects. An object that is pure red (i.e., that emits only red rays of light) is not affected by the filter because its rays pass through unimpeded; but because you open up three stops to compensate for the filter, it is brightened by that amount. An object that is pure green (i.e., that emits only green rays of light) is totally stopped by the red filter and reads as black no matter how much you increase the exposure! The only reason that a green leaf appears at all is that it emits colors other than green that do pass through the filter to the negative.

 Full knowledge of your equipment is immaterial unless you use it to further your interpretive goals.

A yellow filter requires only a ½ or 1 stop exposure increase, as it is weaker than a red filter. It should be pointed out that even with the appropriate filter factor for correct exposure, a red filter will darken blue far more than a yellow filter because it impedes blue more thoroughly than the weaker yellow filter.

The filter factor is correct only if the scene contains a broad spectrum of color. For example, if a scene is dominated by red and a red filter is used, little exposure increase is necessary because all red wavelengths would pass through the filter unimpeded. However, if a red filter is used on a scene that is dominated by green, an exposure increase of more than three stops would be necessary because a high percentage of the wavelengths would be stopped by the filter. Thus, the filter factor represents a starting point for the average scene. It must be increased or decreased as appropriate if the scene diverges greatly from the theoretical standard.

Examples with a Hypothetical Landscape

Walk with me into an idyllic landscape and consider the effect of various filters on it. The foreground is a rolling pasture of luxuriant green grass with a background of low hills and distant mountains. A red barn is off to one side, large orange poppies dot the foreground grass, and a deep blue sky with fleecy white clouds tops the scene. It is a hypothetical scene that possesses just about every color, so playing with filters can be an interesting exercise. Following are some of the possible effects of using (or not using) filters on such as seen:

Using no filter with any of the common panchromatic films (which have a higher sensitivity to blue light than our own eyes), the sky would come out as light gray. The clouds would not stand out strongly against the light tonalities of the sky, and the distant mountains would also be rather light due to the bluish atmospheric haze—however slight that haze may appear—and therefore would not be terribly outstanding. The barn would be dark, as would the grass, while the poppies would stand out as light gray dots.
With a light yellow filter (#8 or K2), the sky would be darkened to the gray value that your eye would tend to expect. The clouds would be more visible against the darker gray, and the distant mountains would also be somewhat more visible due to the reduction in blue haze. The grass would be slightly lightened and the poppies would be lightened even more, while the barn would be slightly darkened, separating it somewhat from the grass tones. A deeper #12 yellow filter would darken the sky considerably, making the clouds pop out more strongly. Again, the grass would be lightened to about the same extent as with the K2 filter, but the poppies would be made even a bit brighter against the grass. The barn would be darker than with the K2 filter.
A #21 orange filter would darken the sky considerably, bringing out the clouds quite strongly, and the mountains would also be darkened. The orange poppies would be nearly white against darkened grass, and the barn would be slightly lighter than the grass.
A #25 red filter would turn the sky dramatically dark. The white clouds would jump out boldly, and the mountains would be even more visible, as atmospheric haze would be cut to a minimum. The orange poppies would be quite light, but the grass would be even darker than with an orange filter—so the contrast between the two would remain about the same as it is with the orange filter. The red barn, however, would appear quite light, and if it were a newly painted bright red, it could be rendered nearly white! If it were a typically dark red barn, weathered and unpainted for many years, it would still be lightened significantly. A somewhat less intense #23 red filter would slightly subdue each of these effects; an even stronger #29 red filter could dramatically intensify them.

Before looking into the effect of green and blue filters on the scene (and you are certainly permitted to think about them before reading on!) consider the most appropriate filter among those discussed. Recall the general mood of the scene, which is one of vivid colors and crispness, yet one of peace and restfulness. The red filter would be too strong for me because it overdramatizes the scene and the mood. I would want my gray tonalities to be rich and brilliant, but not so sharply rich and brilliant. Without any filter, the photograph would be rather bland, lacking the required crispness that I feel the scene deserves. Thus, for me, it comes down to a choice between the yellow and orange filters. I will make my choice, you make yours!

Back to the remaining filters:

A green filter would slightly darken the sky, more than that of the K2 filter, and about as much as the #12 filter, but it would lighten the grass and darken the poppies. The barn would be darkened considerably, which could be interesting. However, the effect it would have on the grass—brightening it—and poppies—darkening them—would be highly unpleasant to me because it would virtually merge those tonalities, and I would avoid its use.

Figures 7–2a and 7–2b: Basin Mountain, Approaching Storm
Figure 7–2a is a straight print, showing how much brighter the sky is than the foreground and middle ground of the scene. We tend not to see this tonal disparity because when we look around a scene, the eye automatically opens and closes its own aperture (the iris) to compensate for brighter and darker portions, and the brain further smoothes out the differences. The camera sees the entire scene at one aperture, often with surprising results.

With a good deal of manipulation in the darkroom, figure 7–2b shows how the tonal imbalance is corrected by darkening the upper portion of the image, then by subtly darkening the edges to direct the eye toward the center, Basin Mountain. The manipulated image is far closer to the way I saw the scene than the straight print.

A blue filter, in my opinion, would be utterly inappropriate, for it would turn the sky almost white and do much the same for the mountains. The clouds would effectively disappear. The barn would be dark gray, while the grass and poppies would be nearly equivalent mid-gray tonalities. That is not the effect I would seek.

Those are my opinions about the desirability of each filter in a hypothetical scene. You may prefer one of the other effects, perhaps even the last one that I rejected so thoroughly. You may wish to concentrate your vision on only a small portion of the scene, rather than the full panorama, and use a different filter to alter its qualities. Your approach could be perfectly wonderful and could show great insight. There is no “right way.” There are many things to consider, and they should all be considered. This is what creativity and personal expression are all about.

Keep in mind the fact that all black-and-white filters perform two tasks: they make their own color (as well as closely related colors) relatively lighter, and they turn other colors darker. (Actually, they only darken colors away from themselves on the color wheel—progressively more for colors toward the opposite side of the color wheel from that of the filter.)

Both effects must be considered on all parts of the scene and all elements of the photograph before the exposure is made. Too often the careless photographer considers only the prime purpose of the filter, without considering its side effects on other areas of the photograph. You may commonly find the most appropriate filter to be a compromise choice. The best filter for one purpose—the primary purpose—may be decidedly harmful to other aspects of the image, whereas a filter that is not quite as effective for the primary purpose could be either neutral or helpful to secondary effects (figure 7-1).

Filters are important aids in black-and-white because the effects they produce cannot be duplicated by even the most intricate darkroom maneuvers. Imagine trying to photograph the hypothetical scene of the previous example without a filter, and then in the darkroom attempting to darken the sky without darkening the clouds, or brightening each poppy without brightening the grass! It would be a miserable task, indeed.

Contrast Control with Filters

At the same time that filters alter the relative tonalities of objects based on their colors, they also change contrast between objects. They can actually alter the composition by directing the viewer’s eye toward objects or areas that are accentuated and away from those areas subdued by filtration. Thus, they are important compositional tools. A #25 red filter increases contrast in a landscape because it cuts through the blue, contrast-reducing atmospheric haze, even when the air seems crystal clear. A #12 deep yellow filter has a similar, but milder, effect because it also cuts through blue haze very effectively (figures 7-2a and 7-2b). I consider the effect that filters may have whenever I set up my camera for a black-and-white photograph, even though I may use them in only a small percentage of instances. I feel that landscapes can benefit most from thoughtful filtration because most colors are so unsaturated in nature, and therefore have a tendency to be rather gray under soft lighting. With filters, tonal variations may be separated with clarity.

Not only can filters be used to separate tones, but they can also be used to bring diverse tones closer together—as the green filter brought the grass and poppies together in the hypothetical example above. Jay Dusard often uses filters in this manner, separating the tonalities later in a very different manner during negative development. There may be times when a darker or lighter color can be intrusive or disruptive to a composition, and it can be better blended with its surroundings through filtration.

An example drawn from my experiences in the Utah/Arizona canyon country helps explain this idea. The dominant features of the landscape in that area are the enormous sandstone cliff faces. Some cliffs that are nearly white in color have visible horizontal lines of various red/purple hues caused by the stratification of ancient dunes or clay deposits. They also have dark, vertical eroded crevices caused by water pouring down the cliffs during heavy downpours. Photographing these cliffs with a green filter further darkens the horizontal streaks, making them the dominant feature. A red filter, however, lightens the horizontal streaks almost to the point of tonal merger with the rest of the cliff. When the horizontal streaks nearly disappear, the vertical eroded crevices become the dominant feature. Thus, the choice of filter can potentially change the dominant line structure of the image from vertical to horizontal!

Just as with any other aspect of photography, no two photographers will have the same approach. This is the meaning of personal expression, and it is as it should be! The important thing is to use your tools with understanding and with a purpose in mind. Filters can be exceptionally useful tools. (In chapters 11 and 12, you will see how to use the digital tools, with multiple cautions about using them wisely to help you achieve your goals, rather than using them as playthings. Effective use or destructive misuse of available tools is a common two-edged sword to both traditional and digital processes.)

Infrared Film and Filters

Infrared black-and-white film sees more than the visible spectrum that the eye sees. Its sensitivity goes beyond our visible range into the infrared portion of the EM spectrum, immediately beyond red. Using infrared film can allow the creative photographer some interesting departures from reality. A variety of filters can be used with infrared film to accentuate or subdue the effect that this film imparts.

An infrared filter completely blocks out all visible light, allowing the film to record only the infrared component that is transmitted to the film. Use of such filters with infrared film creates some eye-popping images, both with portraits and landscapes. In portraits, skin tones are rendered in especially milky and unusual tonalities; in landscapes, sunlit foliage often appears blazingly white, as do clouds, while blue skies are rendered intensely black. An infrared filter accentuates this effect to the greatest extent. Of course, since the filter blocks out all visible light, you’ll see nothing if you look through it; it’s as opaque to your eye as a lens cap! But it allows infrared rays to penetrate through.

A #29 dark red filter allows some of the visible light onto the film, creating a nearly complete infrared effect; a #25 red filter allows still more of the visible spectrum through, yet the infrared effect is still quite strong. Going to weaker filters—such as #21 orange, #12 deep yellow, #8 (K2) light yellow, or no filter, whatsoever—allows progressively more visible light through to the film, and progressively more subtle infrared effects. As the infrared effect becomes more subtle, the viewer may be unaware that infrared film was used. The leaves on deciduous trees may appear to be bright, perhaps brighter than normal, but almost subliminally so (see figure 2-2, infrared film exposed with a #12 yellow filter).

I tend to like the effect of infrared film used with the weaker filters or no filter at all. It removes the bludgeon approach that makes it obvious that I’m dealing with infrared film. In general, I want my techniques to be so subtle that they are transparent. If people respond favorably to my prints, I want them to think that they could have produced the same photograph if only they had been in the right place at the right time. I don’t want any of my manipulations—either in exposing the negative or in printing it—to be obvious. In the same way, I don’t want the materials I use to be the issue of interest; I want the image itself to be the issue. So, the strong infrared effects that you get with infrared or deep red filters are generally much too blatant for my sensibilities. Viewers immediately say, “Aha, infrared film!” They are more aware of the film used than the image produced, and I feel that it generally detracts from the intended message.

 If people respond favorably to my prints, I want them to think that they could have produced the same photograph if only they had been in the right place at the right time.

Color Correction Filters for Traditional Film Imagery

Filtration for color film is not as pronounced as that for black-and-white, but the emotional impact of its subtleties can be every bit as great. Color filtration is limited to altering the color balance in the scene. In addition, filters can be used to change the balance of indoor film to outdoor film or vice versa (chapter 6). An 85B filter with a ⅔ stop filter factor converts indoor transparency film to outdoor color balance. An 80A filter with a 2 stop filter factor converts outdoor film to indoor balance for tungsten lights with a color temperature of 3200 degrees. An 80B filter with a 1⅔ stop filter factor converts outdoor film to indoor balance for tungsten lights with a color temperature of 3400 degrees.

Figures 7-3a and 7-3b: Aspen Group, Sierra Nevada Mountains
Photographed in the late afternoon under the shade of a nearby ridge, figure 7-3a takes on a mild yet distinct blue cast. For figure 7-3b, I used a CC10Y yellow color correction filter to neutralize the shift toward blue, giving the image a more natural feel.

For general color correction, the prime tools are color correction (CC) filters. They are available in several colors—red, magenta, blue, cyan, yellow, and green—and varying intensities of hue in each of the colors. They are nicely color coded by both color and hue intensity as follows: after the letters CC, a number signifies the intensity of the hue and a final letter indicates the color of the filter. Thus, magenta filters come in CC05M, CC10M, CC20M, CC30M, etc., in which two CC05M filters equal one CC10M. Similarly for green, two CC10Gs equal one CC20G. Filters can be combined to reach any desired filtration level and combination. Thus, if you need 25 units of yellow and magenta for filtration, add CC20M + CC05M to CC20Y + CC05Y.

My experience with CC filters shows that for every 25 units of filtration, there is a filter factor of ½ stop, so the 25M + 25Y combination would necessitate a 1 stop filter factor (i.e., open up your exposure one full stop after metering the scene when using those two filters in combination). A full explanation of this procedure can be found in chapters 8 and 9.

CC filters are available as thin gels, somewhat like thick cellophane sheets, which are placed in front of the lens like any other filter. The filters alter the color balance of the scene, shifting it toward the color of the filter just as if they were cellophane sheets—except the filter’s shift is quite subtle.

In the previous chapter, I pointed out that outdoor color film tends to shift toward blue in the shadows or under cloudy conditions. This can be an advantage at times, but it can be harmful as well. Color correction filters can neutralize this blue shift (figures 7-3a and 7-3b). My own experience shows that a combination of CC10M and CC05Y, or alternately, CC10Y and CC05M, returns the color shift to the colors I see. If I want to subtly emphasize yellows or greens in the transparency, I use the CC10Y + CC05M combination, but if I want to bring out warmer tones, I tend to use the CC10M + CC05Y combination. I have used the two combinations often when photographing the deep, red-walled canyons of Utah and Arizona (figure 7-4). (I should note here that the effects seen in figures 7-3a, 7-3b, and 7-4 may be easily achieved digitally by either choosing the appropriate white balance before exposing the image, or altering the image’s temperature and tint in post-processing.)

Figure 7-4: Shiva the Dancer, Paria Canyon
In this deep canyon of Northern Arizona, I combined CC10M and CC05Y filters to warm the scene. The major emphasis was on warming the walls and tree trunk to prevent a blue cast.

CC filters can be used not only to neutralize unwanted color shifts, but also to enhance moods by enriching colors. Suppose you have a composition dominated by green leaves, but they are rather dull in color. A combination of yellow and green CC filters could lighten and enliven the colors. In a similar way, slight amounts of red CC filtration could warm skin tones for portraits—or, you could do a variation on Newman’s portrait of Krupp by using a green CC filter for a more macabre look! Only the slightest amounts of filtration (CC05 or CC10) should be used, or the results may look too contrived.

It takes some time, and a good feel for mood, to learn how to effectively use CC filters, but the emotional shifts they can create are quite remarkable. The emotional connotations of slight color variations have extraordinary impact. CC filters should be an indispensable part of any serious color photographer’s tool kit.

An abundance of other filters can be used for color filtration. The most well known are the haze, skylight, and ultraviolet (UV) filters, which correct for the blue cast of ultraviolet light in bright sun or high altitudes. Film responds strongly to UV light. Since the eye compensates and we tend not to see the blue shift, these correction filters can be very valuable in reducing the blue.

Many people place a filter permanently on the lens, feeling that the correction is proper and that the filter affords protection from damage in case of an accident. This strikes me as a counterproductive approach. First, permanent use of a filter reduces options for later filtration. Second, if the film looks better with the filter on permanently, it may indicate that you should seek another film with a more pleasing color balance. Finally, if you need protection from lens damage, it may indicate that you are too careless and should change your habits, pronto!

One final note on color filtration: CC filters can be combined in extremely high levels to correct for the green shift of fluorescent lighting. However, there are many different types of fluorescent lights, and each requires its own filtration packet. You can write to Kodak or Fuji and obtain their booklet explaining fluorescent filtration. As an example, the appropriate filtration for old Ektachrome or current Fuji-chrome indoor 4×5 transparency film is CC50M + CC60Y for “cool white” fluorescent, with a filter factor of 2 stops. This is a great amount of filtration, but since it does negate the unpleasant green shift associated with fluorescent lighting, it’s worth using.

Digital cameras avoid the fluorescent problem entirely with their white balance feature that recognizes fluorescent lighting and rebalances color for it. On most cameras, you set it manually, simply by going through the various options to see which comes closest to the colors you are seeing. It’s a valuable feature that removes the guesswork and off-colored images that can be the bane of traditional color films. Of course, fluorescent lighting is never a problem with black-and-white film because the film sees only light levels, not colors. As an intriguing aside, Dr. Edwin Land, the creator of Polaroid film, spent much of his life trying to develop a film that would work equally well in daylight, tungsten light, and most fluorescent light. The prime motivation was apparent: the human eye basically sees the same colors under most of those varied forms of lighting. How does the eye/brain system compensate for those different types of lighting? It turns out the eye/brain system has capabilities that still are not understood. Perhaps, if they are determined in the future, we may be able to produce films or digital sensors that can automatically compensate for varying lighting, as does the human eye/brain. Today, we’re still looking for that same “holy grail” that eluded Edwin Land for so many years, and many other researchers to this very day.

Neutral Density and Polarizing Filters

Two types of filters are useful for both black-and-white (including infrared) and color photography . . . and even for digital: neutral density and polarizing filters. The neutral density filter essentially amounts to putting sunglasses on your camera. It cuts the amount of light entering the lens equally from all parts of the visible spectrum. It does not alter color balance, nor does it selectively block specific color wavelengths while allowing others to pass unimpeded. Its purpose is to force longer exposures.

Neutral density filters allow anything from slight exposure increases (1-stop neutral density filters) to extreme exposure increases (10-stop neutral density filters). This may seem like a strange approach considering today’s emphasis on faster films and lenses (i.e., lenses with wider maximum apertures), but it does have wonderful uses. Consider the example of Wynne Bullock’s extended time studies cited in chapter 3. I don’t know whether Bullock’s exposures were made at dawn or dusk under low light levels, or whether he artificially created long exposures at midday through the use of neutral density filters, but the effect is magical. It could not have been done with standard exposures.

Most photography today emphasizes stopped motion; but if you are interested in exploring the effects that motion can produce under long exposures, neutral density filters are mandatory. They can be expressive and creative tools with more applications than most photographers realize (see figures 3-26 and 3-27).

The polarizing filter (or polarizer) is a neutral density filter with a 2-stop filter factor. Beyond that, it reduces glare, which is highly polarized light. In order to understand what a polarizer does, we must first understand what polarized light is. Again, we must become somewhat technical, but not very much so.

For our purposes, we can say that light propagates as waves from its source (the objects in the scene) to the receptor (your eye, the camera lens, etc.). If you drew a straight line through space from the source to the receptor, there would be millions or billions of light waves traveling along that line. Each individual wave would be oriented at a slightly different angle to the direction of travel. Most objects emit or reflect non-polarized light, in which approximately equal numbers of waves are oriented at any given angle to the direction of travel. Some objects emit or reflect polarized light, in which most waves are oriented in one plane perpendicular to the direction of travel. If we drew a coordinate system in space, with X, Y, and Z axes at 90 degrees to one another, and polarized light traveled along the Z-axis from left to right, there would be a predominance of waves in the X-Z plane (i.e., the vertical plane) compared to the Y-Z plane (i.e., the horizontal plane).

Diagram 7.1: The Polarizer—How It Works
Two light waves travel along the Z-axis from left to right. Light wave #1 is in the X-Z plane (the vertical plane), perpendicular to the Y-axis. Light wave #2 is in the Y-Z plane (the horizontal plane) perpendicular to the X-axis. The “pickets” of the polarizer are aligned parallel to the X-axis (i.e., vertically). Light wave #1 passes through the filter. Light wave #2 is stopped, for its angle of orientation is 90 degrees to that of the filter.

In a sense, the polarizer acts as a visual “picket fence,” allowing only waves oriented in the same direction as the pickets to pass through the filter. Therefore, if the pickets are parallel to the X-axis, waves in the X-Z plane pass through while those in the Y-Z plane are stopped. If the polarizer is rotated 90 degrees so that the pickets are parallel to the Y-axis, then waves oriented in the X-Z plane are stopped and those in the Y-Z plane pass through. Those at intermediate angles pass through in direct proportion to their closeness to the angle of the pickets.

Objects exhibiting polarization (i.e., objects reflecting polarized light) can be made slightly lighter or much darker than other objects not exhibiting polarization simply by rotating the polarizer. All good polarizers can be rotated while mounted on the lens. When the polarizer is rotated to correspond to the polarization angle of the incoming light (i.e., the angle at which most of the light rays are oriented), the object emitting or reflecting the polarized light is hardly affected. When the polarizer is then rotated 90 degrees, most of the rays of the polarized object are blocked, and it turns quite dark. A second non-polarized object, however, has the same portion of its light blocked by the polarizer at any angle to which the polarizer is rotated.

Skylight is polarized, as are window and water surface reflections. Lesser-known objects that reflect polarized light include the thick leathery leaves of live oak trees. When the camera is aimed at a landscape that includes sky and clouds, the polarizer can make the sky lighter or darker compared to the clouds because clouds don’t show polarization. The effect of the polarizer can be seen as you look through the lens and slowly turn the filter. You can clearly see the sky grow darker and then lighter as the filter is rotated. The clouds become more or less pronounced as the sky darkens and lightens around them. This is why I used a polarizing filter along with a #12 deep yellow filter when photographing figure 7-1, Mt. Samson and Peaks of the Canadian Rockies. The two filters together helped separate the tonalities of the sky from the clouds, but they had little effect on the rest of the image. I’ve employed that combination of filters at other times as well.

When looking at the surface of water, rotating the polarizer can effectively reduce or even eliminate surface reflections at certain angles and allow objects beneath the surface to be seen clearly. You can watch the reflections disappear while subsurface objects become visible as you stand behind the lens rotating the filter. As you continue to rotate the filter, you will reach a point of minimum surface reflection and maximum subsurface visibility. Beyond that point, the relationships will reverse until you reach maximum reflection and minimum subsurface visibility.

 A polarizer can be misused by rotating it to its maximum polarizing angle. When this angle is used for color slides of dramatic landscapes and cloud-scapes, the polarizer can make the sky oppressively blue-black.

The polarizer, like the neutral density filter, can be used in combination with any CC filter or black-and-white filter because it has no color shift. I have often used a polarizer in combination with a red, orange, or yellow filter in black-and-white primarily to accentuate clouds against a blue sky for heightened drama, but for other purposes as well.

Problems Associated with Polarizers

A polarizer has one oddity when used on the sky: it works to maximum effect at 90 degrees to the direction of the sun. When lined up with the sun it has no polarizing effect whatsoever. Thus, if the sun is directly behind or in front of you, the polarizer is nothing more than a 2-stop neutral density filter. But if the sun is to your left or right by 90 degrees, the sky can be dramatically affected by the polarizer.

There is a hidden danger here. If your photograph includes a portion of the sky 90 degrees to the angle of the sun, and substantial portions of the sky at other angles, the polarizer can make the sky appear very uneven. The portion of the sky at right angles to the sun will be greatly darkened, while other parts will be darkened far less. If the photograph is made with a wide-angle lens, the unevenness can be excessive and very distracting.

Another danger is that the polarizer can be misused by rotating it to its maximum polarizing angle. When this angle is used for color slides of dramatic landscapes and cloudscapes, the polarizer can make the sky oppressively blue-black. The viewer becomes more aware of the polarizer than either the scene or the photograph. In a similar fashion, maximum reduction of reflective glare off windows or water surfaces can effectively eliminate the substance of the window or the water itself. In some cases this may be desirable, but in most cases an intermediate angle of rotation allows the reflective surface to be visible as well as the objects behind or under it. With sky and clouds, the optimum angle is often less than the maximum polarizing angle. Overuse of the polarizer is more objectionable in color than in black-and-white because of the closeness of color to reality. Moderation is mandatory for effective use of this tool.

I learned about the seductive effect of the polarizer the hard way. I was photographing a color scene in the rolling, oak-covered grasslands of California near San Luis Obispo in the early 1970s. The leaves on the live oak trees were quite reflective and bright, the grasslands were covered with spring wildflowers, and the blue sky had streaked white clouds. I used a polarizer to accentuate the contrasts and colors. At the non-polarizing angle, the filter simply darkened the entire scene. But as I rotated it, the clouds began to pop out from the blue sky and the leaves on the oaks became progressively greener. I finally reached the maximum angle of polarization and was giddy with how colorful everything had become. It turned out that the resulting transparency was a complete dud! By eliminating the reflection off the leaves, I lost all the feeling of light and life—effectively turning the trees into blobs of deep color, as if they were painted. Somewhere between the non-polarizing angle and the maximum polarizing angle I could have moderately accentuated the clouds against the sky, while at the same time retaining some of the brilliant light off the leaves and moderately enhancing their color saturation. It was a lesson learned.

It is easy—perhaps compelling—to gravitate toward the maximum polarizing angle because its effect can be intoxicating. Each increment in dramatic effect gains acceptability, making the next one acceptable and desirable as well. Always keep in mind the fact that believability can be pushed somewhat beyond reality—into a realm bordering on “super-reality,” heightened impact, and increased drama—but pushing too far creates a decidedly unreal and obviously contrived photograph.

Digital Polarizing Filter

Because of the way a polarizing filter works, selectively having its effect on light rays that show polarization, the only way to replicate its effect digitally would be to place a polarizer in front of the lens when exposing an image. However, placing a polarizer in front of a lens may produce unexpected optical conflicts with the tightly controlled lens/sensor system built into the camera. The only way to see if a polarizing filter can be effectively used with your camera is to try it several times, make careful notes of what you’ve done, and observe the results. It may have the same results as a polarizer used with a film camera. If not, it is difficult to envision an algorithm capable of replicating the effects of the polarizer. Programmers would not only have to create a method of replicating the polarizer’s effect on the sky, including the angle of the sky in relationship to the sun, but also the effect of polarized light reflected off many shiny objects, and reflections off surfaces such as still water on a pond or a glass window. That monumental programming task has not been accomplished, and it’s hard to imagine how it could be accomplished (though future advances could accomplish the seemingly impossible).

Because a polarizer is an extremely valuable tool for both black-and-white as well as color traditional photography, its possible loss for digital photography would be unfortunate. Some of the polarizer’s effects may be possible to duplicate in post-processing, by increasing color saturation and reducing bright glare off live oak leaves (to relate it to my personal experience). It would be possible to replicate its effect on the sky (while having no effect on the clouds), by isolating the blue of the sky and darkening it, but it seems impossible to replicate partial or total reduction of reflection from a water or glass surface. For this reason I strongly recommend experimentation to see if holding a polarizer in front of your camera lens is a viable option. If it doesn’t work, then resorting to post-processing to emulate some of its effects is your only option.

Digital Black-and-White Filtration

As stated at the start of this chapter, digital filtration is generally accomplished in post-processing, not during the exposure. Few digital photographers use filters when photographing in the field or studio, relying instead on software to do the work later in post-processing, particularly for black-and-white work. Black-and-white filters may be used with digital cameras, but their effect on digital sensors may be quite different from their effect on film. It may be worth trying black-and-white film filters on your digital camera (simply hold it in front of the lens when making the exposure) just to see the effect. This may prove to be utterly counterproductive if your RAW files are typically in color, but may be worth exploring if you’re using one of the digital cameras dedicated to black-and-white imagery exclusively. (NOTE: While such cameras have wonderful black-and-white capabilities, discussion of them is beyond the scope of this book.) For standard digital cameras based on full color imagery, trying to use standard film black-and-white filters makes little sense.

The digital approach to filtration is completely different, relying on the three color channels—red, green and blue—of the original RAW exposure to post-process the image. You can apply changes to the entire image or even to select parts of the image to different percentages of the three channels. This would be the rough equivalent of filtering each part of the image in isolation, without concern for any undesirable effects filtration may cause to other parts of the image even if it proves to be the apparent choice for a key part of the image.

Let’s see how this can be applied to the hypothetical idyllic pastoral scene discussed earlier in the chapter. Let’s assume you like the yellow filter to help separate the white clouds from the blue sky. But at the same time, the filter will slightly lighten both the grass and the orange poppies dotted within the grass. Perhaps, in that section of the image, you’d prefer an orange filter, which would lighten the poppies while darkening the grass. Digitally you can do this.

The great advantage of digital filters is twofold: you can see what any one does to the image as you move its slider to the left or right, and you can move that slider to any degree you choose. This flexibility offers wonderful options when converting the original color RAW file to a final black-and-white image. But the problem is, once again, that most practitioners tend to go too far before they believe they’ve gone far enough. And, once again, I caution moderation in the use of filter manipulation, always keeping an eye on the final composition, and how you want to direct the viewer’s gaze. If you filter each portion of a black-and-white image for too strong an effect, you could end up drawing too much attention to portions of the image that should serve a supporting role, and hence you can lose your compositional focus (please reread chapter 2 for the meaning of good composition). Second, digital filters are clearly not the same as traditional black-and-white filters, so the effect could be quite different. Certainly they are to me—I have a lifetime of working with traditional black-and-white filters, and find the digital equivalents to yield significantly different results. Digital filters are computer algorithms created by software programmers and computer engineers; they are not optical filters like those used in traditional photography. This is not to say that digital filters are wrong or bad in any way, but simply to say their effect on the image is different from those of traditional black-and-white filters.

Allow me to briefly explain the differences as I see them. It is clear that red and magenta are not very far from one another on the visible spectrum, nor are blue and aqua. But moving the red filter slider to the left or right may have a huge effect on an image, whereas moving the magenta filter to the left or right shows no visible effect, whatsoever (or vice versa). I’ve seen the same strange effect when playing with blue and aqua filters on an image. The same is often true with any other filters with closely aligned colors: one may work to a remarkable extent, while the other shows virtually no effect.

While some filters do, indeed, have a huge effect on an image, there seems to be little relationship between the alleged color of the filter and its effect on the image. These unexpectedly large differences, where I would expect small differences, make me wonder if the algorithms should be listed as #1 filter, #2 filter, #3 filter, and so on, rather than as yellow, orange, red, and so on around the color wheel. Therefore, while the filters can be very effective, they seem to have only a cursory relationship between their alleged color and their effect on the image. But, as stated above, these unexpected results are largely irrelevant because you can actually see the effect of each filter on the image, and you can increase or decrease the degree of that effect as you see fit. I look upon the names of the digital filters merely as potential indicators of what effect they may produce, and then I work the sliders to see what they actually do. (From a practical point of view, it’s also easier to remember “magenta filter” rather than “#4 filter.”)

Digital Color Filtration

In essence, there is no such thing as digital color filtration, nor is there any need for it because digital methods have resolved the issue in such applications as Adobe Camera Raw or Lightroom with their tint and (color) temperature sliders. Nothing has to be done—or guessed—in the field to achieve proper color correction for imbalances such as the blue shift in outdoor shadows. Instead, your selection of the original white balance, and the minute color balance alterations using either or both tint and temperature can quickly and easily rebalance colors to those you remembered in the field, or to those you wish to convey in your finished image. Further post-processing changes of exposure, lightness, and color saturation produce major or minor shifts in the color balance of the image. As a result, any of the tweaks available via color correction filters for film can easily be accomplished digitally, but with greater precision. Furthermore, adjustments may be made over time as your vision of the image changes without affecting the original RAW file. Perhaps it’s unnecessary to note, but it’s always worth a reminder: for such color balance alterations to be precisely what you want, you’ll need to be sure that your computer monitor is properly calibrated, and that its profile matches your printer (whether it’s your own printer or the commercial printer you use). Otherwise your end result my exhibit colors that are quite different from your intent.

===== FILE 15/28: Text%2fchapter08.xhtml =====

Figure 8-1: Negative of Stairway to Cittá Alta, Bergamo, Italy
This is the look of a typical negative under common lighting conditions. You can see density on the negative throughout the image, with no area so dense that it is impossible—or even very difficult—to print.

CHAPTER 8
The Zone System of Exposure for Black-and-White Film

THE NEXT FIVE CHAPTERS deal with the practical aspects of making a photograph, first traditionally with black-and-white negative film followed by traditional darkroom printing, and then digitally. Chapters 8 through 10 deal with traditional film exposure and printing. Chapter 8 explains exposure of the film negative or transparency for optimum effect. Chapter 9 explains development of the black-and-white negative for creative, personal interpretative purposes. Chapters 8 and 9, negative exposure and development, are so closely tied together that it is difficult to separate them effectively without leaving a temporary gap. The gap is tied together early in chapter 9, so please read on until the explanation is complete. Chapter 10 discusses methods of printing the negative as a black-and-white silver gelatin print in the traditional darkroom to express your vision in the most personal manner.

These are the methods I employ for all of my black-and-white photography, because I feel it still affords immense control, while yielding the richest results. Furthermore, I enjoy the process of working with film, developing it, and then printing it in the classic darkroom. The darkroom is my sanctuary, a truly magical place. Hence, I enjoy both the final product and the process employed to get me there. Furthermore, as oft-stated in this book, the film/darkroom process slows me down considerably, allowing me to think more, which I feel is critically important for self-expression. And still today, the traditional silver-gelatin print remains the gold standard for fine black-and-white printing.

While I have switched to digital procedures for my color work because I feel its options and tools now render it superior for fine color image making, I do not see the same being true for black-and-white. (In fact, as a working photographer, it would be foolish for me to stay with traditional methods if I felt that digital methods yielded better results.) Today I have a wide range of excellent films available to me (though I lament the loss of a few fine, specialized ones), and I am currently working with the finest black-and-white enlarging papers that I have ever used in more than 45 years of darkroom printing. Therefore, knowing that the final product is the richest of all imagery, a stable market of the best products ever available for traditional black-and-white photography, and with an inherent love of the process, itself, I see no reason to switch to digital for my black-and-white work.

Chapter 11 concentrates on the digital workflow from image exposure to printing, and chapter 12 takes us through the use of many of the tools available for fine digital image making from the RAW file exposure to the finished TIFF file. I am now a confirmed user of traditional methods for black-and-white and of digital methods for color. Hence, I am firmly involved in both worlds. I recommend that everyone read all five of the following chapters, even if your approach is strictly film or digital, because they provide important insights into how the photographic process unfolds. Such knowledge is never useless.

A Brief Overview

In the 1940s, Fred Archer and Ansel Adams first developed the zone system of exposure as a means of making an exposure in a scientifically accurate manner. It is fully applicable to both black-and-white and color. The explanation that follows is expressed in terms of black-and-white tonalities; for readers interested exclusively in color, please think in terms of how these tonalities translate into colors on the color sphere (chapter 6). After the explanation is complete in terms of black-and-white, the chapter concludes with specifics on how the zone system applies directly to color.

I’ll explain the first part of the zone system—exposure of the film—by meshing two concepts: first, how film reacts to incoming light when the shutter is open; and second, how light meters give an exposure reading. There are only two things that can be done with a negative. First, it can be exposed. Second, it can be developed. That’s it! There’s nothing more to it.

When you expose film, you can use greater or lesser amounts of exposure. That’s the limit of your control (except for changes brought about by filtration, which can alter the relative brightness of objects). In the next chapter, you’ll see that when you develop black-and-white film, you can reduce the scene’s inherent contrast (by reducing the normal development time); maintain it (by developing for the normal development time); or increase it (by extending the normal development time). Development of color film will not be explored, since it does not allow significant changes in contrast.

Film’s Response to Light: Building the Zone System

What happens to a negative when it is exposed to light? The camera lens focuses light from the scene onto the film, which is sensitized in proportion to the amount of light that hits it. Those areas receiving the most light are sensitized to the greatest extent; those receiving the least light are sensitized to the least extent. Later, when the negative is developed, the areas sensitized to the greatest extent become the darkest, or “densest,” portions of the negative; the areas least sensitized become the lightest, or “thinnest,” portions of the negative.

Some portions of the negative may receive so little light that they are not sensitized at all. The unexposed edges of the film fall into this category, as do all portions of the film within the exposed area that are “below threshold,” i.e., areas that show no density in the developed negative except for the negative material itself, the so-called “film base fog” density. We will call all such sub-threshold areas Zone 0.

There may be an area within the image space receiving just enough light to produce visible density in the developed negative, the so-called “threshold level.” We will call this developed density Zone 1. Zone 1 is an easily perceptible density, yet very thin. If you look at a portion of a negative and have to scratch your chin wondering whether or not there is density, we won’t consider it Zone 1. Only if the density is obvious, although light (thin), will we call it Zone 1.

If we were to double that exposure, the same area would receive twice the sensitization and the developed negative would show greater density. In a “normally” developed negative, we will call the density of that area Zone 2. (This is the temporary gap in the explanation referred to at the start of this chapter; the exact definition of “normal development” will be explained in chapter 9. Here, it’s not critical to be specific about the term, so please read on.)

Now, if we again double the exposure, the Zone 2 area would receive double the sensitization, which we call Zone 3 sensitization, followed by greater density in the developed negative. Continuing to double the exposure, we obtain Zone 4, 5, 6, 7, and onward. Each successive zone represents a doubling of exposure from the previous zone and a corresponding increase in developed density (figure 8-1).

Of course, since each zone above the Zone 1 threshold represents a doubling of exposure, those zones can be reached by successively doubling the amount of light within the scene while using the same exposure. Thus, we can obtain progressively higher zones either by doubling exposures via the lens apertures (the f/stops) or shutter speed, or by doubling the ambient light levels.

Zone 1 density—the threshold density—is the same on all negatives. It is always thin but easily perceived. Since all higher zones are obtained by successively doubling either exposure or light levels, Zone 2 density is the same on all negatives, as is Zone 3 density, Zone 4 density, Zone 5 density, and so on. Keep this in mind: Zone densities are the same for all negatives.

You can continue doubling the exposure, thereby increasing the negative density of the developed negative—but there is a limit. Eventually you’ll reach a density level that cannot be increased; the negative will “max out.” It turns out that on nearly all black-and-white films, the maximum density usually goes up to Zone 16 or even 18! Most photographers think it goes only to Zone 10, but in fact, it goes well beyond that. Zone 10 is just above the halfway mark on the density scale. When you fully comprehend how much the negative can encompass and learn how to control that immense range (which will become clear in the next two chapters), you can then appreciate how extraordinarily flexible and powerful photography can be.

 On nearly all black-and-white films, the maximum density usually goes up to Zone 16 or even 18! Most photographers think it goes only to Zone 10, but in fact, it goes well beyond that.

Translating Negative Densities to Print Tonalities

Negative densities mean nothing until a print is made. What happens to those densities when they are printed, when the negative is placed in the enlarger and exposed onto a normal grade enlarging paper?

We begin this determination by defining a “standard exposure.” A standard exposure is the minimum length of exposure time through the enlarger required to achieve a maximum black from the Zone 0 portion of the negative. Suppose we require a 20-second exposure of the negative under the enlarger to achieve a maximum black on your enlarging paper from Zone 0 (i.e., the clearest portion of the negative). Any exposure greater than 20 seconds will produce a black that is no blacker; anything less fails to achieve maximum black. At best, any exposure less than 20 seconds will yield a very dark gray, but not black. Using the 20-second exposure on a normal contrast paper (generally a grade 2 paper or a mid-contrast level on variable contrast paper), you get the table shown on the next page.

Figure 8-2: Stairway to Cittá Alta, Bergamo, Italy
The photograph contains a full range of tonalities from black to white, yet there appear to be no jarring contrasts. There are small amounts of dodging and burning, but no extensive alterations.

At first glance the table seems to indicate that Zone 1 has no real meaning, since it is essentially as black as Zone 0 in the print. But remember, Zone 1 represents the amount of light needed to sensitize the film just enough to produce visible density when the negative is developed, i.e., the threshold exposure. From this level of exposure, we begin the doubling of exposures (or light levels) to obtain the successive zones. For this reason, Zone 1 is especially important—though it is essentially unimportant for printing purposes. Because it has so little density, it blocks almost none of the light coming from the enlarger, so it prints virtually as black as Zone 0.

Diagram 8.1:
Negative density and print tonal scale

Surprisingly, the print reaches pure white by Zone 9, although the negative continues to show separations up to Zone 15, 16, 17, and even 18 (beyond the table)! These extremely dense zones will print as pure white in a “straight print,” but they are very usable. (A straight print is one with a single exposure; no additional exposure, known as “burning,” is used on any portion of the image.) In chapter 9 you’ll see how those zones can be controlled in development, and in chapter 10 you’ll see further methods of making the higher zones visible, meaningful, and essential in the print. They should not be excluded from consideration in exposure. Those zones are part of the zone system, and you’ll soon see how to fully use them. At that point, your artistic and creative potential will rocket upward immeasurably (figure 8-2).

For now, however, we will confine ourselves to the range of printable values in a straight print, Zone 0 to 9. I have mentioned several times that by doubling the exposure, you can jump from one zone to the next higher one; but how do you double the exposure? Simple! A quick glance at your camera shows that the shutter speeds are (in fractions of a second) 1, ½, ¼, ⅛, 1/15, 1/30, 1/60, 1/125, 1/250, 1/500, and perhaps 1/1000. Each speed is half the exposure of the previous one. If you go the other way, each is twice the speed of the previous one. Thus, if your exposure is 1/60 second, you double the exposure by going to 1/30 second. If your exposure is ¼ second, you double it by going to ½ second. So the camera’s shutter speeds tie in immediately with the zones.

There is another way to open up or close down a zone: by closing the aperture (i.e., the opening) of the lens. Look at the aperture settings, also known as the f/stops. They are f/2, f/2.8, f/4, f/5.6, f/8, f/11, f/16, f/22, and perhaps f/32, f/45, and f/64. Each of these numbers represents a halving of the aperture from the previous setting. Thus, f/5.6 admits half the light that f/4 admits. F/16 allows only half the light through the lens that f/11 allows. The higher the number, the smaller the aperture and the less light passes through the lens. Again, the camera and the zone system work together in harmony.

 All gray meters do the same thing: they average light within the viewing angle of the meter and give you a reading of the proper exposure for Zone 5. That is the only thing they do!

The other confusion comes from the fact that the f/stop number is actually a ratio of the lens opening to the focal length of the lens, so we are really dealing with an inverse amount, or ¼, ⅛, 1/16, 1/32, 1/64, 1/128, 1/256, 1/512, etc. This is how we end up with the rule, “The bigger the number, the smaller the hole,” i.e., the larger the f/stop number, the smaller the aperture.

The two methods of doubling or halving the exposure, via aperture or shutter speed, point out a very important relationship: one zone is equal to one stop. When you “open up a stop—for example from f/11 to f/8—you are at the same time giving one zone more exposure. In the same way, when you change the shutter speed from, say, 1/125 second to 1/60 second, you are also “opening up one stop” or giving one stop greater exposure.

Now that you know what the zones are and how you can jump from one to another with your camera, set that information aside for a while as we look at the workings of the light meter. By combining the knowledge of the zones with an understanding of the light meter, the zone system becomes immediately clear.

The Light Meter—How It Works

In order to fully understand the light meter, let’s refer to it by a different name for awhile. The name “light meter” is a bit confusing. We’ll call it a “gray meter” because its only function is to tell the proper exposure for medium gray, or Zone 5. All gray meters do the same thing: they average light within the viewing angle of the meter and give you a reading of the proper exposure for Zone 5. That is the only thing they do!

The gray meter has no idea what it’s pointed toward. It could be a dark coat in a hallway, a field of snow under bright sun, a person’s face under overcast skies, or anything else you can think of. All it knows is the amount of light that impinges on its light-sensitive cells. Since it has no idea what it’s looking at, it cannot give the proper exposure for the item, so it gives the Zone 5 exposure! For this reason, it should logically be called a gray meter.

Zone 5 may be just the right exposure for many things—perhaps a person’s face under overcast skies (though it seems a bit too dark to me)—but it surely is not the proper exposure for sunlit snow! The difference between you and the gray meter is that you can think! Recognizing that the meter always gives a Zone 5 reading, you can supply your knowledge of the tonal scale to determine the proper exposure (figure 8-3).

Let’s take the case of sunlit snow. If the snow has modulations—small hills and valleys—and perhaps even some shadows, you may want it somewhere between Zone 7 (easily seen light gray textures) and Zone 8 (very light gray, almost white—no real textures). Even though snow is white, you probably want to avoid a blank white area lacking in detail. Suppose the gray meter reads f/16 @ 1/250 second exposure. Of course that exposure would yield medium gray (Zone 5) snow! So, how do you get from the metered reading to the desired reading?

Figure 8-3: Morgan Yazee’s Corral
Morgan Yazee is a Navajo rancher and show horse producer. I visited his ranch in 2003. Using a handheld medium format camera (Mamiya 645), standing on the second rail of the corral fence and propping my elbows on the top rail for stability, I followed the horses around the corral, making this exposure when they briefly stopped, lining up almost like a chorus line of dancers. Using a relatively fast film—Ilford HP5, rated by Ilford at ASA 400, but at ASA 300 by me—I was able to make the photograph at 1/60 second, placing the shadowed side of the horses just above Zone 5.

Start with the metered reading and first double the exposure by opening up one stop, which is the equivalent of increasing the exposure by one zone. From f/16 @ 1/250 second, you can go to f/16 @ 1/125, which doubles the exposure and places the snow in Zone 6. (Remember that 1/125 second is twice as long as 1/250 second.) Alternatively, you could change the aperture instead of the shutter speed and achieve Zone 6 with a setting of f/11 @ 1/250 second.

Next, double the exposure again to place the snow in Zone 7. From f/16 @ 1/125 second, you can go to f/16 @ 1/60 second, again using the shutter speed to double the exposure. (By changing the aperture you can achieve the same thing, going from f/16 @ 1/125 second to f/11 @ 1/125 second.) If you want to go to Zone 8, you can again change either the aperture or shutter speed to move up another zone on the scale.

Each doubling of the exposure makes the snow one zone lighter in tone. You can even go a half tone lighter by using the aperture setting between the f/stops shown on the camera. Thus, to place the snow in Zone 7½, go from the Zone 7 setting of f/16 @ 1/60 second to a point halfway between f/16 and f/11 @ 1/60 second. With this exposure setting, the snow will come out at Zone 7½, and it will show very light textures without being blank white.

With this example, you have learned how to expose negatives using the zone system. The critical point to remember is that the gray meter always gives a Zone 5 reading. You must open the aperture or increase the shutter speed if you want lighter tones than Zone 5. You must close down the aperture or decrease the shutter speed if you want tones darker than Zone 5. Then, by maintaining a mental image of the tonal value of each zone, you can determine exactly how much to open up or close down to obtain your desired exposure.

It may be confusing at first to realize that when you are standing in front of a bright object (such as sunlit snow), you must open up the lens to make it bright. It seems logically correct to close down the aperture from your meter reading because the object is so bright, but the opposite is true. You always start from the Zone 5, medium gray meter reading, and if you want your subject to have tones lighter than Zone 5 you must give it additional exposure above the meter reading to make it light. Similarly, starting with the Zone 5 medium gray meter reading, if you want your subject to have darker tones than Zone 5, you must give it less exposure than the meter reading to make it dark. Just as you must interpret the scene rather than merely “shoot” it to make your point of view visible, you must also control the negative densities. You can do so if you recognize that your starting point is always medium gray, the exposure that the gray meter always gives you!

Review of Negative Exposure Procedure

Let’s quickly review the procedure for obtaining a proper exposure. In a sense, you must start at the end, jump to the beginning, then work back to the end. It works this way: when you see something you want to photograph, first decide the tonalities you want in the final print (that is the end point!). Then take your meter reading, which always gives you a Zone 5 exposure (that is the starting point!). Then decide how many stops (i.e., zones) you must open up or close down to reach the desired tones (that is working back toward the end point!).

This tells you that the use of the zone system is integrally tied together with previsualization, for you must be able to visualize the way you want the final print to look in order to follow this procedure. Most of the time, if you follow your light meter (the gray meter) blindly, you’ll probably come out relatively close to the proper exposure because the eye is somewhat of a gray meter also. After all, you see things almost equally well outdoors or indoors, even though the light levels are very far apart. This is due to the fact that the eye and brain compensate wonderfully within a very wide range of brightness levels—in other words, you average out the light levels, just like the meter does. But when you encounter an exceptional situation such as the sunlit snow, following the gray meter can be disastrous. You will end up with Zone 5 snow! Therefore, keep in mind that the gray meter is a dumb robot. It is your tool, and it gives you a starting point—middle gray—a point of departure. It is up to you to depart with intelligence.

Consider another example, along with several variations, to help solidify these ideas. Suppose you travel to Hawaii and are standing on a field of black lava rock on a cloudy day. You decide you want to photograph the rock. First, look at it and decide what tonal values you want it to have. Using a mental picture of the zone scale, you might choose an average tone of about Zone 3½, so that the textures are quite dark yet easily seen.

Next, take a meter reading with your gray meter. Suppose the meter reads f/5.6 @ 1/30 second. Of course, if you use that shutter speed and aperture, you will get Zone 5 (medium gray) textures. So, if you stop down one stop (i.e., one zone), either by cutting the shutter speed in half or closing down the aperture one stop, you will get Zone 4 textures.

This time, let’s leave the shutter speed at 1/30 and close the aperture down to f/8. Then stop down another ½ stop to a point between f/8 and f/11. That puts you at Zone 3½. (Remember, you can always place the aperture at intermediate points between listed settings. However, the shutter speed must be on a listed setting; otherwise, it won’t open or it will make a choice between the two nearby speeds.)

In this example, you cut down on the exposure from the meter reading in order to make the object (the lava rock) appear as dark in the print as it did to your eye. You started with the Zone 5 reading and closed down 1½ zones to Zone 3½. Suppose the field of lava rock also includes a bush with delicate, lacy branches that sway gently in the breeze. If you want to arrest the movement of those branches, 1/30 second may not be a short enough exposure, but 1/60 second may. In this case, close down the shutter speed from 1/30 second to 1/30 second and compensate for the loss of one zone by opening up the aperture from the halfway point between f/8 and f/11 to the halfway point between f/5.6 and f/8. The total exposure will be the same, but the faster shutter speed may stop the motion of the bush, as you desired. You can always use this reciprocal relationship (i.e., ½ × 2 = 1) between f/stops and shutter speeds to gain the optimum exposure for your purposes.

Now, suppose there is no wind and you want maximum depth of field. Smaller apertures (i.e., the higher f/stop numbers) yield greater depth of field, and the setting between f/8 and f/11 may not yield sharpness from the immediate foreground to distant areas. If you stop down to a point halfway between f/11 and f/16, and compensate for the loss of one zone by increasing the shutter speed from 1/30 second to 1/15 second, you may get just what you want. Now you have achieved your goals of getting the rock texture at Zone 3½ while obtaining great depth of field.

As in the first example, you start by defining the tonalities you want to have in the print. Then you meter the scene with your gray meter to determine what exposure will yield a Zone 5 result. Then you change the metered exposure by the amount needed to go from Zone 5 to your desired exposure. It’s really quite simple! It’s also very exact, and that’s the chief attraction of the zone system. By using it carefully, you can get precisely the exposure you want.

Using the Zone System to Depart from Reality

Although the two examples just presented show how to obtain a literal rendition of the objects photographed, the zone system can be employed perfectly well in creative departures from reality—ones that may present your interpretation more effectively. Suppose, for instance, that you want to present the tones of the lava rock in a high key (i.e., light-toned) rendition of Zone 6, 7, and 8. Perhaps you feel that a section of rock is sharded, with jagged edges that remind you of broken glass or crystal, and you want to render it as such. This would not be a literal rendition of the scene, but a fascinating transformation of it to something abstract or unreal, perhaps even surreal.

The method of obtaining this interpretation is exactly the same as for the literal rendition. First, determine the tone you want (the end point; in this case, Zone 6, 7, and 8). Then take the meter reading (the starting point), which is f/5.6 @ 1/30 second. This time, however, you want to make the tones lighter than the gray meter’s Zone 5 reading by an average of two zones (working back to the end point by using Zone 7 as the average of the three desired zones). Open up two stops via either the shutter speed or aperture. If you want to maintain depth of field and you have a tripod, then do it via shutter speed, going from 1/30 second exposure to 1/30 second (remember that doubling the shutter speed from 1/30 second exposure to 1/15 second adds one stop, and then opening from 1/15 second to ⅛ second adds another stop). Now the exposure will yield the rocks with an average Zone 7 tonality. This could produce a spectacular departure from the reality of the scene.

Since the camera is on a tripod and you have no worries about movement with a long exposure, why not also go for greater depth of field by closing down to f/8 while lengthening the shutter speed to ¼ second? . . . or even going to f/11 @ ½ second? After all, the rocks won’t move, nor will the camera on the tripod. But remember, if a bush is in the scene and a breeze is blowing, you may have to rethink that approach. These are the real problems of photography.

 The zone system is a method of precise exposure, and that precision can be applied to literal interpretations or to vast departures from reality. It is a remarkably useful and flexible system of exposure for creative photographers.

Now you can see that the zone system becomes not only a tool for “correct,” literal exposure, but also a creative tool for departures from reality. So many people forget this aspect of the system despite the fact that it is one of its greatest virtues. All aspects of photography should be meshed for creativity and personal expression, and the zone system should be an integral part of that process. The zone system is a method of precise exposure, and that precision can be applied to literal interpretations or to vast departures from reality. It is a remarkably useful and flexible system of exposure for creative photographers.

One final example will begin to expand the concept of the zone system to its full usage. When you look at a scene, you are generally concerned with several objects and several tones, not just one. The zone system explains how to relate these tones.

Suppose you want to make a portrait of a white male wearing a dark shirt. Suppose the gray meter reading of the man’s face is f/11 @ 1/60 second, and the shirt reads f/8 @ 1/15 second. (The shirt is darker, thus it requires a greater exposure for a Zone 5 rendition. Brighter objects always require less overall exposure on the gray meter. Make sure you fully understand this point before going further!)

How far apart are the readings? F/8 is one zone more than f/11. 1/15 second is two stops more exposure than 1/60 second. Therefore, the man’s face is three stops brighter than the shirt. If you make the exposure at the reading on the man’s face, the face would be in Zone 5 and the shirt would automatically be in Zone 2. Both would be too dark. If you make the exposure at the reading on the shirt, the shirt would be in Zone 5 and the man’s face would be in Zone 8. Both would be too bright.

Whatever the zone of the man’s face, the shirt is three zones lower. That cannot be changed during exposure (except possibly through filtration, which we will not consider here). So, if you place the man’s face at Zone 6½ by opening up the aperture 1½ stops above the meter reading on his face, then the shirt would end up at Zone 3½. To do this, first open up one stop from the meter reading of f/11 @ 1/60 second, to f/8 @ 1/60 second (or to f/11 @ 1/30 second, which would be the same). This places the tone of the face at Zone 6. Then open up another ½ stop to place the face in Zone 6½. The final exposure would be halfway between f/5.6 and f/8 @ 1/60 second. Now both the man’s face and the shirt are reasonably placed for a meaningful portrait.

In chapter 9, the discussion will continue with methods of altering contrast between two objects. If a scene is too contrasty for your desires, appropriate negative exposure and subsequent development can be used to lower contrast while still maintaining detail throughout the negative. Conversely, if the scene is too flat for your purposes, appropriate exposure and development can be used to increase contrast to a more desirable level.

The Zone System for Color Negatives

In color, contrast is inherent in the film. It cannot be altered easily unless you learn very sophisticated methods of color negative development, which are beyond the scope of this book. This chapter, dealing with exposure, is therefore even more important for color negatives than for black-and-white negatives because it’s the only control you have. The only contrast control you have is to change from one film to another that is inherently higher or lower in contrast.

Exposure of color negatives must be more precise than black-and-white negatives, because when attempting to correct an overexposed color negative at the printing stage, you may encounter color shifts that alter the entire color balance. Underexposure of color negatives poses the same problems as it does with black-and-white negatives: loss of shadow detail. Once detail is lost in the negative, it cannot be regained in the print. But, if the negative is slightly overexposed, it gains excess density that can be corrected in printing.

The Zone System and the Inverse Square Law

At the end of chapter 5, I pointed out that the inverse square law presents major problems for zone placements indoors. If objects are placed one foot, two feet, and three feet from a light source, the second object receives ¼ the amount of light of the closest one, and the third object receives only the light of the first. The same ratios hold if the objects are placed two feet, four feet, and six feet from the light source. (The closest object receives 1/22 = 1/(2 × 2) = ¼ unit of light; the second receives 1/42 = 1/(4 × 4) = 1/16 unit of light; the third receives 1/62 = 1/(6 × 6) = 1/36 unit of light. Thus the ratios remain the same.)

Suppose those objects were people, and you wanted to do a portrait of the three people sitting side by side on a couch with a lamp lighting the scene from the far right edge. As we know, successive zones represent doublings or halvings of light levels. Therefore, if the middle person receives only ¼ the light of the person on the right, he or she will be two zones lower on the scale. (One zone difference is half the light; two zones is a quarter the light, and so on.) The person on the left will be more than three zones darker. (One eighth of the light would be exactly three zones.)

As a result, if the person nearest the lamp is placed in Zone 7 (which would be an extremely light rendition of any skin tone), the one in the center will be Zone 5, and the one on the left below Zone 4! (This assumes the skin tones are the same in equal lighting.) This is a major problem for all indoor photography, and it explains the necessity for so much extra lighting in most studio photography just to balance light levels.

In chapter 9 you will see how appropriate negative exposure and development, alone, without the need for extra lighting to balance out the inverse square law, could overcome the problems outlined here.

The eye/brain combination tends to smooth over these large discrepancies in light levels, so gray meter readings are essential indoors for determining the light levels that the film will encounter. If the light source is a window in the daylight hours, the distance from the windowpane (which is, effectively, the light source) also answers to the inverse square law. This explains the difficulty of photographing with natural light indoors. The problem is increased by the fact that every part of the room does not receive direct light from the window. Some parts, such as the walls immediately around the window, receive no direct light whatsoever but only reflected light within the room. Therefore, those walls may be many zones lower than an object in front of—and very near—the window.

Methods of dealing with surprising situations like this, as well as other situations with excessively high or low contrast, are the focus of chapter 9.

In Summary

Knowledge of the zone system of exposure, coupled with knowledge of your film’s characteristics, is the most effective means of obtaining excellent negatives or transparencies. These tools can be combined either for literal renditions of reality or for departures from reality. The important thing is that they will bring precision to your interpretation. For this reason, they are indispensable tools for creativity.

===== FILE 16/28: Text%2fchapter09.xhtml =====

Figure 9-1: The Queen of Maligne
Maligne Canyon (pronounced Ma-leen) in Jasper National Park is inaccessible in the spring, summer, and autumn, as a powerful river scours the deeply cut limestone chasm. But in winter the river freezes, allowing access. At one location within the 180-foot deep canyon an underground seep hits the canyon wall just below the rim. As water runs down the inner canyon wall, it freezes, creating the enormous natural ice sculpture known as the Queen of Maligne.

Although the limestone walls are light gray, the contrast between the walls deep in the canyon and the icefall in a more open section is immense, requiring compensating development of the negative to hold the brightness range within printable densities. The means to accomplish this is simple in traditional film photography.

CHAPTER 9
Contrast Control and the Extended Zone System for Black-and-White Negatives

ANSEL ADAMS ONCE LIKENED PHOTOGRAPHY TO MUSIC with his famous analogy, “The negative is the score; the print is the performance.” The composer creates the score, including everything he or she wants; then a performer interprets the score as he or she sees fit. In photography, you are both the composer and the performer. This chapter gives you the tools to make the score far richer than you may have imagined possible. Chapter 10 extends that thinking into the realm of the performance.

Chapter 9 Overview

Chapter 8 deals with proper exposure of the black-and-white negative; this chapter deals with developing it to the level of contrast you want, thus giving you immense control over your imagery.

The zone system can be used not only for placing an object into any desired tonality, but also for changing contrast between objects. Since there is more than one object (or tonality) in any photograph, the moment you place one of them at the density you desire, the others automatically land as far away in density as the light meter shows. That may be either too close in density to the first object or too far away. There is no assurance that exposing one object at the appropriate density places the others at a desirable density for printing purposes. You may wish to have the other objects brighter or darker. In other words, you may wish to alter the level of contrast between the objects.

By varying the length of time for negative development, contrast can be increased or decreased in the black-and-white negative. Lower zones of the negative (the thinnest or least dense portions, which become the darker portions of the print) develop fully within a few minutes, then change little with extended development times. This tells you that the low zones (referred to as the scene’s “shadow area”) are determined almost exclusively by negative exposure, with little change occurring as a result of negative development.

The middle zones (roughly Zones 4, 5, 6, and 7) can be altered by changes in negative development times, with each zone affected more than the previous zone. The higher zones (generally Zone 8 and higher) are greatly affected by changes in negative development times. The higher an object is placed on the zone scale at the time of exposure, the more it can be altered by changes in negative development.

This tells you how to “read” a negative. If your shadow areas show good density—appropriately low, but with good density separations between them—then your exposure was good. This is true because negative development has little effect on shadow areas; if they look good, it tells you that their exposure was on target. Low-density areas are almost purely determined by your initial exposure. Once you have those densities nailed down, look at your highlights. If your highlight densities are good, then your negative development is good. This is true because altering negative development has such a great effect on the higher zones.

If your shadow areas are too thin or nonexistent, simply increase your exposure. Don’t think about changing your development time because it will have little or no effect on the low zones.

Once you get sufficient exposure for the shadow areas to have good density separations, then look at the highlights. If they are too dense, reduce your development time; if they are too thin, increase your development time. But don’t change your exposure to compensate for the changes in development time because development changes do not materially affect the low zones.

The full range of the negative—Zone 0 to Zone 16–18—can then be put to use. This chapter is divided into three sections beginning with an explanation of what happens to the exposed negative when it is developed. The second section has examples of how to use that information for creative purposes. The last section examines the general characteristics of negative materials and developers, and the specifics of processing to make full use of the negative a reality.

The range of black-and-white film is astonishing, and the creative potential inherent in fully using the “extended zone system” (i.e., including the extremely useful zones above Zone 10 that most instructors ignore . . . or fail to recognize) is immense. As we saw in chapter 8 for exposure of the negative, the underlying concepts for negative development are simple. The approach here is nontechnical; though graphs are used in the explanation, they do not require mathematical sophistication on the part of the reader.

The Negative During Development

As explained in chapter 8, every part of a negative is sensitized to the amount of light that fell on it during the exposure. This sensitized negative is known as the latent image. At the time of exposure, the negative gains a potential for density, but no actual density. Only during development does it gain density.

When the exposed negative is put into the developer, all of its parts begin to develop—i.e., to grow denser than the unexposed film base—in proportion to the degree of sensitization. The areas sensitized to the greatest extent build density at a rapid rate; those sensitized to a lesser extent build density at a slower rate. Those areas sensitized to the lowest level, Zone 1, gain full density rapidly because there is so little to gain and they are developed in a minute or two. Additional development time has no real effect on Zone 1—except that extended development tends to progressively fog, or darken, the film base itself, making Zone 1 denser along with an equal density increase in all higher zones.

Areas sensitized above Zone 1 continue to grow in density as development continues. Once areas sensitized to Zone 2 reach that density, they gain slightly greater density with continued development—but they won’t even reach Zone 2½ without excessively long development times. Once areas sensitized to Zone 3 gain that density, they can be developed nearly up to Zone 4 with increased development times. Areas sensitized to Zone 4 can be pushed beyond Zone 5 in density with extended development times.

The amount of development time needed for each zone to reach its proper density is known as the “normal development time.” How do you determine “normal development time”? By finding out how long it takes to develop any exposed zone to that exact density. For example, normal development time is the time required to develop an area placed at Zone 5 (the gray meter reading) to Zone 5 density. At the start of development, the exposed (i.e., sensitized) Zone 5 area has no density, but as development proceeds, density increases. It quickly exceeds Zone 1, and then surpasses Zones 2, 3, and 4 before finally achieving Zone 5 density. That’s “normal development time” (for that combination of film and developer). If development continues beyond that point, the density will exceed Zone 6 and ultimately reach Zone 7.

But how do you identify true Zone 5 density? Let’s go back to the beginning of chapter 8 where we defined standard exposure as the minimum exposure under the enlarger to achieve maximum black for Zone 0. Once you find the standard exposure, place the Zone 5 negative in the enlarger (at the same height and aperture you used to determine the standard exposure) and give it that same exposure. If it’s true Zone 5 density, the print you get will be exactly the same tone as the 18 percent gray card. When you develop the Zone 5 negative for the appropriate amount of time to achieve that density, you have found the normal development time. (This fills in the temporary gap in the explanation of the zone system at the beginning of chapter 8. It may be worthwhile to reread those pages now.)

Each higher zone grows progressively denser with increased development time. The portion of the negative exposed at Zone 6 (one stop brighter than the gray meter reading) achieves Zone 6 density in the normal development time, but it can exceed Zone 8 density with greatly extended development time. Increasing the development time beyond normal does not simply shift the density of each zone equally; instead, it expands each zone in proportion to its original placement. This is crucial, for it tells you that increased development time increases contrast because it pushes the exposed zone placements further apart.

 Increasing the development time beyond normal does not simply shift the density of each zone equally; instead, it expands each zone in proportion to its original placement. This is crucial, for it tells you that increased development time increases contrast because it pushes the exposed zone placements further apart.

If development is terminated before the normal development time, precisely the opposite effect occurs. In that case, the density of each zone decreases in proportion to the original exposure on the zone scale. The higher zones are reduced in density more than the lower zones. Zone 1 is fixed in density no matter what development the negative is given. Those areas exposed as Zone 2 will not quite reach full Zone 2 density in less than normal development time. Zone 3, however, will begin to show significant changes, perhaps dropping to Zone 2⅔ or 2¾. Areas exposed as Zone 4 may only reach Zone 3½ if development time is cut short. Zone 5, the gray meter’s average reading, may just exceed Zone 4, and Zone 6 may be just shy of Zone 5.

As you progress up the tonal scale to higher exposed densities, each is developed to a higher density than its predecessor, but each is reduced below normal density by a greater amount than its predecessor. Zone 9 may drop to Zone 7, while Zone 11 may barely exceed Zone 8 with a shortened development time.

The Bellows Analogy

A simple way to grasp the concept of progressively increased densities with extended development times, and progressively reduced densities with shortened development times, is to think of each successive zone as a number on the successive pleats of a camera bellows, or any type of bellows. When development begins, the bellows are crunched down completely and each zone placement has zero density. As development progresses, the bellows are slowly extended to the right from the fixed point on the left so that the pleats, or zones, separate from one another—meaning that they separate in density. The longer the development time, the further the bellows are extended to the right, and the greater the density of the higher zones up to maximum negative density (diagram 9.1).

Diagram 9.1: Density Increase During Development Time—The Barnbaum Bellows Analogy
Negative density and print tonal scale. Please note that this diagram is not a model of actual negative densities during development, but rather a schematic of what happens to densities as development proceeds. I will refer to it in the following examples to be consistent within the text, but don’t expect your combination of negative and developer to yield the same results as those shown here. Yours should be close, but not exact. (See Time/Temperature Development Charts for several films in diagrams 9.6–9.9.)

Within the first minute of development, the zones begin to separate. At four minutes, Zone 1 is fully developed and Zone 2 is near its normal density, while the higher zones are noticeably falling short. If you choose 6½ minutes as the normal development time (my development time for Ilford HP5+ or Kodak Tri-X film in Kodak HC110 developer), you will see that the zone placements—the sensitization levels of the latent image, which are the numbers on the pleats—correspond to the developed densities. Beyond 6½ minutes, all zones except 0 and 1 continue to grow ever denser.

For example, note in the schematic representation at three minutes development time, the exposed Zone 4 reaches just above Zone 3 (a loss of nearly a full zone from its normal development density) whereas Zone 10 reaches only a bit above Zone 6, which is a loss of nearly 4 zones from normal. This shows that the higher zones lose more density than the lower zones with reduced development times. Contrast is decreased when development times are reduced below normal.

Conversely, with 12 minutes of development the exposed Zone 4 reaches 4⅔ density (a gain of ⅔ zone), whereas the exposed Zone 8 reaches almost Zone 11 (a gain of nearly 3 zones), and the exposed Zone 10 (beyond the chart) may go beyond Zone 14 (a gain of 4 zones). This shows that the higher zones gain more density than the lower zones with increased development times. Contrast is increased when development times extend beyond normal.

Another way of representing the development characteristics of the negative is via a graph (diagram 9.2), where the X-axis (the horizontal axis) represents development time in minutes and the Y-axis (the vertical axis) represents density. Each curved line represents the increase in density of an exposed zone as development proceeds. All exposed zones start the development process with no density, and density increases in proportion to the initial sensitization. At my normal development time of 6½ minutes, each exposed zone reaches its proper density. Beyond 6½ minutes, density continues to slowly increase (except for Zone 1) in proportion to the initial sensitization.

Diagram 9.2: Zone-by-Zone Negative Development Curves
Diagram 9.2, like the bellows schematic, is meant to be a visual aid to the understanding of the development process, but is not meant as an exact model of any specific negative material.

For those who have trouble understanding graphs, a brief explanation may help. Choose any one of the curved lines, such as the dark line, which represents Zone 5. It begins at the lower left, like all the other lines, because it has no density at the start of development (0 minutes). As you move to the right, which represents elapsed development time, the curve rises, representing increased density. When you stop at any point along the curve, the distance from the Y-axis (the left edge) represents elapsed development time, while the height above the X-axis (the bottom) represents density. In three minutes, for example, negative density barely surpasses Zone 3. In 6½ minutes (shown as normal development time in this graph), it exactly reaches Zone 5 density. In 12 minutes, it exceeds Zone 6 density. Follow any other line to see how development proceeds with time.

Looking at diagram 9.2, if you choose any length of development time along the X-axis, and then rise vertically along that time line, you will see how dense each exposed zone becomes during development. At 6½ minutes (normal development time on this graph), each exposed zone reaches its proper density. Below 6½ minutes, each exposed zone is proportionately below its normal density; above 6½ minutes, each zone is proportionately above its normal density (except Zone 1, which reaches its density quickly and stays there).

The initial jog in the curves prior to density build-up reflects the fact that the emulsion absorbs the developer before density begins to increase. This is the same phenomenon you see during printing, when the paper is placed in the developer and 10–15 seconds elapse before the image begins to appear. The process is somewhat slower for a negative, taking 15–20 seconds (maybe more) for density to manifest.

Putting Higher Zones to Work

Understanding negative development is very important, not only because it shows how contrast can be increased or decreased, but also because it indicates how to use the zones above Zone 9. As explained in chapter 8, in a normally developed straight print made on average contrast paper, all zones above Zone 9 print as blank white (chapter 8). For this reason, most photographers—and even many instructors—feel that the range of a negative is limited to Zone 0 through 9. Not true. Diagram 9.2 tells you that an object can be exposed in a higher zone and that reduced development can bring it back within printable range. Furthermore, if two objects are metered to be very far apart tonally—say, eight zones—they can be exposed at Zone 4 and 12 respectively; then they can be given greatly reduced development time, so that the darker object is developed to Zone 3 while the lighter object is reduced below Zone 9.

In chapter 10 we will see how areas developed above Zone 9 can still be printed. This will further increase your use of the higher zones and greatly expand your creative potential. In this manner, you can use the full range of the negative rather than limiting yourself to the lower half.

There are two points I wish to stress here. First, enlarging papers possess a much shorter range of tonalities than negative materials. So, while a negative is capable of recording scenes of excessive contrast within its extended range, its scale may need to be compressed to fit on the shorter tonal scale of the enlarging paper. Second, while the long tonal scale of the negative is fully usable during exposure, it is not wise to develop negatives to high densities (i.e., Zone 11 and up) because those densities require excessively long exposures under the enlarger to yield tonalities. Therefore, if you encounter a scene of excessive contrast and choose to expose the brightest areas well above Zone 9 (a perfectly good approach), be sure to use less-than-normal development times in order to avoid excessive densities. Good separations will still be maintained in your negative and in the print.

In fact, enlarging papers have the same long tonal scale that negatives possess, but the two are viewed differently. You view a negative with light coming from behind it toward your eye. You view a print by light coming from behind you, going through the emulsion, hitting the base of the enlarging paper behind the emulsion, and reflecting back through the emulsion once more to your eye. That’s why there is an apparently reduced tonal scale to the print. If, instead, you place a bright light behind a fully developed print, wet or dry, you will see details in the blacks that are invisible to the eye with the print viewed normally, showing that the enlarging paper’s tonal range does equal that of the negative. But this is merely fascinating information, since it has no practical application. We all view prints as described above, very rarely with a bright light source behind the print.

During exposure, the spread of zones between two objects never changes, but it can be altered during negative development. If two objects are metered to be 5 zones apart (i.e., 5 stops), they will always be 5 zones apart when exposed, unless they are altered by filtration or by reciprocity failure (explained below). Depending on the exposure you make, they can be placed at Zone 2 and 7, 3 and 8, 4 and 9, 5 and 10, etc., but they’re always five zones apart. The 5 zones of separation can be maintained by normal development; they can be brought closer together by developing the negative less than normal, known as “minus development”; or they can be separated further by developing the negative longer than normal, known as “plus development.”

Of the two ways that contrast can be altered during exposure—filtration or reciprocity failure—filtration is better known. Suppose two objects meter three zones apart, and the darker object is red while the lighter one is green. A red filter will lighten the red object with respect to the green one and therefore reduce the contrast between them at exposure. A green filter will darken the red object with respect to the green one and expand the contrast between them at exposure. Filtration must be taken into account when exposing and developing the negative.

Reciprocity Failure

Reciprocity denotes the way film responds to light within the standard range of exposures, from one second down to 1/1000 second. Within that range of exposure times, the negative maintains a reciprocal relationship between light level and exposure; if you cut the amount of light in half, you can double the exposure time to maintain the same overall image. (It’s a reciprocal relationship because it means that 2 × ½ = 1.) Thus, if your exposure is 1/30 second and you close the aperture from f/8 to f/11, increasing the shutter speed to 1/15 second will maintain the same overall exposure and image. Or, if your exposure is 1/30 second and the light level drops in half, expanding the shutter speed to 1/15 second will also maintain the same overall image.

 During exposure, the spread of zones between two objects never changes, but it can be altered during negative development.

For times beyond one second (encountered under dim light conditions), this reciprocal relationship breaks down, leading to reciprocity failure. If, for example, you calculate your exposure to be five seconds at f/8, but you need greater depth-of-field and close the aperture to f/11, a 10-second exposure will not give you the same overall image. It turns out that you may need to keep the shutter open 15 seconds or more to gain the same overall exposure. The reason is that beyond one second, film becomes progressively less efficient in its ability to gather light. (This loss of efficiency varies from one film to another, so you’ll need to learn the characteristics of your film to know how to deal with it.)

During a long exposure, light reflected off brighter objects is accepted by the film somewhat more efficiently than light from dimmer objects. Therefore, overall contrast increases progressively during a long exposure as the exposure time increases. My experiences in the English cathedrals, where exposure times generally ranged between 3 and 20 minutes, and in the Arizona/Utah slit canyons, where some exposures exceeded an hour in length, and one was fully 3½ hours, show that the contrast increase due to lengthy exposures can be substantial (figure 9.2). Development must be altered by an appropriate amount in order to maintain the desired contrast.

Each of the sections in the tables below is labeled to indicate an approximate range of how much increase in contrast occurs as the result of a long exposure. Thus, when the increase is equivalent to an N+1 development, a development of N–1 is required to counteract it and yield overall normal development (see Time/Temperature Development Charts in diagrams 9.6 through 9.11).

Figure 9-2: Buckskin Gulch, Two Walls
I was attracted to the relationship between the lines of the near wall (on the right), curving around a bend, to those of the more distant wall (on the left). Contrast was low, but so was the light level in the deep, narrow canyon. I used it to my advantage, stopping down to about f/45, and forcing a 20-minute exposure, which significantly increased contrast due to the effects of reciprocity failure.

Increased contrast due to reciprocity failure is a double-edged sword. If you want greater contrast in a scene, you get it automatically with longer exposures. You can force the situation in bright, flat light by using strong, neutral density filters to force long exposures that increase contrast. Furthermore, when you increase contrast via long exposures, it does not increase the film’s grain—whereas if you increase contrast via long development times, grain increases.

While reciprocity failure can be beneficial, my experience is generally that increased contrast from reciprocity failure most often occurs when overall light levels are dim. In most such situations, the contrast is already quite high. In both the English cathedrals and the slit canyons, reciprocity failure saddled me with undesirable additional contrast in situations that were already excessively contrasty. (All films vary in their reciprocity failure characteristics; some, like Fuji Acros or Kodak T-Max 400, have none up to two minutes of exposure.)

Another problem with long exposures is the fact that the gray meter does not calculate the film’s reduced response to low light levels. Within the negative’s normal response range you can determine your exposures as explained in this chapter and the previous one, but for long exposures (beyond one second) you must factor in additional time to compensate for reciprocity failure. Then you must alter contrast in negative development to compensate for the contrast increase during exposure.

Diagram 9.3: Exposure Table for Reciprocity Failure of Tri-X Pan Film (ASA 320)

Diagram 9.4: Exposure Table for Reciprocity Failure of T-Max 100 Pan Film

In both tables (diagrams 9.3 and 9.4), the asterisk (*) indicates the approximate amount of contrast increase due to reciprocity failure and extended exposure. Thus, if you use Tri-X film and have a metered reading of 30 seconds, the table indicates that you must expose the negative for 75 seconds. But normal development of that negative will increase the contrast as if you had N+1 development (diagrams 9.6–9.9), so you must give the negative an N–1 to compensate for the contrast increase during the long exposure.

The reciprocity failure tables (diagrams 9.3 and 9.4) show the approximate exposure increase needed for extended exposures for both Tri-X and T-Max 100 films. The Tri-X table is my own personal table derived from years of practical experience (identical to Minor White’s own determination 40 years earlier). Kodak’s table for Tri-X is wildly incorrect. The T-Max table is based upon Kodak’s numbers, which are correct but incomplete.

It’s easy to interpolate between the stated times. The following example for Tri-X illustrates the proper method for using the table with the zone system. Suppose you want to place an object in Zone 7, and your gray meter gives you a five-second exposure reading. Of course, the reading places the object in Zone 5 (as always!), so first you double the exposure to 10 seconds in order to place it in Zone 6. Then you double the shutter speed to 20 seconds to place it in Zone 7. By consulting the reciprocity failure table, you determine that 20-second metering requires a 45-second exposure for Tri-X film.

Examples of Decreasing and Increasing Contrast

As a first example, let’s return to the sunlit snowfield of chapter 8. As before, you see the modulations of the snow, its hills and valleys. You want to photograph it so that those delicate tones are visible in the print. If nothing but snow is in the scene, it’s easy. All you have to do is decide where to place the snow on the scale and shoot. My choice would be an average placement of Zone 7½ or 8, which would yield a range of light tones from pure white to light gray and would show the modulations.

But suppose a large, dark boulder sits in the center of the field, oriented in such a manner that it’s shaded. Let’s agree that the rock should be about a Zone 3 tonality, and that the snow should still be placed at about Zone 7½ or 8 on the average. Suppose the gray meter gives a reading on the snow of f/16 @ 1/250 second, while the reading on the rock is f/5.6 @ 1/60 second. How many zones separate the snow and the rock? The separation is determined by adding the differences between the two readings in both aperture and shutter speed. F/16 represents 3 stops less exposure than f/5.6 as follows: f/5.6—f/8—f/11—f/16. At the same time, 1/250 second represents 2 stops less exposure than 1/60 second as follows: 1/60—1/125—1/250.

The difference is 5 stops, or 5 zones. No matter how you expose the negative, there will be a 5-zone spread between the snow and rock, which cannot be changed in the exposure. It may not be wise to expose at either the metered reading on the snow or the rock; if you choose the former, the snow would come out at Zone 5 and the rock at Zone 0, while if you choose the latter, the rock would be exposed at Zone 5 and the snow at Zone 10. But you know how to place the rock at Zone 3: close down stops from the gray meter’s reading on the rock. With the rock in Zone 3, the snow is automatically placed at Zone 8 on the exposure scale, and normal development brings the density of each to the desired level. (Further on I explain why I actually prefer the shadow placement to be in Zone 4 rather than Zone 3.)

Suppose, however, that the meter reading on the rock is f/4 @ 1/60 second rather than f/5.6 @ 1/60 second. Now the spread between the rock and snow is 6 zones, so that exposing the rock in Zone 3 automatically places the snow in Zone 9—too high for any texture. But since cutting the development time lowers contrast, if you place the rock in Zone 3 (which automatically places the snow in Zone 9) and develop less than normally, the higher zone drops significantly more than the lower zone. By cutting the time so that the Zone 9 exposure drops to Zone 8 (perhaps about six minutes, based on diagram 9.2), the Zone 3 exposure hardly drops at all. At most, it will drop to something above Zone 2¾. By exposing just a little higher on the scale, say Zone 3½ on the rock and 9½ on the snow, and cutting the development time a bit more, the snow can be developed to a density of Zone 8 (a drop of 1½ zones from the exposure) while the rock will drop less than ½ a zone to a point just above Zone 3. Now the spread of zones between the two objects is just what you wanted. You have achieved the precise contrast and tonalities you sought by thoughtful use of the zone system coupled with your knowledge of negative development.

Let’s play with this example just a little further. Suppose you decide that the dark (Zone 3) mass of rock in the midst of the light snow is too heavy, and you want the rock lighter. First, give the negative additional exposure, placing the rock in Zone 5, which automatically places the snow in Zone 11, given the zone spread between the two. Now, cut the development time substantially, perhaps to 4½ minutes based on the schematic. The Zone 11 exposure now is developed to a Zone 8 density, while the Zone 5 exposure ends up with a density of about 4¼. The spread of zones in the field is reduced to only 3¾ zones via clever exposure and development. The snow is the same density as before, but the rock is now 1¼ zones lighter, just what you wanted.

Both the snow and the rock are easily printable, yet notice how high your exposure placed the snow initially in Zone 11! That’s 2 full zones beyond the range of the paper in a straight print, yet well within the limits of tonal separations of the negative and thus a fully usable zone. In this case, you then reduced development to bring the final density down within the range of enlarging papers. In chapter 10, you’ll learn that even denser zones can be used in printing. The important point is that you shouldn’t limit yourself to exposures within the Zone 1 to Zone 9 range. Overcome your fear of putting the higher zones to use.

From this example, you can see how the common rule of “overexpose and underdevelop” has become accepted. If you want to cut contrast, start with extra exposure because density is lost in less-than-normal development. Without the extra exposure initially, you can lose valuable tonalities and textures in the lower zones.

Please note in the examples above that the decision of how to expose the negative is based on your initial determination of the tones you want in the final print (i.e., the end point, as noted in chapter 8). Then readings are made with the gray meter to determine the spread of tonalities (the starting point). Finally, exposure and development are simultaneously determined in order to arrive at the desired contrast level and overall placement for the negative.

Before going on to an example of expanded contrast, let’s see what would have happened if you took an average meter reading at the scene described above and used it without thinking further. The snow would dominate the scene, while the rock would be a relatively small part of it. Therefore, the snowfield’s reading would dominate the gray meter, and the overall reading of the scene (including the rock) would be only slightly lower than that of the snow without the rock. Suppose this overall reading was f/11 @ 1/250 second, or one full stop below the reading of the snow alone (it probably would not drop that much). If we used that exposure and developed normally, the snow would have a Zone 6 density and would print as a medium light gray. That would be a rather dingy rendering of snow. The rock, 6 zones lower, would be exposed as Zone 0. You would end up with a featureless black blob in a medium light gray morass. Obviously, that would be a disaster! That should demonstrate the value of the zone system and the importance of learning it thoroughly!

Now let’s turn to an example of expanded contrast. Suppose you are in a forest on a cloudy day and you see a leafy bush next to the base of a Douglas fir tree. The scene is beautiful, but the contrast is low. The gray meter reads the dark furrows of the bark at f/4 @ 1/15 second and the green leaves at f/5.6 @ 1/30 second. There is only a difference of 2 stops between the two readings, and averaging them would place the bark in Zone 4 and the leaves in Zone 6—a bit dull for me.

If you place the leaves in Zone 5 (i.e., expose the negative at the meter reading on the leaves), the bark would be exposed at Zone 3. Now you can give the negative substantially increased development. According to diagram 9.2, developing it for 15 minutes (roughly 2½ times normal) would raise Zone 3 to about Zone 3⅓ and Zone 5 to just above Zone 6⅓, increasing the spread between the leaves and bark about 1 zone. If you want still more contrast, you can print using high-contrast paper.

I don’t recommend adhering to the “underexpose and overdevelop” rule for increasing contrast. Underexposure severely limits your ability to increase contrast because the lower zones move very little during extended negative development. That is evident from diagram 9.2. The lower you place them in your exposure, the less you can separate them during development. For example, if you place the bark and bush at Zone 2 and 4 respectively, the same 15 minutes of development would raise the density of the bark to just barely above Zone 2, while the Zone 4 placement would increase to just above Zone 4½. Thus, the underexposure would limit the increase in contrast to ½ zone.

 I don’t recommend adhering to the “underexpose and overdevelop” rule for increasing contrast. Underexposure severely limits your ability to increase contrast because the lower zones move very little during extended negative development.

However, if you expose the leaves at Zone 6 instead of Zone 5 (and therefore the bark at Zone 4 instead of Zone 3), the 15 minutes of development would raise the leaves to Zone 8 and the bark to Zone 4¾. Here, you have increased the tonal spread by almost 1¼ zones. If you exposed one zone higher, at Zone 7 and 5 respectively, the increased development time would raise the leaves to about Zone 10 and the bark to Zone 6¼, a 1¾ zone increase in contrast. Thus, the higher the initial exposure, the greater the contrast expansion through development (within reasonable limits, of course).

There are some trade-offs with this approach, to be sure. First, the negative may be quite dense, and therefore requires long exposures in the darkroom to achieve appropriate print tonalities. Second, the graininess of the negative increases with density, but this is generally an issue of minor concern. While these drawbacks must be considered, contrast has increased twice as much as with the “underexpose and overdevelop” approach. It should be noted that some of Edward Weston’s most famous negatives are so dense by today’s standards that they almost can be used for viewing solar eclipses! Yet they obviously produced iconic prints. I think too much emphasis today is placed on producing the thinnest usable negatives, and I see little merit to that approach.

My normal contrast negatives aren’t so dense that they’re bulletproof, but they certainly aren’t thin. If I want to greatly increase contrast, I expose at mid-densities and then overdevelop. I get a dense negative, but I also increase contrast substantially. As for the graininess, it shows up only in areas of smooth tonality, such as clouds or sky or smooth skin, but not in areas of sharp modulation, such as the hypothetical tree trunk example above. I do consider whether grain will be a factor in the final print, but it’s rarely a real problem. For small or medium format roll film, increased grain and density are greater problems than with larger negatives; but all things considered, I would always prefer having increased grain over a negative lacking in sufficient contrast.

The Exposure/Density Curve and Zone 4 Shadow Placement

The most important reason to avoid thin negatives is based on the separation of tonalities in the developed negative. Zone 1 is very thin with easily perceptible density above Zone 0. Yet translated to the print, both zones appear black with no real separation of tone between them. Zone 2 shows separation from Zone 1 in the print; in fact, on the negative there is a greater density spread between Zone 2 and Zone 1 than there is between Zone 1 and Zone 0. Higher zones show even greater separation of density. Diagram 9.5 shows a common graph known as the Exposure/Density Curve, which depicts how it all works. (For the mathematically inclined, this curve is the first half of a sine wave.)

In diagram 9.5, the X-axis (the horizontal axis) represents equal increases in exposure; the Y-axis (the vertical axis) represents increases in negative density with development. The continuous line represents normal development of a typical negative. The dotted line to its left represents the curve if development time is increased; the dotted line to the right represents the curve if development time is decreased. As the curve starts from Zone 0 it rises very slowly to Zone 1, being nearly horizontal in that area. Its height above the X-axis at Zone 1 represents its very slight density. It then begins to curve upward between Zones 1 and 2, representing the greater density spread between those zones. It curves even more steeply upward between Zones 2 and 3, again representing more density spread between those two zones.

From Zone 3 upward to the mid-teens, the curve is relatively straight, indicating nearly equal separations in density between zones. Above Zone 15, the curve flattens out again, representing decreasing separations in density between zones in the densest portion of the negative. The lower portion of the curve, where separations are minimal (Zone 0 to 2½) is called the “toe” of the curve. The upper portion of the curve, where separations are again minimal, is known as the “shoulder” of the curve. The large middle portion, where separations are greatest, is the “straight-line portion” of the curve. The straight-line portion is the best part of the curve—the part where you want your densities to be—because it’s where you get the most visible separations of tonalities in the print.

Diagram 9.5: The exposure/density curve

I strongly urge you to keep all of your exposures within the straight-line portion of the curve in order to maximize tonal separations as I do. You can do this by “overexposing” your black-and-white negatives one full stop. In this way, your Zone 1 is actually Zone 2. More importantly, your Zone 3 is now Zone 4. Good, dark shadow detail and texture are often printed at Zone 3 tonalities, but Zone 3 placement puts a portion of that texture on the toe of the curve, whereas Zone 4 placement puts it all on the straight-line portion of the curve, maintaining better separations. (Later, when printing the negative, give it extra exposure to bring the tone back to Zone 3.) You won’t lose anything with this approach, because the valuable part of the curve for virtually all black-and-white films ranges all the way up to Zone 15 before starting to flatten out again. I don’t consider this to be “overexposure,” but proper exposure for the best possible negatives. At the upper end of the scale, it’s wise to avoid exposures above Zone 15, where highlight detail may lose separation.

If you follow this approach, your negatives will tend to be a bit denser and require a bit more exposure time under the enlarger, but they will give your prints visible separations down to the deepest tones. There will be no muddying of dark tonalities above pure black.

For those doing digital photography, this recommendation is quite similar to the recommendation of exposing your digital images as far to the right of the histogram as possible without “clipping” (i.e., overexposing beyond the right edge of the histogram), as will be discussed in chapters 11 and 12. Digitally, this maximizes the information packed into your exposure, even though the image appears overexposed and “washed out” on your camera’s monitor. Later, in post-processing, you reduce the exposure to the tonalities you want, but it’s a smoother image with far less “noise” in the shadow areas. Thus, the traditional and the digital approaches dovetail in ways that most photographers do not realize.

My method of proper film exposure is simple: cut the film’s recommended ASA (the rated film speed—the faster the film, the higher the number) approximately in half, which is the equivalent of opening up one stop, then do everything else as discussed above. If you use the DIN number instead of the ASA, drop the number by one. With Tri-X sheet film listed as ASA 320, I use ASA 160; with HP5+ sheet film listed as ASA 400, I use ASA 300 (which obviously is not half the recommended ASA, but which has proven to give me ample density with that film). Some films, such as Kodak T-Max 100 or Ilford Delta 100, can be exposed at, or closer to, the manufacturer’s recommended ASA. But most benefit from additional exposure.

Differences Between Photography and Sensitometry: Texture vs. Tone and Zone 4 Shadow Placement

There is a solid reason behind my recommendation of higher zone placements. Zone 1 is a critical zone for testing film because it starts the process of successively doubling exposures that creates all the other zones. But while Zone 1 is critical for testing film (i.e., important for sensitometric purposes), it’s not terribly important for photographic purposes because it hardly separates from Zone 0 in printing. Because your goal is to create fine photographs, not fine tests, take the route that leads to better photographs, which is to cut the manufacturer’s recommended ASA in half when using most films.

In testing film, sensitometrists—those who measure the film’s response to light—use step wedges. They measure small bits of featureless film density. They expose the film to varying amounts of light and develop them to see how they respond to light when developed in different developers, at different temperatures, with different agitation procedures, etc. Unfortunately, they do not look at textures, but only tones.

This is a pivotal difference. In the real world, we deal with textures, not tones. For example, when we talk about a Zone 4 exposure on the bark of a tree, we know that the Zone 4 is the average of the lighter and darker parts of the bark, which we see as texture. A Zone 4 tonality in the real world has parts that are lighter than Zone 4 and parts that are darker. In other words, there is a spread of brightness. Not so with a tone, which is a featureless Zone 4.

This difference becomes critical where the toe of the curve meets the straight-line portion of the curve, generally about Zone 2½. If you place your shadow (the bark) in Zone 3, as sensitometrists recommend, the lower part of the textural spread is on the toe of the curve, where densities are crunched together with less separation. When you print that negative, the print tonalities are also crunched together. If you want deep, rich blacks, everything goes too black and you lose detail; if you want separations to show, you can’t get a good, rich black.

Instead, if you place your shadows in Zone 4, or even higher, the entire spread is on the straight-line portion of the curve. Your negative is denser than it would be if you placed the shadows in Zone 3, but everything separates beautifully. Then, when you print the negative, simply give it additional exposure time under the enlarger, printing it down to the average Zone 3 that you want. By placing your most important dark shadows at least in Zone 4—not the darkest things in the scene, but the darkest things that you want to see as good, dark, visible textures in the final print—you’ll get a richer print every time. That’s a guarantee!

Surely you’ve often heard the phrase, “the print looks flat.” It’s one that has no life or snap in it. My experience shows me that when shadows that you want in Zone 3 (on your print) are placed in Zone 3 (or lower) on the negative, the print is guaranteed to look flat. The term “flat” is perfect, for it represents two things simultaneously. First the print has flat tonalities—particularly in the darker areas—because some or all of those separations are on the toe of the curve, so there is simply not much tonal separation. Furthermore the print looks flat dimensionally because we see tonal separations as spatial separations, and if the tonalities are not well separated, it appears that space has flattened out. The best way to avoid flat prints is to start with more exposure, specifically getting your important shadow detail well above Zone 3.

Cutting the manufacturer’s recommended film speed in half, or placing shadows one zone higher than normally recommended (or both!) is my simple—but overwhelmingly important—modification of the zone system for practical usage. All of my recommended methods are geared toward getting the optimum quality from your negatives and the highest quality from your prints. So, rather than placing key shadows in Zone 3, place them in Zone 4 or higher to assure that you’re on the straight-line portion of the curve, where density separations are greatest. (And don’t worry about getting squeezed at the top because the black-and-white film response goes so high.) The idea of placing important shadows in Zone 3 is simply wrong.

Developing the Exposed Negative

The time/temperature charts for negative development shown below are my personal guides for each film/developer combination. As stated above, I rate Tri-X at ASA 160 rather than the recommended ASA 320 to ensure sufficient density and separation in the shadows. For Ilford HP5+ I do much the same thing, rating the film at ASA 300 rather than the recommended 400. It has been my experience that rating films lower than the recommended times produces denser negatives that yield greater tonal separation in the shadows and a greater feeling of spatial separation in the deeper toned areas of the final print.

The greater shadow density is primarily a product of greater exposure, not development. This is often the difference between a print that is flat and one that has snap. When shadow densities are placed on the toe of the exposure/density curve, they are not materially moved by changes in development. Low placement, therefore, ensures thin shadow areas with little density difference. When the negative is printed, those densities translate into close-tone differences in the final print. They tend to print as blacks, without textural or spatial differences, or as muddy charcoal grays, also lacking textural or spatial separations. The print has a flat look—in which the word “flat” is appropriate for two reasons. First, the image is tonally flat in the shadows; second, it is spatially flat, showing little of the illusion of three-dimensional depth that makes a photograph so compelling. You can avoid this problem by giving your negatives higher exposures.

Diagram 9.6: Time/Temperature Chart for Developing Kodak Tri-X Film (ASA 320) with Kodak HC110 Developer in Tanks (for Tri-X film rated ASA 160)

Diagram 9.7: Compensating Development of Kodak Tri-X Film with Kodak HC110 Developer
For a dramatic reduction in contrast, use the following:

Some Additional Comments on Diagrams 9.6 and 9.7
In diagram 9.6, designations such as Z6  Z5 indicate an exposed Zone 6 will be developed to Zone 5 density. “N” is normal development, in which each zone is developed to its exposed sensitization level.
“C” in diagram 9.7 is roughly equivalent to N–4 in the diagram 9.6 (if it existed!). Highlights are greatly reduced in contrast yet still maintain good separations. C–1, C–2, and C–3 produce still lower contrast.
When using the compensating developer, give 2–3 stops extra exposure to the negative.
Read the section under “Two-Solution Compensating Development for Negatives” later in this chapter for a significant improvement on this procedure.

Diagram 9.8: Time/Temperature Chart for Developing Ilford HP5+ Film with Kodak HC110 Developer
(for HP5+film rated at ASA 300) Note: Times and dilutions are different from Tri-X.

Diagram 9.9: Compensating Development of Ilford HP5+ Film with Kodak HC110 Developer
For a dramatic reduction in contrast, use the following Compensating Development:

Diagram 9.10: Development of Kodak T-Max 100 Film in Kodak T-Max RS Developer
(for T-Max 100 film rated at ASA 100).

Diagram 9.11: Chart for Developing Kodak T-Max 100, Kodak T-Max 400, Ilford Delta 100, or Ilford Delta 400 Film with Kodak XTOL Developer

 A Note of Caution in Using a Compensating Developer

Due to the extreme dilution of the working solution, there is very little active developer present. Therefore, develop only a few sheets, or a maximum of one roll, at a time. Otherwise the developer will be exhausted before full development is achieved. For roll film, it is wise to use a large tank (one containing several reels) with only one roll loaded onto a reel to assure a sufficient amount of developer in the tank.

When I use HC110 as a compensating developer in 90 ounces of working solution (which contains only 2 ounces of HC110 stock solution, or ½ ounce of the liquid concentrate), I limit development to four 4×5 sheets at a time. When using N–3, I limit myself to six 4×5 sheets at a time.

I strongly advise you to use the time/temperature charts only as a guide and starting point. Modify them as necessary for the best results. Even if you use the same negative/developer combination, a number of variables could make your results different from mine: the water in your area, your agitation procedure, your thermometer being a degree or two different, etc. As is so often the case, a little experimentation will give you optimum results.

If you use a different negative/developer combination, you’ll find that once you determine your normal development time, the percentage changes to N–, N– –, N+, and N++ are approximately the same as those on the charts—making them very useful as a starting point.

Explanation of Compensating Development

Diagrams 9.9 and 9.11 on the complete development charts for Tri-X and HP5+ list a development procedure for greatly reduced contrast via the use of extreme dilutions of HC110. Using this procedure, the dense portions of the negative are restrained significantly compared to the thinner portions. This procedure turns HC110 into a so-called “compensating developer” in the sense that it only partially develops the very dense highlights compared to the mid-tones and shadow areas—i.e., it “compensates” for their high sensitization level during exposure.

“C” development (C for “compensating”) is somewhat equivalent to N–3 of the adjacent diagram in the shadow areas, but the higher zones are reduced to lower densities than N–3 would yield. In effect, C is then equivalent to an N–3; but the unacceptably short development time necessary to produce N–3 would yield uneven results, so C proves to be a greatly improved alternative. Following the trend of the adjacent diagram, C–1, C–2, and C–3 produce progressively lower contrasts (see figure 9-1).

Compensating development depends primarily on the periods of non-agitation between the periods of agitation. Each time the negative is agitated, new developer is brought to all portions of it; but during the quiet periods, the developer exhausts itself on the dense areas because there is so little of it in the solution while more fully developing the thinner areas, hence the name “compensating.” The extra-dilute solution automatically prevents the densest portions from gaining excess density; it compensates for those areas potentially becoming too dense. Because this procedure depends on the quiet periods, it must be done by hand rather than by a mechanical, rotating drum with continuous agitation. But there is one minor drawback to this procedure: because the developer is so dilute, those areas that would normally be developed to Zone 1, or even Zone 2, may simply disappear. They have so little exposure that the dilute developer seems unable to bring them out in the developed negative. (The next section shows how to surmount this problem.) Even areas exposed as Zone 3 are somewhat anemic in the developed negative, but they are there, with discernible density. Beyond that, everything is OK. But this is a minor drawback to a procedure that yields huge benefits to control excessively high contrasts.

I learned about compensating development toward the end of 1979 and used it extensively starting with my discovery of the slit canyons of Arizona in January 1980 (figure 9-3). I then used it for my studies of the English cathedrals later that same year (figure 9-4). Thus, this purely technical procedure led to an astonishing artistic and expressive leap for me. This proved to me—and I hope will convince you—that the technical and the artistic aspects of photography cannot be separated. The two work in concert. The more you understand both aspects, the more your photography will improve. You cannot be a good photographer if you have great artistic instincts with little technical understanding, and you surely cannot be a good photographer with great technical prowess but little artistic imagination. You need both.

Figure 9-3: The Slit, Antelope Canyon
The negative received compensating development to retain as much detail as possible throughout the range—yet the brightness range of the scene still pushed the limits of the film. I allowed the darkest areas of the print to disappear in pure black, seeing their forms as so sensual that detail would have intruded. The scene was abstract; the image is meant to be abstract as well, with strong lines, forms, and contrasts.

Figure 9-4: Choir and Organ, Wells Cathedral
Using precisely the same negative development procedure as in figure 9-3, the print has visible detail throughout; the viewer can see every bit of intricate detail that I saw while standing at the camera.

Two-Solution Compensating Development for Negatives

After using the compensating development procedure detailed above for nearly 17 years, I developed a superior method of dramatically lowering contrast in excessively high contrast situations or in prints where I want an extremely soft look, while retaining the lost lower values, and even enhancing all other values along the tonal scale. It involves the use of two solutions of HC110: first, a solution somewhat stronger than the normal dilution for Tri-X film in HC110 (1 part stock solution to 10 parts water); and second, a “compensating” solution (2 parts stock solution to 90 parts water).

I begin development in the first solution with constant agitation for the first 45 seconds; then I allow the negative to sit unagitated for the next 45 seconds. (Total development time at this point: 1 minute, 30 seconds.) This initial development in the stronger solution quickly develops Zone 1 and 2 close to their appropriate densities as seen in the bellows analogy. (See diagram 9.1 and imagine the look of the bellows at 1½–2 minutes development time.)

At this point, I transfer the negative to the compensating solution. I agitate for the first 30 seconds, primarily to dilute the amount of developer in direct contact with the emulsion (total development time at this point: 2 minutes). The negative sits unagitated for the next full minute. (Total development at this point: 3 minutes.) From this point, I revert to my usual procedure of 15 seconds agitation at the start of each minute followed by 45 seconds of non-agitation. At 10 minutes total development time (i.e., 10 minutes from the time the negative was first placed in the first developer), the negative is removed from the developer and placed into the stop bath, followed by the fixer.

Starting this procedure in the slightly stronger than normal development solution retains the lowest zones that would be lost with full compensating development, and tends to begin separating local contrasts in the mid and upper zones in a snappier manner. Then, before those upper zones attain too much density, the negative is placed into the extremely dilute compensating solution. This clamps a lid on the upper zones, preventing them from getting too dense but giving the mid and high densities wonderful local separations. All this results from the initial “kick” of the stronger first solution (figure 2-7 and figure 9-5).

Since devising this procedure in 1996, I have used it exclusively in place of the single solution developer. Whenever I’ve done direct comparisons, it yields better separations from the bottom to the top. Yet, I would have to admit that I do not know how I could have improved the final images I created in either the slit canyons or the English cathedrals had I employed this procedure with those negatives. But I do know that several images I have made since devising the two-solution procedure would have been impossible to print from a negative developed with the single solution. (And that may indicate that several attempted images I made prior to 1996 with the single solution that fell short may have made the grade if I had implemented the two-solution developer earlier, though I cannot imagine printing my slit canyon images any differently than I do with the older, single dilution methods. The two-solution process would give me more options in printing, but I would not put any of them into effect.)

Figure 9-5: Slickrock and Reflecting Pool
Looking directly into the sun, I carefully placed the camera so that the clouds closest to the sun (but not the sun itself) were seen in the pool’s reflection. Contrast was excessive, from the sun and clouds to the sandstone in the foreground. When I came upon this scene in 1996, I had already evolved the two-solution compensating development, which gave me control of a greater contrast range than I could have retained with compensating development alone. This proves that every technical advance allows a further artistic advance.

To alter the final contrast level, I simply extend or reduce the development times in the first developer (agitation and non-agitation) by a few seconds in either direction. If I want more contrast, I add five seconds of agitation followed by five seconds of non-agitation; if I want lower contrast, I reduce both the agitation and non-agitation times by about five seconds. In either case, after removing the negative from the first solution, I agitate for about 30 seconds in the compensating solution to dilute the active solution in direct contact with the emulsion. This initiates the compensating effect that prevents excessive density in the upper zones. In all cases, I maintain the overall 10-minute development time for the two solutions. You can experiment with time variations to suit your needs. I now use this procedure in place of the pure compensating development procedure found in the Time/Temperature diagrams 9.6 through 9.9.

Development Procedures for Sheet Film and Roll Film

Both sheet film and roll film must be developed uniformly, from edge-to-edge, corner-to-corner. While you may be able to overcome inappropriate negative development (i.e., too dense or slightly too thin, too contrasty or not contrasty enough), it is virtually impossible to correct uneven negative development during printing. This section explains procedures that yield evenly developed negatives.

For sheet film development, we’ll look at these three common procedures:

Hanger Development
Tray Development
Mechanical Drum Development
Hanger Development

In hanger development, the film is placed in metal holders, or hangers, which are immersed vertically into a large tank of developer. Agitation is accomplished by lifting the hangers completely out of the liquid, rotating them 90 degrees to the right, dropping them back into the tank, lifting and rotating them 90 degrees to the left, and repeating the procedure several times.

In practice, I lift the hangers up and lean them against the upper-right edge of the tank while rotating to the right, and against the upper left edge of the tank while rotating to the left. This action must be continuous, and neither too fast nor too slow, or unevenness could result. DO NOT STOP to allow the hangers to drain at the 90-degree rotation point. Instead, reverse the motion smoothly and swiftly, like a billiard ball hitting and ricocheting off the edge of a pool table. This will ensure even development.

My general procedure is to agitate continuously for the first minute, and then for each successive minute, agitate again for the first 15 seconds with the remaining 45 seconds of each minute devoid of agitation. Only with the N+2, C–3, and two-solution compensating procedures does this vary. Agitation is continuous for development of T-Max 100 developed in Kodak D-76, T-Max RS, or XTOL.

Diagram 9.12: Agitation Procedure for Sheet Film Development in Hangers
After dropping the hangers into the tank and banging them down several times to dislodge any air bubbles on the negatives, agitate by raising the hangers first against the left edge of the tank and rotating 90 degrees to the left, then dropping them back into the tank. Then raise them against the right wall of the tank, rotate 90 degrees to the right, and drop them back into the tank. Repeat the procedure for all agitation. Do not hesitate at the 90-degree position, but immediately return the hangers to the tank.

Tray Development

Tray development is theoretically simpler but often much more difficult to master without damaging the film during development. The procedure is to slide the film into a tray of developer one sheet at a time, stacking one sheet on top of another. Agitate by pulling out the bottom sheet and laying it on top of the stack, making sure the top sheet is then fully submerged. Repeat this simple procedure continuously.

This procedure must start with a pre-soak of the negatives, or they will stick to one another like glue. To begin, submerge the first negative in plain water for several seconds, then submerge the second for several seconds together with the first, then add the third, and so on. After all of the negatives have been submerged, run through the stack several times before transferring them to the developer. This will ensure that all of the negatives will separate from one another and that development will begin smoothly.

Diagram 9.13: Agitation Procedure for Sheet Film Development in Trays
There are two methods of tray development. Method A shows that by cradling the entire stack of negatives at a slight angle with one hand, the top sheet can be removed and slid under the bottom sheet of the stack. Continue the procedure without pause for the entire duration of development. Method B shows agitation by pulling the bottom sheet from the stack and placing it on top. This procedure also requires a constant shuffling motion from bottom to top from the start of development until development is complete. With practice, Method A may prove less subject to scratching.

For those who have mastered this procedure, 15 to 20 negatives can be developed at a time. The pitfall is that it is very easy to scratch negatives against a sharp corner of the one above or below during agitation. Experience will overcome this initial problem.

Because agitation in trays is continuous, while in tanks it is periodic, the characteristics of the developed negative are different. In the tank, 45 seconds of unagitated “hang time” per minute slows development, so for equal development times the hanger-developed negative is less dense and contrasty than the tray-developed negative. Of course, if many negatives are developed simultaneously in trays, there is a long period of non-agitation for each negative as it slowly moves from the top of the stack to the bottom (before it is again agitated by being pulled out and placed on top). This lengthy period of non-agitation makes tray development closer to hanger development.

In the compensating procedure, periods of non-agitation are essential to create the compensating effect. During the “hang-time,” the dilute developer in contact with the heavily sensitized portions of the negative is quickly exhausted; further development ceases until the next agitation brings new developer in contact with those areas. During that same hang-time, however, the thin portions of the negative cannot exhaust the developer as quickly, and they are more fully developed. This means that if you use tray development, the compensating effect is lost unless you allow periods of non-agitation.

Mechanical Drum Development

Mechanical developing procedures, such as automatic periodic agitation in nitrogen burst tanks or continuously rotating drums such as Jobo, are perfectly fine negative development methods. If you use such methods, be sure the development is even throughout the negative. Also be aware that continuous agitation in a mechanical processor precludes the possibility of compensating development, since non-agitation periods are mandatory for the compensating process to be effective. Use a drum processor for negative development in the normal ranges, but switch to hand development and periodic agitation to achieve the compensating effect.

Development of roll film on spiral reels should be done only in an invertible tank, not in tanks requiring agitation by spinning the reels. The only agitation that I have found to yield uniform development is a wide, upward sweep to the inverted position, and then a return sweep—like an inverted pendulum with your elbow as the fulcrum—and, perhaps, a 90-degree turn along the way (the 90-degree turn is not necessary with each inversion; I do it periodically). Spinning the tank should never be done because it creates additional agitation and density along the reels, which translates to light streaks along the edges of the print. If your prints lighten noticeably along the edges, it’s a good bet that spinning the tank is to blame.

Diagram 9.14: Agitation Procedure for Roll Film Development in Invertible Tanks
Agitate by inverting tank fully and spinning it 90 degrees when bringing it back to upright position.

One common mistake in developing roll film is to load the reels first, place them in the tank, then pour in the developer through the small hole at the top. This is the worst way to start development! The reason is that some portions of the negative will be in contact with developer for 20–25 seconds before other portions are finally submerged, and uneven development is virtually assured. A better procedure is to remove the reels first and fill the tank with developer, and then load the film on the reels. (Of course, it helps greatly to load the reels in total darkness.) Then drop the reels into the tank, clamp on the lid, and begin agitation. Once the lid is clamped on, you can turn on the lights during the development time. Toward the end of the development time, turn off the lights, remove the lid completely, dump the developer quickly, and pour in stop bath from a nearby flask, premixed with the proper amount of liquid. Once development is stopped, you can pour out the stop bath and pour in the fixer in a leisurely fashion.

Completing Development with a Stop Bath and Fixer

For both roll and sheet film, place the negative in a stop bath for several seconds of continuous agitation to quickly stop development. Then fix it for the recommended time in the fixer. With most standard fixers (I use Kodak standard fix with hardener), 10 to 15 minutes is sufficient; excessive fixing may bleach the negative slightly. After you immerse the negatives in the fix and agitate them for two minutes or more, you can turn on the lights for inspection. A subsequent wash of 10 to 15 minutes—or five complete changes of water—makes the negative archivally permanent.

Developing negatives is not my favorite pastime, but proper development is the only way to continue the process started when you exposed the negative. There can be no substitute for a well-conceived, well-composed, well-exposed, and well-developed negative. If any of the four is given short shrift, there will be a distinct loss of quality in the final, all-important step: the well-printed photograph.

Appendix 1 contains tests for film ASA and contrast levels of your developed negative. It shows a method for determining normal contrast development for your film/developer combination, as well as other excellent tests for materials and equipment.

The Zone System and Roll Film

How can you use the zone system and contrast control procedures with roll film? To be sure, they don’t work quite as well as with sheet film. All negatives on a roll are developed the same way, whereas each negative on sheet film can be developed exactly as desired.

However, several options are available for roll film. First, you can use more than one film back or camera body, designating each back or body for a different contrast development level. By employing a sufficient number of backs, any desired development can be produced and nothing is lost. Most likely you would use only two or three backs and make small compromises. With three backs, you could use one for contrast expansion, one for normal or slightly reduced contrast, and one for compensating reduction. With two backs, you could use one for normal or reduced contrast and another for increased contrast. However many film backs you have, expose each photograph on the roll that most closely fits your needs.

 Choose any great photographer—let’s say Ansel Adams, for he was great and his work is so well known—and ask yourself how many truly great photographs he produced in his lifetime (50+ years of photography). 50? 100? 200? Maybe more. But that is about four per year at best!

If additional backs are either too expensive or unavailable for your camera, another approach may be possible. If you can unwind the film from your camera prior to complete exposure of the roll (a procedure that is possible with most 35mm cameras, but impossible with 120mm film), then carry several rolls with you at all times, each marked for different development. Whenever you encounter a scene that requires different development from the roll currently in the camera, unwind the one inside and label the frame it is on, then wind in the appropriate roll just beyond the frame last exposed (to avoid a double exposure) and shoot. If the next scene requires the previous roll again, unwind the current roll, mark the frame number on the roll or cassette, and wind in the roll you need just beyond its last exposed frame. This may be time-consuming and inconvenient, but it allows for proper development for each photograph.

However, my best suggestion involves another approach that shocks most people when they first hear it, but it really works! Whenever you expose a frame that is truly exciting to you—one that you feel will be a superb photograph—unwind the roll immediately and develop the entire roll for that particular exposure! You may want to make several variations of the exposure first. You may try different camera positions, filters, lenses, aperture and shutter speed combinations, etc., but then remove the roll! That may be a very surprising suggestion, but what do you lose? Film is the least expensive part of photography, so why compromise on a potentially great shot? I have seen people leave a roll of 20 exposures in the camera for months because the last two frames are not yet exposed. That makes no sense. Keeping film in the camera after a great exposure just to finish out the roll is equally absurd.

A second consideration may be even more important in support of this radical suggestion. Choose any great photographer—let’s say Ansel Adams, for he was great and his work is so well known—and ask yourself how many truly great photographs he produced in his lifetime (50+ years of photography). 50? 100? 200? Maybe more. But that is about four per year at best! Now, with that in mind, how many truly great photographs do you think you actually have on that one roll? When you stop to think of it, you don’t lose anything by trying this suggestion.

The only other alternative is to get the best “average exposure” on every frame and develop normally, hoping that high- or low-contrast papers will provide enough leeway to yield a good print. (This is a poor alternative to the previous suggestion.) This is the usual approach, and while it renders contrast control useless for the negative, it does show that use of the zone system for determining the initial exposure is still very important.

Once you know the zone system, you will have no need to bracket your exposures. Bracketing is nothing more than a fudge factor for those who are unsure of what they’re doing. Let me hedge on this by saying that periodically—and only on rare occasions—you may want to make more than one exposure and development because the lighting is unusual, weird, or perhaps very “different.” Doing several exposures along with different developments makes sense in strange situations. You can learn from them while making at least one usable negative along the way. Except in such rare cases, a complete understanding of both the zone system and your film’s characteristics should put you right on target without the need for extra exposures and time-consuming developments.

I strongly recommend that you avoid bracketing because it promotes sloppy field techniques. I’m not against making a second exposure of a negative that may be extraordinary just as a back-up in case the first is damaged, but the backup negative should be the same good exposure as the first one.

Negative Materials and Developers

The commonly used panchromatic materials (i.e., Kodak Tri-X, Ilford FP-4+, HP-5+, Fuji Neopan Acros 100, and comparable films by other manufacturers) are generally developed by a selected few developers (i.e., Kodak HC110 or D-76, Edwal FG-7, Rodinal, Ilford ID-11, etc.). Kodak T-Max films or Ilford Delta films (both using T-grain technology) can be developed with Kodak T-Max or XTOL developers. Other developers may be employed for special purposes. The question often arises as to which combinations of negative materials and developers give the “best” results. There are differences, of course, and some of the combinations are better for certain purposes than others—but which?

If sharpness or smooth grain is a prime consideration, then it’s best to recognize that the slower speed films have finer grain and generally better sharpness than faster films. But how do the various developers affect your images? My experience indicates that the film itself, along with the length of development (but not the developer per se), determines the final outcome to the greatest extent. In other words, if one of the films mentioned above were developed by each of the developers listed, it would be difficult to show that grain or sharpness varied significantly as long as the development times were approximately equal. Excessive development increases grain noticeably.

There are people who claim that certain combinations are clearly superior to others, but even after inspecting the evidence carefully, I remain unimpressed. The differences range from extremely subtle to nonexistent and are of marginal importance. Furthermore, a very fine grain film may have finer grain than a coarser grained film no matter what developer is used to process either one.

There are other, more important, considerations regarding film/developer combinations. First, which combination yields the greatest detail in both highlights and shadows? Some film/developer combinations show great separation of shadow tonalities but little separation in highlights. Other combinations show good highlight separation but little shadow separation. I haven’t tried all of the combinations (after all, I’m a photographer, not a lab technician), nor have I tried all of the films or developers separately. Generally, I shoot 4×5 sheet film and occasionally 2¼ × 1⅝. Long ago I settled on Tri-X film for my sheet film and Ilford Pan F, FP4+, and HP5+ for roll film (for increased, normal, and decreased contrast respectively). The results have been excellent, with each of the films yielding smooth tonalities and fine grain. I use HC110 as my prime developer because I find that it produces good highlight and shadow separation. I develop the T-Max 100 in T-Max RS or XTOL.

Whatever you choose as your film/developer combination should be based on your goals as a photographer. If highspeed film is necessary for your photography, avoid testing low ASA/DIN films. If fine grain is critical to your imagery, stay away from high-speed films; they are noticeably grainier. A little testing will show you which film/developer combination yields the best highlight and shadow details for your purposes.

Testing is a means to an end, and the “end” is the best possible photographs you can make. Don’t waste your time testing and retesting, refining and further refining your test results. There is a difference between photographers and sensitometrists. If you are a photographer, start making real exposures for expressive photographs after some initial testing. Any modifications of your test results can be made during the “real” shooting.

Another consideration is contrast control. Which combinations allow the greatest flexibility for expansion or contraction of contrast? In general, most of Kodak’s standard or T-grain films are quite good in contrast flexibility, though Plus-X film lacks expansion capability to such an appalling extent that I avoid it completely. More development fogs Plus-X overall, increasing density greatly without increasing contrast appreciably. All Ilford films seem to have wonderful contrast control characteristics, and their gradations of tonality are beautifully smooth—better, in fact, than the equivalent Kodak films. But Ilford HP5+ becomes excessively grainy with increased development, though it is quite smooth and fine-grained with reduced development.

Be aware of a strange quirk in Kodak’s marketing: it produces two distinctly different films named Tri-X. A quick clue to the fact that the films are different is that sheet film Tri-X is rated at ASA 320, whereas roll film Tri-X is rated at ASA 400 (and the roll film Tri-X Pan Professional is rated at ASA 320). Why Kodak gives these different films identical names is strange indeed.

Concerning developers, each one has its proponents, but I find some of the arguments arcane and immaterial. Whether one developer produces a finer edge demarcation when measured on an optical bench is immaterial because we all look at photographs with our eyes, not with a microscopic caliper! Of material importance is the separation of tonalities in highlights, midtones, and shadows, the effect of the developer on film speed, its characteristics in contrast expansion and contraction, and its ease of use.

For example, I have found that using Kodak HC110 to develop either HP5+ or Tri-X, according to the time/temperature charts, separates tones quite nicely throughout the entire spectrum. It produces noticeable grain during expanded development (particularly with HP5+) but extremely fine-grained negatives with the compensating procedure. It’s easy to use because it’s a liquid concentrate, which can be quickly diluted. It also lasts a long time in the bottle without noticeable deterioration, even as it turns dark brown (but there is a limit). It suits my purposes well. I feel that these are the important considerations, and I recommend that you judge your choice primarily on the same considerations.

Testing and experimentation will uncover combinations that are best for you. My choice may or may not be your choice. The important thing is that you are satisfied with your own combinations. Your goals are surely different from mine, and your final combinations may be different to enable you to best achieve your goals. I stated my film and developer combinations as examples, not as recommendations, as I have done with other examples throughout this book. Please accept them as such.

In addition to the commonly used negative materials and developers discussed above, there is an abundance of materials for specialized purposes. Orthochromatic film is sensitive to a narrow segment of the visible spectrum (the blue wavelengths) and can be used to great advantage. Blue objects, such as the sky, are rendered very light, while red objects are very dark. The uncommon tonal renditions created by this film can be very intriguing.

Infrared film can yield truly bizarre images, and with care and subtlety on the photographer’s part they can go beyond the superficial realm of stark, almost shocking impact to become quite creative and insightful. As with so many other tools, most people use this film sporadically for special effects and immediate impact rather than delving into its expressive possibilities. If you are interested in these or other specialized films, I suggest you work with them over long periods of time, as if you were nurturing plants in your garden. Cultivate them and gradually get to know them, and what they can do for you.

Not only are there specialized films, but also specialized developers for them. They can be used with panchromatic, orthochromatic, or infrared films, yielding some very exciting and unusual results. This is purely in the realm of creative experimentation, and you will have to discover the possibilities yourself. I suggest obtaining data books and brochures from Kodak, Ilford, and the other manufacturers to get basic information before charging ahead blindly. Such books will offer information concerning the characteristics of the various materials and give you a starting point for your experiments. The rest is up to you!

Figure 9-6: Eclairé
The four story spiral stairway at Chateau Lourmarin, in Provence, France, is a true work of art in masonry, much like an Escher drawing, looking almost the same upside-down. Its contrast is excessive, with window light at various levels providing the only illumination. I used my widest angle lens to adequately encompass and convey its magnificence, and a two-solution compensating development for the exposed negative.

===== FILE 17/28: Text%2fchapter10.xhtml =====

Figure 10-1: Rocks and Receding Wave
I exposed this negative in 1978 and unsuccessfully tried cropping and printing it a few times before giving up. In 2006, I rediscovered the negative and realized that the upper right, which appeared blank white on the contact proof, simply needed burning to bring out necessary detail. So, after nearly 30 years, I finally printed it. The glowing, flowing, abstract forms that I encountered three decades ago have finally come to light. With easy access to any negative I’ve ever exposed, I can print at any time. This is a great advantage of negatives, which stay the same forever, as opposed to digital files, which may not be easily accessible as technology changes.

CHAPTER 10
The Print

ASIDE FROM YOUR CHOICE OF SUBJECT MATTER, printing a negative in the darkroom is possibly the most personal aspect of photography. Every photographer has his or her own special way of approaching darkroom work, just as every digital practitioner has his or her own workflow, and few photographers avail themselves of the opportunity to watch others work in the darkroom. For this reason, I shall approach this chapter in a very personal manner, detailing the materials and methods I use in making a print. I don’t suggest that my approach is the only way to go about darkroom work, nor is it necessarily the best way—but it is surely my way, and it has proven successful for me. I suggest that you consider each of my methods for possible inclusion in your own approach, with your own personal modifications.

Many of the techniques I regularly employ in the field and in the darkroom started as suggestions from other photographers. I often modified their procedures to suit me. I’ve even invented new techniques. I try to maintain an open, flexible approach, trying new procedures or materials whenever they seem to have merit for my purposes. If you can adopt an open approach, this chapter will prove more meaningful to you, whether you’re at the beginner or advanced level.

The chapter will begin with an overview of materials, because their characteristics are so integrally tied to my methods. From there, it will proceed to methods of printing—using both standard and advanced techniques—then to completion of the process through archival processing (i.e., the production of a permanent image). The discussion will first focus on black-and-white procedures, then on color. I wish to make clear that some of the methods explained in black-and-white are fully applicable to color, and vice versa. So I urge readers with an interest in only one or the other to read the entire chapter.

 I find that images possessing substantial areas of white printed on neutral or slightly warm papers appear more brilliant than those printed on cold-toned, bluer papers, even if a densitometer confirms the fact that they both read equally bright.

Black-and-White Enlarging Papers

What is the best enlarging paper? Today there are fewer options due to the rapid shift toward digital photography, but there are still excellent products available. I’ve used many papers over the years, and today’s products are as good or better than ever. As I revise this book, my favorite papers are Fomabrom V111, Adox MCC110, and Ilford Multicontrast Warmtone. All three are variable contrast papers. They all have great brilliance, wide latitude in contrast range, and rich glossy surfaces (not high gloss like drugstore prints, but semigloss with a slight texture). They can be processed to full archival longevity and can be bleached and toned easily. There are other papers available as well, so there are plenty from which to choose. Let me add that most digital users believe that traditional black-and-white is dying or dead, and that most materials have disappeared. That is not the case! Among the abundance of films and papers available, I can say that the products I’m using now are the best I’ve ever used.

Let’s look at several important paper characteristics more carefully. There is a subtlety concerning paper color that deserves real scrutiny. Papers with cold, bluish whites always seem to have less brilliance in broad highlight areas than papers with warmer, yellower whites. It’s an interesting and unusual phenomenon that has intrigued me for some time. I believe I have identified the reason. Let’s investigate a concrete example to understand it.

Suppose you look at an image made in winter of a sunlit snowfield. It would seem that the colder (blue) white paper would convey the feeling more appropriately than a warmer (yellower) white. Surprisingly, it’s the other way around. My explanation is that the human eye responds more strongly to the yellow-white than to the blue-white. This is due to the well-known fact that the human eye responds more strongly to the yellow portion of the spectrum than to the blue portion. After all, we can see light blue, medium blue, and dark blue, but we cannot even comprehend dark yellow. Yellow always appears bright to our eyes, and that carries over to the subtle print coloration. I find that images possessing substantial areas of white printed on neutral or slightly warm papers appear more brilliant than those printed on cold-toned, bluer papers, even if a densitometer confirms the fact that they both read equally bright. But when a highlight is isolated and surrounded by mid-gray or darker tones, the color seems immaterial; any paper appears equally brilliant.

Developing characteristics are also important, for there are subtle differences between the image quality of a fully developed print and one that has been pulled from the developer a bit too soon. Most fiber base papers develop slowly over long periods of time, with increasingly rich blacks and more subtle midtones resulting from extended development times. Variable contrast papers appear to develop more quickly, but gain subtle highlight gradations with extended development. The reason for this characteristic in variable contrast papers is that their two emulsions—one low contrast and one high contrast—don’t always develop at the same rate of speed. The high-contrast emulsion usually develops more quickly, giving the appearance under the safelights that complete development occurs rapidly; but as the low contrast emulsion develops, the subtle highlight and midtone gradations become more apparent. Of course, the low-contrast emulsion adds to the richness and the subtleties within all image tonalities: highlights, midtones and shadows, and down to the deepest blacks. So if you rush your development, or pull the paper out of the developer early, you’ll lose some of the richness of the image.

One final word about papers in general: double weight paper is more durable than single weight paper. That is obvious, but it also means that in the long run, double weight paper is probably cheaper and less frustrating, for fewer prints are damaged during development and subsequent handling. Also, because it can endure rougher handling, double weight paper can be worked on in the developer, with hand rubbing of specific areas to enrich blacks or bring out the most subtle highlight gradations. I don’t know of a single fine art photographer who uses single weight paper over double weight (or “premium weight”), and there’s an important lesson in that fact!

Variable Contrast vs. Graded Papers

The greatest change I have encountered in traditional photography came between 1990 and 2000 with the widespread introduction of high-quality variable contrast papers, also known as multicontrast papers. (In fact, the failure of traditional color photography to adopt variable contrast papers was the prime motivation for my switch to color digital methods.) It amounted to nothing less than a revolution in photographic possibilities. Today, even after carefully watching digital processes improve over the years, I am still convinced that a good gelatin silver black-and-white print is unmatched by any inkjet or other digitally created image. That’s the reason I continue to work with traditional processes in black-and-white. (Besides, the traditional darkroom is also my sanctuary, where I can block out the world while I engage in my creative dreams.)

I used to print all of my images on graded paper, but by 1995, I had completely switched to variable contrast papers. Variable contrast papers exhibit whites that are every bit as white as any graded paper and blacks that are equally rich and brilliant. Thus, they are equal to graded papers in overall tonal quality. Beyond that, there are two advantages to variable contrast paper. The first is a reduction in your need to stockpile vast amounts of paper, since each sheet can be printed to any desired contrast level. Second, you can print an image with one level of contrast in one area and another level in another area, smoothly meshing the two (or more) contrast levels with careful burning and dodging (see below for more information on this topic).

The contrast level of a variable contrast paper depends on the color of light that hits the paper. The color—and therefore the contrast level—is changed by placing filters below the enlarging lens or above the negative inside the enlarger (which is the preferred method because it doesn’t interfere with the optical qualities of the lens). Most enlargers are made with filters built into the system, allowing a continuous increase or decrease in contrast from the highest level (maximum magenta or blue) to the lowest level (maximum yellow or green). Thus each portion of a print can be exposed to your desired contrast, offering a remarkable level of control and flexibility never achievable with graded papers.

The way it works is relatively simple to understand. All variable contrast papers contain two emulsions: high contrast and low contrast. Magenta (or blue) light activates the high contrast emulsion to the greatest extent and the low contrast emulsion to the least extent. Yellow (or green) filtration activates the low contrast emulsion to the greatest extent and the high contrast emulsion to the least extent. Thus, by varying the amount of magenta or yellow filtration, you can control the contrast level of the paper. There is never a reason to use yellow and magenta filtration together, for one serves to negate the other, but doing so does lengthen the exposure under the enlarger due to the neutral density effect of two filters being used simultaneously (more on this below).

Today, anything that can be done with graded paper can be done with variable contrast paper simply by setting its contrast level to the equivalent of the graded paper. Of course, many of the prints I make can still be done equally well on graded paper because the entire image is printed at one contrast level. Some images are simply easier to print—and often are superior in overall quality—on a variable contrast paper. But a few are possible only on variable contrast paper. Because I try to maximize my options in all areas of my photographic endeavors, variable contrast papers have become my logical choice and I strongly recommend them for all printers. The discussion that follows is based largely on variable contrast papers, but everything still applies to graded papers, except where the added flexibility of variable contrast papers come into play.

Fiber Base Papers vs. Resin Coated (RC) Papers

Fiber base silver gelatin papers offer the ultimate in quality and longevity. They are the gold standard by which any paper is measured, including digital papers of any sort. Resin coated (RC) papers were developed for those who need to get prints quickly, have them dry almost immediately, and lay flat on the table without mounting. They were perfect for newspaper use, for example, but now digital processes are even faster; the prime purpose of RC has been superseded in a span of about 20 years.

RC papers have improved significantly since they first hit the market. Initially, images appeared to be a bit fogged and the papers had a short lifespan, lasting no more than 10 years before the plastic base began to crumble, taking the images with it. But great strides have been made over the years in image quality and longevity. However, RC papers still lack the last step of brilliance and are still not as permanent as fiber base papers. They are unlikely to ever reach the quality level of fiber base papers.

Another problem with RC papers is that they develop fully within 60 to 90 seconds. Additional development has no effect on the image. As a result, exposure alone determines the image. This means that development is purely a mechanical process, and the print lacks the subtle variations of tonality that make a fine fiber base print shimmer.

I use fiber base papers exclusively. I see no reason to compromise on quality at any stage of the artistic process, especially the all-important final step: the finished print.

Black-and-White Paper Developers

There are a number of developers available, and each has different properties. It’s worth trying several, printing the same negatives with different developers and different papers to see which combination pleases you most. Don’t be surprised if you find that some combinations work better for some images, while others work better for different images. For years I have used Kodak Dektol developer with a variety of papers with pleasing results. Ilford’s Ilfobrom developer is similar to Dektol in quality, but slightly colder in tone and even a bit higher in contrast. It, too, is excellent. Other developers abound, and experimenting with them (using, perhaps, Dektol as a standard of comparison) will help you determine which is best for your general use. I’ll use Dektol as the standard throughout the ensuing discussion because of its high quality and widespread use. Some developers bring out a warmer tone in papers, whether they are initially warm tone, neutral tone, or cold tone papers. These are worth working with to achieve your desired look.

In addition to the prepackaged developers mentioned above, there are formulas for mixing your own developers, which are available from a variety of sources. I won’t delve into these here. If you’re interested, there are books available about the formulas. I believe that the prepackaged materials possess all the varieties of the formulas, and they are far easier to prepare.

Making Contact Proof Prints

My first step in printing is to make a contact proof of every negative so that I can see what I have on paper and get a good indication of how to print any negative of interest. Making contact proofs is far more important than most printers realize. For me, it’s critically important; it should be for you, as well. I have contact proofs of all my negatives; these serve as a catalog of my entire history of photography. (For digital practitioners, a contact proof is the equivalent of a RAW file: it’s the untouched original from the developed negative with no manipulation. Once you have a contact proof, it’s always there for reference. It never changes.) My contact proof prints are intentionally low in contrast so I can see detail everywhere, even if I later choose to allow some of the detail to disappear in the final print. At the contact print stage of the printing process I’m looking for information, not “punch.” I study each contact proof for the possibilities I envisioned at the scene, and even visualize new possibilities while studying the proof.

To make my contact proofs, I place two sheets of 8 × 10 enlarging paper on top of a thick foam pad under my enlarger and place four 4×5 negatives on each sheet of paper, with the negative’s emulsion in contact with the paper’s emulsion. I cover the entire setup with a ¼"-thick sheet of glass. This arrangement ensures perfect contact between the negative and paper emulsions. The entire arrangement is directly under the enlarger, which is set to a contrast level of 60 units of yellow filtration—roughly equivalent to a #½ or #1 filter (the filtration may vary depending on the paper used). The eight negatives normally vary in density; often there are considerable differences in density among them. So I expose the entire set to the amount of exposure needed to get a good proof of the thinnest of the eight negatives. Of course there may be several negatives within the set that have the same relatively low overall density.

After making that exposure, I place 4×5 sheets of cardboard on top of the glass over each of the thinnest negatives. Then I give additional exposure to the next densest negative(s) in the group, and then I cover that negative with cardboard. I continue giving additional exposure to successively denser negatives until I finally expose the densest one fully. Then I develop both sheets of paper to yield eight proof prints. If any of the proofs comes up too light or too dark to be of value, I simply proof it again in the next set of eight negatives with a more appropriate exposure (maybe even a third or fourth time). Eventually I discard all the useless ones and keep only the good ones, i.e., the ones giving me the best information of what each negative contains.

 Making contact proofs is far more important than most printers realize. For me, it’s critically important; it should be for you, as well. I have contact proofs of all my negatives; these serve as a catalog of my entire history of photography.

If I’m proofing 120 roll film, I cut the roll into several segments (five 2¼ × 1⅝ frames per segment, or four 2¼ × 2¼ frames per segment) and use the same procedure with cardboard cut to 2¼ × 1⅝ or 2¼ × 2¼ for density variation. If you use a different size 120mm film (such as 6 × 9 cm or 6 × 7 cm), cut the roll appropriately to proof the entire roll on the sheet of 8" × 10" paper.

I then develop the contact prints for the usual five minutes in Dektol diluted 1:5. This yields a low contrast proof with excellent detail for all but the most high contrast negatives. It doesn’t give me a “snappy” print, but it gives me the maximum amount of information about what is on the negative and shows me how it would look in a straight print. That’s all I want: information!

I process the proof sheets, fully dry them, and then flatten them in a dry mounting press. I number them all to correspond to my negative number system, which allows me to retrieve any contact print and negative later. Then I study the proofs individually before printing any of the negatives. This may appear to be a time-consuming approach for those who want to produce a number of great prints quickly, but it certainly saves time and paper in the darkroom later. By the time I decide which are the most important negatives to print, I also have a rather clear idea of how I wish to print them, including any burning or dodging or other techniques.

Often, I have an idle 25 minutes or even an hour of time, which is not enough for a productive printing session in the darkroom. But those minutes can be extremely valuable for further evaluating contact proofs, not only to determine which images are really worth printing, but also how each image can/should be cropped, the proper contrast level for the final print, and for determining a basic printing strategy. Furthermore, those images rejected as good prospects can be reviewed again days, months, or years later. I’ve gone through that process and, many years later, as I looked at those old contact proofs, I found real gems hidden among those I had long ago rejected. Apparently I’ve been ahead of myself at times, making exposures in the field that I only began to appreciate years later. Having the contact proofs allows me such review; having no contact proofs would have prevented later evaluation of my work. And, of course, I can immediately access any negative I’ve ever exposed for printing in the darkroom (figure 10-1).

Preliminary Work Toward a Final Print

The first thing I look for is a good image from the entire negative. If it disappoints me, I look at the possibility of cropping the photograph to obtain a good image. Though I try to compose the photograph to utilize every square millimeter of negative area, I will crop without hesitation if it can improve the possibilities of yielding a good image.

I use two small 5" × 5" cropping L’s for my purpose, searching the proof for distracting elements along the edges or undesirable areas that could lower the quality of the final print. Then I move the cropping L’s around to see if I can effectively eliminate the unwanted portions. If I find an effective crop, I mark it directly on the proof print with a typical ballpoint pen. If I find a second potential crop of equal value, I mark that one in ink as well. If I have second thoughts about anything I’ve marked, I can remove the ink by swabbing denatured alcohol directly on the proof print with a cotton swab. It removes the ink with no adverse affect to the emulsion.

A contact print of a negative has roughly the same contrast level as the negative projected onto enlarging paper from a diffusion enlarger (but not a condenser enlarger, which would have significantly higher contrast). Thus the low contrast proof I make is closely equivalent to a variable contrast paper printed at 60 units of yellow filtration when projected from the enlarger. If the proof looks good, it tells me that about 60 units of yellow filtration is the logical choice for enlarging the negative. If the proof looks a bit flat, I think about decreasing the amount of yellow filtration, thus increasing the contrast level, perhaps even to zero units of yellow (i.e., “white light”), or going beyond white light into the realm of magenta filtration, which further increases the contrast of the paper.

The “muddier” the contact proof looks, the more magenta filtration I feed into the enlarger, up to its maximum level (170 units of magenta on my LPL enlarger). On the other hand, if the contrast in the contact proof looks too harsh, I dial in progressively higher amounts of yellow filtration to lower the inherent contrast. I never use magenta and yellow filtration simultaneously because they cancel out one another and serve as neutral density filtration, lengthening exposure times.

In the past, I used to start out by printing 8×10 prints, even if the final print would be 11×14 or 16×20. I figured it’s far less expensive to experiment with printing an image on 8×10 paper than on larger sheets. I further decided that the 8×10 prints could always be used for publication prints, even if I had no intention of mounting them, so they were not merely learning devices. I don’t do that today. Instead, relying on a great deal of experience and a lot of pre-planning for each negative to be printed, I go directly to the size I wish to print for exhibition prints (most often 16×20, but sometimes 11×14, 8×10, or even smaller). For publication purposes, 8×10 prints were once required for reproduction, but most reproduction has gone digital, so I simply scan or re-photograph my finished darkroom prints to convert them into reproduction-quality digital TIFF files, which are sent to the printer.

Make Test Prints, Not Test Strips

I don’t make test strips because I find them confusing, counterproductive, and useless. A test strip is generally a small strip of the image, perhaps an inch or two wide by about eight or ten inches in length, taken from the center of the image, with a series of 3-second exposures along the length of the strip . . . so that there may be 10 exposures ranging from 3 seconds to 30 seconds. From that, you’re supposed to choose the best exposure, and proceed to print from that starting point.

But test strips show too small an area of the full image and cannot give enough information if the final image has a variety of tonalities and contrasts. Think of it: the best exposure is showing just one or two square inches of an 8×10 or larger image, or at best about 2% of the image.

Not only is it difficult to judge the best exposure from only two-percent of the image, but the test strip invariably contains two or three segments that are far too light to be usable, two or three that yield useful information, and three or four that are far too dark. This represents an unthinking approach to the start of your darkroom printing process. Instead of this mindless beginning for your printing, let me suggest a far more useful approach—one that turns test strips into a thinking process rather than a mindless one. So let’s get you started on a good track to making prints efficiently.

I recommend a full test print rather than a tiny test strip. If you’re about to make an 8×10 print, use the full 8×10 sheet as a test rather than just a skinny test strip. Here’s how to do it: first, based on your study of the contact proof, choose the contrast level you think the print will require. If the contact proof has good contrast, start with about 60 units of yellow filtration. If the proof seems a bit low in contrast, reduce the yellow filtration to 40 or 30 units, thereby increasing the contrast a bit. If the proof seems slightly muddy, remove all yellow filtration or consider going into a small amount of magenta filtration (after removing all of the yellow filtration, of course). If the proof seems quite muddy, go to 50 or 70 units of magenta. If it looks really muddy, go all the way to the top, maybe 170 units of magenta. Make your test print with that filtration dialed in, or with that filter dialed into your enlarger.

Next, study the amount of light falling on the easel or on the back of the sheet of paper you use for focusing (with the contrast filtration in), and guess at the correct length of exposure. In doing this, you are actually correlating the amount of light hitting the easel to the length of exposure. Correlating the level of light on the easel to the length of exposure will serve you well every time you get into the darkroom to print. It’s an essential step to efficient printing. If you have a dense negative, it may force you to have the aperture wide open to get a reasonable amount of light on the easel; if you have a thin negative, you may need to stop down several stops to get a reasonable amount of light. Try to get the amount of light you think will yield an exposure within the range of 15 to 20 seconds, if possible.

Figure 10-2a: Proof Print of Rocks and Receding Wave
The proof print made at 60 units of yellow light gives me usable detail everywhere (except the far upper-right corner, which remains blank white). It tells me that I need to raise contrast to get the glow on the rocks, indicating that when I increase contrast, the upper-right corner will need additional exposure to bring out detail there.

Figure 10-2b: Three-Part Test Print of Rocks and Receding Wave
To make a three-part test print, guess your expected exposure at the contrast level you have chosen in advance. Set the timer for ½ that guess. Then make three exposures across the print to get the major tonal areas into each of the sections. Note that all three sections contain rock, moving water, and pebbles. The “guess” was 15 seconds at the chosen aperture, so the three sections received 7½, 15, and 22½ seconds of exposure, respectively.

In the 15-second exposure the rocks are too dark. The foamy water in the left center looks good at 22½ seconds of exposure. This indicates that a basic exposure of 13 or 14 seconds may be appropriate for the rocks, but that the water has to be burned to 22½ seconds or more to gain detail on the foam. A review of figure 10-1 shows the final print compared to the basic proof print (figure 10-2a), with additional printing information coming from the three-part test print.

A better proof would have given the right side the 22½-second exposure and the left side the 7½-second exposure, yielding more information about the additional exposure needed on the upper right.

Stop down to a seemingly reasonable amount of light hitting the easel (i.e., not so bright that you know an exposure will be too short, and not so dark that you can’t see the image clearly on the easel). Start by guessing at the correct exposure, recognizing that on the first guess, you may be wildly off the mark. No problem. Just proceed as follows:

Set the timer to exactly half the time of your guess. Suppose you stop down several stops and guess that your exposure will be 15 seconds. Then set your timer for exactly half of that, i.e., 7½ seconds.
Now make a three-part test print by first covering about ⅔ of the print with heavy cardboard and expose ⅓ of it for 7½ seconds.
Move the cardboard to expose ⅔ of the enlarging paper and expose that for 7½ seconds.
Remove the cardboard entirely and expose the entire sheet another 7½ seconds.

With this process, the first third gets 3 × 7½ = 22½ seconds. The middle third gets 2 × 7½ = 15 seconds (or your initial guess), and the final third gets 7½ seconds. This way your “guess exposure” is in the middle. One side gets 50 percent less than your guess; the other side gets 50 percent more than your guess (figures 10-2a and 10-2b).

You can segment the three-part test print horizontally, vertically, or diagonally, or fan out from any point. The important thing is to get highlights and shadows into each of the three sections so you can truly evaluate how to choose a reasonable exposure for the full print.

If you’re way off in your guess, try it again until your guess is about right. So, expect at least two guesses the first time you try this. Once you’ve guessed about right, work on that print until it’s refined. But in the process of refining that print, notice the level of light on the easel. If you then get that same light level on the easel for your next negative—whether you have to open up or close down the aperture to get it—and give it the same amount of exposure time, you’ll get the same average tonalities. Thus, you’re now putting good observation of light levels to use. Again, if that subsequent negative is denser, you may need to open up the aperture a half stop or a full stop or more to get the same level of light; if it’s thinner, you may have to stop down a bit more. The important thing is to get about the same level of light. This way, you’ll begin to see the relationship between the amount of light hitting the easel and the length of exposure you need for the print you want. In other words, you’re thinking about what you’re doing, rather than just mindlessly making test strips over and over without ever judging the amount of light hitting the easel.

I suspect that if you do this several times, your guesses will become quite accurate. In time, you may be able to dispense with the test print entirely, as I have done, but that’s up to you, your accuracy of observation, and your level of confidence. Don’t worry about negatives of varying density.

To repeat: For a dense negative, keep the aperture more open to get the needed amount of light onto the easel; if it’s a thin negative, close down several more stops. At this point you’re observing and thinking; you’re not mindlessly making test strips.

Also, once you’re in the ballpark with a good basic exposure, you can check the contrast level again within the three sections before making your first full print. If contrast within the best section of the three seems a bit too low or too high, alter it for the first print you make. After all, why not make all the changes needed before wasting time and money on prints that won’t be very good?

I employed this method for a long period of time, eventually getting accurate enough, and often enough, that I now dispense with the test print entirely. Instead, I now make an educated guess at both the contrast level and the length of exposure . . . and proceed to make a first print. I’ll predict that if you use this approach often enough, you are likely to get to this stage, yourself. It’s not all that difficult. It requires observation and evaluation, both of which are within your grasp.

Based on the contrast level of the contact proof, I guess at the contrast grade of the enlarged print, recognizing that different sections of the image may require different contrast levels. I also guess at the length of exposure needed based on the amount of light projected from the enlarger down to the easel. Then I go directly to the display size I want for that photograph, complete with dodging and burning (sometimes with burning at different contrast levels in various locations), in an effort to make a first print that is perfect in every respect. Sometimes—amazingly—it is perfect! But rarely. Usually it misses the mark, sometimes by a little, sometimes by a lot. Then by studying it carefully, I make major or minor adjustments in subsequent exposures. My approach works for me, but it may not for you at first. After all, I am relying on a great deal of experience.

With practice, I believe you can do this, too. It’s simply a case of serious observation: observation of the amount of light hitting the easel and correlating that with the tonalities of a finished print. After years of printing, not only do I skip the test print entirely (simply because I can usually guess the exposure time fairly accurately), but I also go further with my initial print because I study the contact proof print extremely carefully. Careful study of the proof print gives me a very good idea of how much contrast the final print needs, but it tells me much more. If a specific area of a proof print is quite light, I may have to burn it to bring out needed detail. If I increase contrast overall for the final print, I’ll have to burn that area progressively more because it will be even brighter as contrast increases. So a careful study of the proof not only tells me if an area needs burning, but also how much I have to burn. In a similar manner, studying the proof print gives me a great deal of information about where I have to dodge the negative during the basic exposure, and roughly how much dodging is needed.

Combining all this information gives me the following:

The contact proof tells me the level of contrast I need for my print, so I can set my dichroic head filtration for the contrast I need.
The contact proof tells me where I have to burn and dodge, and as I increase or decrease contrast, it indicates how much I have to burn or dodge each area.
The level of light hitting the easel when the filtration is dialed in tells me the necessary length of exposure at the chosen aperture.

Now I have a pretty good idea of how to print the negative. My first print of any new negative is an educated guess at the proper contrast, the length of the exposure, and the burning and dodging needed. So I go for it! I make my first print as if I’ve printed it for years, including all the burning and dodging I think I’ll need right from the start. I fully develop that print, then evaluate it carefully after I get it into the fixing bath and inspect it under white lights.

There have been instances in which I hit it right on target on the very first try. Most of the time, I’m a bit off, but I’m generally close enough to make a few minor adjustments to get much closer to the print I want on my second try. Further refinements may extend the process to three or four or more tries before I get the print exactly the way I want it (and, of course, future printings may bring additional improvements to the image). Sometimes, I’m way off on my first set of guesses, but careful comparisons between the contact proof print, the first enlarged print, and my desires for a final print, give me a great deal of insight for a second print that’s usually close to the print I want to have. From that stage, it’s just a question of further refinements.

Concerning aperture, please ignore those who argue that all negatives should be enlarged at two or three stops below maximum aperture on your enlarging lens to yield maximum sharpness. Technically, those arguments are correct. Neither the wide open (full aperture) nor the fully stopped down (minimum aperture) lens is as sharp as the mid-range openings. While that’s technically true, in practical terms it’s meaningless. The sharpness difference at various apertures may be visible on a super-enlarged optical bench, but it isn’t visible to the naked eye at any enlargement that you or I will ever make. Don’t worry about any supposed lack of sharpness as you stop down, because you’ll never see the difference. Choose the aperture that makes sense for the print you’re making: you don’t want an exposure that lasts several minutes (because it’s tiring), and you don’t want one that’s just a few seconds long (because you don’t have the time to dodge consistently from one print to the next; or to put it differently, you lack needed control over the final result). Something in the middle makes logical sense.

The only aperture I generally avoid is maximum aperture, not because of sharpness considerations but simply because it projects significantly more light toward the center than the edges and corners. I stop down at least one full f/stop to achieve an even level of light across the easel. In time, you’ll recognize that if you want a lighter (high key) print, you’ll choose a shorter exposure or a more closed aperture; if you want a darker (low key) print, you’ll choose a longer exposure or a more open aperture (more on this issue below).

Doing test prints rather than test strips gives you a wealth of information and sharpens your view of the negative right from the start. You’ll begin to see the relationship between the negative and the print you want. It helps your understanding of the entire photographic process. You’ll get to your final print quicker this way, and your final print will be better! Start thinking from the beginning! Follow the advice that American painter Robert Henri gave to his students: “Intellect should be used as a tool.”

Dodging and Burning

Dodging and burning are essential techniques in making most prints. Dodging is the procedure of blocking light from the enlarger to selected areas of the print during part of the basic exposure. When light is withheld, the area is made lighter, so dodging lightens an area. Burning is the procedure of giving extra exposure to selected areas of the print, thus making those areas darker.

For dodging, I use small pieces of cardboard cut into geometric shapes (rectangles, circles, squares, ellipses), each taped to the end of a hanger wire. I hold the wire at one end beyond the projected negative image and block light from the enlarging paper with the appropriately shaped cardboard. If dodging is required in a larger area, say the lower third of the print, I use a large piece of cardboard with a straight or curved edge. If dodging is needed along an edge or at a corner, I may use my hands and fingers—sometimes running them back and forth along the edge and often following contours of shapes along the edge as if I were playing scales on the piano.

For burning, I use cardboard sheets with straight edges or with gentle convex or concave curves. To burn interior sections of a print, I cut rounded holes at key locations (near one corner, in the center, midway along an edge, etc.) so I can burn areas of the print along the edges, in the center, near corners, etc., as I please. Whether I’m burning or dodging, I keep the cardboard in constant motion to soften the edge of the manipulated area, allowing it to smoothly mesh with the unaltered adjacent area.

My dodging and burning cardboards are all black mat board with the reverse side white. This allows me to see the projected negative on the white (top) side, while the black (lower) side absorbs light reflected upward from the enlarging paper. For burning, I can alter the size and shape of the hole in the cardboard by holding a second, L-shaped piece of cardboard over it and opening up only part of the precut hole. In this way, I can burn oddly configured areas, even down to narrow slits when necessary. I accomplish this by holding one cardboard atop the other, using the upper one to cover the hole of the lower one (diagram 10.1). Then I turn on the enlarger, holding the two cardboards under the lens so that no light hits the paper. The negative image is visible on the cardboard’s white top side, allowing me to position the hole precisely over the area to be burned (still holding the second cardboard over the hole, so the enlarging paper is still not exposed). Then I slowly uncover part—or all—of the hole by sliding the upper cardboard across the opening, allowing light to go through the hole in the appropriate shape. Both cards must be kept in constant motion in order to smoothly mesh the tonalities of the burned area with its surroundings. As soon as I burn the area for the desired length of time, I close the hole again and turn off the enlarger light.

Diagram 10.1:
Two pieces of cardboard are needed for this precise burning tool: an L-shaped card (as shown in the diagram at top left), and a square card with a hole cut in its lower-right corner and with arrows drawn that point toward the hole (top right in diagram).

To start, place the L-shaped card atop the square one, cover the hole completely (see left center), and hold both cards under the enlarging lens so the enlarging paper is not exposed when the enlarger is turned on. Both cards should have a white surface on the upper side to allow the projected image from the enlarger to be easily visible; the underside of each should be black to minimize the light reflection onto the enlarging paper.

Turn on the enlarger light. The arrows on the lower card indicate the location of the hole when the L-shaped card covers it. With the negative image visible on the cards—and the hole still covered by the L-shaped card—move them as a unit to the location where the hole is at the point of desired burning. (The arrows on the lower card will easily show the proper location.) Then slide the L-shaped card away from the hole at the desired location—and in the optimum shape—for burning (right center and bottom in the diagram). As shown, you may need to rotate the L-shaped card for best results. The size and shape of the opening can be controlled during burning by moving the L-shaped card around the hole while moving the lower card over the enlarging paper.

The same two-card system can be used for flashing (see diagram 10.2).

I always make sure that the dodging or burning is not apparent, no matter how extensive it may be, by keeping the dodging or burning tools (hands or cardboards) moving during the exposure to produce smooth, undetectable gradations between manipulated and unmanipulated areas. Too often, a printer darkens a stormy sky for dramatic effect but burns the upper portion of the mountains, trees, or church steeple along with the sky. This obviously represents sloppy technique. Furthermore, too much darkening of the sky may look artificial and phony, not dramatic. The light depicted in a print should be logical. If it isn’t, it simply appears contrived. When manipulation is visible, people see poor technique rather than the intended visual statement.

One might ask how much burning or dodging is acceptable in a print. The answer is: as much as is necessary to direct the viewer’s attention (perhaps I should say, “as much as is necessary to force the viewer’s attention”). However, even if the dodged or burned areas mesh smoothly with the adjacent areas, the manipulation should not be so great that the altered areas appear artificially or unnaturally light or dark. The image must possess coherence, logic, and a realistic feeling of light. There is a logic to light that cannot be violated. That is the only constraint.

Technique—and dodging and burning are essential aspects of printing technique—should be transparent. In other words, when you look at the image you should see the image; you should not detect any manipulations used to create the image. So, if dodging or burning, or any other applied technique is readily apparent, you’ve lost the message. The viewer is distracted by obvious manipulation. That diminishes the message you want to convey, and in the worst cases, it destroys the message. So it’s always wise to not only stay within the bounds the logic of light, but also within the bounds of invisible technique. This is equally true for both traditional and digital approaches.

Manipulation must be done with cunning and subtlety, but not with timidity. I have printed negatives that require as much as 500–1000 percent additional burning of selected areas beyond the basic exposure. The goal is to bring out all the desired detail and mold the light in a way that strengthens the composition wherever possible. Burning or dodging can also be used to add snap to selected areas. There are, of course, any number of reasons for burning or dodging. Use them, but use them sensibly for your goals.

Integrating the Entire Process: Visualization, Exposure, Development, and Printing

When I stand behind the camera composing the scene, I consider camera position, lens focal length, filtration, negative exposure, and development. I also think ahead to the darkroom possibilities of burning and dodging, and I have a strong feeling of the size I’ll print the final image for display purposes. This allows me to fully integrate the entire photographic process and maximize my interpretive capabilities. This is also part of the process fully discussed in chapter 4, “Visualization,” which may be worth rereading at this point. In visualizing the final print, I try to see the steps needed to get there, and darkroom considerations are key among them.

As a simple example, suppose a landscape has low contrast separations within the land itself and the sky above is much brighter and also low contrast. Previous chapters on negative exposure and development may indicate that the obvious approach is to give ample exposure for the darker land within the frame, followed by reduced development of the exposed negative to bring the highlight densities (i.e., the bright sky) down to an easily printable range.

But by thinking ahead to the darkroom possibilities and fully integrating the process, I may decide to maintain overall contrast in the negative through normal development, or I might even increase contrast through extended negative development, and then burn the sky extensively during printing. In this way I bring the tones of the sky down to my desired level, but in the process I maintain or increase the contrast in the land while also maintaining or increasing contrast in the sky. This produces a print that is alive throughout rather than one that has tonal separations throughout (figures 10-3a and 10-3b).

Figures 10-3a and 10-3b: Approaching the Rocky Mountains
Figure 10-3a shows the straight proof print. Figure 10-3b shows the final print in which the sky and ground are printed separately, as if they were two separate negatives. The sky alone is exposed first for 35 seconds at a contrast level lower than the proof print (80 units of yellow), with additional burning in the upper portion to bring out cloud detail. Then the lower (ground) portion is exposed at 70 units of magenta for just 13 seconds, enough to give it strong tonalities. The jagged summits of the northern Montana Rockies can be seen just above the grasslands.

The print may be more difficult to make using this approach, but it will be a more exciting, snappier print. By thinking ahead to the simple technique of burning a portion of the negative during the printing stage (i.e., giving a portion of the negative—the sky in this case—additional exposure under the enlarger), I can choose a different exposure/development regime than I would have without fully integrating the process by thinking ahead.

The same is true of dodging a portion of a print. If I consider areas of a scene that can be exposed and developed with an eye toward dodging (perhaps a deep shadow area possessing interesting and compositionally desirable detail), I may approach my exposure and development differently.

So, my plan for exposure and development of any negative is not based solely on the light meter readings I take during the exposure—though that is surely the heart of the exposure and development plan—but also on the recognition of potential darkroom manipulations. So while I’m in the field, future darkroom possibilities send feedback loops into my thinking. I’m thinking not only about the scene in front of me, but the work I can do later to mold the image to my vision. Thus, the scene serves as the start of my plan, but I want to interpret that scene, not simply record it. I have to integrate the entire process to do so.

I should note that such thinking of future processes must be an essential part of any successful digital approach, as well. Future digital manipulations must be considered when the exposure is made. It’s also the reason I avoid the common phrase of a “digital capture,” because I don’t think any camera “captures” anything. Instead it simply records the light levels in the scene.

If you employ this type of thinking, it will extend your use of the zone system into higher negative densities that you may have previously avoided, or into areas that you felt didn’t exist! Such thinking greatly expands your interpretive and artistic possibilities, and frees you from constraints that you might put on yourself.

I see no magic to a straight print (i.e., one with no darkroom manipulation, such as dodging or burning) unless the tonal values of the scene miraculously fall into the perfect array of tonalities everywhere. Such perfect alignment rarely occurs, so darkroom manipulation is almost always necessary. Ansel Adams knew this, for nearly all of his prints were burned or dodged, some quite heavily. I know this to be true because I had spoken to him about the printing of several of his images, and he explained the extensive manipulations required for most of his images. Most of my prints are manipulated as well, some quite extensively. I recommend that all photographers recognize this and use the tools available in the darkroom for their creative and artistic needs.

Burning can be done to darken highlight areas, midtone areas, or dark areas. Dodging can be done in any tonal area as well. The only consideration is this: what is needed to make the print look as good as it can look? When you decide what is needed, apply the technique. It’s an available, legitimate, creative technique, so use it. Remember, too, that the eye views the scene at many apertures as it scans from bright to dark areas, while the camera sees all areas at the single pre-chosen aperture. So burning or dodging may prove to be the only way to bring the image back to the way you saw it. Where is the manipulation—in your initial viewing of the scene or in your printing? It could be either one, or both! Who cares? The scene isn’t yours, but the print is always yours! So do what is needed. Every good photographer should recognize this.

How many photographers—beginners and advanced—have encountered the following situation in the darkroom? You print a landscape negative that includes a big, puffy, white cumulus cloud. The cloud, towering above the land, ends up blank white in the print. So you make another print, giving lots more exposure to the sky and cloud (i.e., burning it in). Suddenly the cloud has rich tones within it. This tells you that the portions of the negative that printed blank white in the first print (i.e., with densities of Zone 9 or above) contained excellent, usable detail! In other words, without realizing it, you have already exposed and developed negatives that contained densities above Zone 9, and you have printed them successfully!

So you have already used much of the information that I’ve covered in this book. Now you fully understand it, so it won’t remain an obstacle to your thinking in the future. The higher zones are valuable, usable, and easily accessible. Don’t shy away from them, especially since you’ve already used them. This should break down your fear of the “extended zone system.”

Burning or dodging can bring out the compositional unity sought when the exposure was made. For example, I have a photograph of several enormous mushrooms draped over rocks at the base of a dead tree (figures 10-4a and 10-4b). The granite rocks were lighter than the mushrooms. Without darkroom manipulation, the rocks would compete with the mushrooms for attention and become distracting elements in the final print. To achieve my desired print, I dodged the center of the mushrooms during the basic exposure to lighten them considerably while still retaining detail and texture. Then I burned everything around the mushrooms—even the bottoms of the mushrooms—except the tree trunk, which was already dark. I used a cardboard with a hole near the edge and rotated the hole around the outer edge of the mushrooms. I gave the rocks particular emphasis by laying one or two cardboards atop the hole to shape it like the rocks and then burning each rock successively. Ultimately the rocks were lowered in tone to deep, rich grays (Zone 2–5), while the assorted twigs, leaves, pine needles, and dirt had similar deep values.

Now the mushrooms appear to glow with light, and the viewer’s attention is drawn to them without distraction from the surrounding objects. The burning around the mushrooms amounts to nearly 300 percent additional exposure beyond the basic exposure. But the centers of the mushrooms were dodged during the basic exposure, so the surrounding areas actually received about 500 percent more exposure than the centers of the mushrooms. The darkroom manipulations are not apparent in the final print (though they are dramatic when compared with the straight print). It is not an overstatement to say that the compositional unity of this print was largely created in the darkroom.

Figures 10-4a and 10-4b: Mushrooms, Yosemite Valley
In figure 10-4a, the mushrooms dominate the image because of their placement and size, but the granite rocks—especially the one below the mushrooms—distract attention. Neither the light beige mushrooms nor the gray granite rocks would have responded to filtration. Darkroom printing was the only option to enhance the image. For figure 10-4b, I raised the contrast level to 50 units of magenta, printing the image substantially darker overall while dodging the tops of the two large fungi throughout the basic exposure. Then I burned the rocks, with special attention to the bright rock at the bottom. The mushrooms glow, yet the background retains detail.

The options you have in the darkroom include dodging and burning, contrast level of paper, two-solution contrast control, and your choice of paper. Each option deserves careful thought. The goal is to achieve a print that enhances the effect you desire. Some prints should sparkle; they should glow. They should be alive with light and luminosity. Others should be subdued and quiet, yet still glow with soft light. The contrast level must be chosen with the mood of the final print in mind. Some prints require high contrast; some demand low contrast. Some should be dominated by large, light areas; some by dark areas; and some by mid-tones. When a print appears flat, a higher contrast filter may solve the problem; but a little burning and dodging with the same contrast level may be a better solution.

Excess contrast often comes across as harsh. It may appear striking at first, but it fails the test of time. Too often, it simply flies in the face of the desired mood. Prints lacking appropriate contrast are simply dull. The question of how much contrast a print should have, how dark it should be, how light it should be, are all subjective questions, and the answers vary from photographer to photographer. Stick to your vision, and do it your way in the darkroom.

Burning with Variable Contrast Papers

Everything in the previous section applies to both graded and variable contrast papers, but variable contrast papers offer a spectacular option not available with graded papers: the ability to burn at a different contrast level from the basic exposure. To understand the importance of this, keep in mind just what high contrast and low contrast mean. High contrast implies that when shadows achieve dark gray or black tonalities, the highlights are light gray or white. Low contrast implies that when shadows achieve dark gray or black tones, highlights are deeper grays, perhaps even mid-gray tonalities. Or, viewed another way, low contrast may mean that by the time you give enough exposure to a negative to achieve subtle highlight detail, the shadow areas are still midtones rather than dark grays or black.

Now, suppose you made an exposure inside an old, abandoned house, and the negative included a window to the landscape outside. That exterior may be an extremely dense portion of the negative compared to the densities in the rest of the negative. If you print for desirable tonalities and contrast for the interior, the window area will likely be blank white in your print. With graded paper, if you burn the window enough to get outside landscape detail, the edge of the wall adjacent to the window will likely have a dark “halo” where your burning touched the wall. This is obvious and therefore sloppy technique.

But with variable contrast paper, you can lower the contrast level for the burning. By the time the landscape becomes visible, the edge of the wall may not be noticeably darker. This may prove to be an image that can be printed only through the use of variable contrast paper. Low contrast burning may allow you to attain subtle detail—or high drama—in the sky without darkening foreground items such as trees, a mountain slope, or a church steeple.

High contrast burning may be the solution to the opposite problem. Suppose you have a landscape with good contrast, but the sky is light, hazy, and lacking good tonal separations in the thin clouds. Not only can you burn the sky at higher contrast, but you may also want to initially dodge the low contrast sky partially or fully, then burn it back in completely at the higher contrast level. This is the way to mesh two or more portions of a negative at completely different contrast levels, melding them seamlessly by carefully burning and dodging where they merge.

Of course, low contrast or high contrast burning can be applied just as appropriately to midtone or dark areas. I have emphasized its use in highlight areas just for the sake of example, but the technique can be equally effective when cleverly applied to any tonal area of a print.

Using this technique, I have been able to make prints with variable contrast papers that are simply impossible to print to my satisfaction with graded papers. It’s allowed me to go even further, making images from more than one negative by finding textural similarities and merging them even when contrast levels between the negatives differ. Thus, variable contrast papers open up creative possibilities beyond those of graded papers.

Advanced Darkroom Techniques

There are three additional darkroom techniques that are generally considered advanced, which simply means most people are not familiar with them. They are flashing, reducing (often referred to as “bleaching”), and masking. Flashing is a method of exposing the enlarging paper to a bit of blank light prior to exposing the negative. This procedure extends the range of visible tonalities on the enlarging paper into the highest densities. Reducing is a method of chemically removing silver from the developed print, thus lightening areas of the print. However, its effect is quite different from that of dodging. Masking, which may require special registration equipment, has two different forms: one increases local contrast while reducing overall contrast, while the other allows printing of bright highlight areas while protecting adjacent dark areas from any additional exposure.

Flashing

In order to understand flashing, try to understand what happens to the enlarging paper when it is exposed to light from the enlarger. Light comes through all portions of a negative—even the densest portions—when the enlarger light is turned on. Yet, as we know, parts of the print may be pure white when fully developed. The reason is that the enlarging paper, just like the negative, has a threshold level that must be reached before any tonality will appear. Until that threshold level of light hits the paper in any area, no density will appear in that area.

 Flashing, reducing, and masking are three additional darkroom techniques that are generally considered advanced, but this simply means most people are not familiar with them.

Let’s say the threshold is 10 units of light, the first tonality beyond pure white. It may take 100 units of light to make medium gray and 1,000 units or more to reach pure black. But suppose a dense highlight area of the negative allows just 4 units of light through during the basic exposure, and you want to show some detail in that highlight area.

You could burn that area a minimum of 150 percent to give it the necessary 6 additional units of light to barely achieve tonality; but the burning process will inevitably spill over into the area adjacent to the highlight, and you could get an obvious dark halo around it. For example, if the adjacent area received 100 units of light during the basic exposure, 150 percent additional burning could give it another 150 units of light, turning it into a dark gray strip around the highlight. If you burn just the center of the highlight so as to avoid the halo effect, you may miss the edge of the highlight area, producing density in the center of the highlight but not along the edges. This would be an equally unacceptable solution.

But suppose you expose the enlarging paper to 7 units of blank light through the enlarger after making your basic exposure, plus the required burning and dodging. Now the 4 units of light from the exposure through the negative plus 7 units of blank light gives you 11 total units, revealing subtle tonality in the highlight. Of course, the flash exposure adds 7 units to all parts of the print, so the adjacent area that received 100 units will now receive 107, which is hardly any change at all. The darkest portions, formerly receiving 500 or more units, will go to 507 units, an imperceptible difference.

You can refine the technique by flashing only the area that needs the boost rather than the entire image. First, focus the negative and find the area that requires flashing. Next, mark it off beside your easel using two cardboard arrowheads as markers of a Cartesian coordinate system (diagram 10.2). Then remove the negative and flash just the designated area, using the two-cardboard system described in the section on burning and shown in the diagram. In this way, only the area you want flashed (along with a little spillover to adjacent areas) will receive the additional blank exposure, and there will be no loss of contrast or muting of tonalities elsewhere.

How do you determine what is 7 units of light? Use the following method. With no negative in the carrier, close the lens aperture down to a minimum setting (f/22, f/32, or f/45—the smaller the better). Then make a test strip of blank light on the same grade paper as the print you are making, giving it one-second increments up to, say, 15 seconds. Then fully develop the strip. To be consistent with the discussion above, let’s say that the full 15 seconds of exposure shows a gray stripe, 14 seconds a lighter gray stripe, 13 seconds still lighter, and so on down to 10 seconds, which shows the last perceptible tonality. Now you know that 10 seconds is the threshold level of 10 units of light, so 7 seconds of flash exposure gives 7 units of light.

Of course, it’s a guess that the basic exposure gives us 4 units of light in the highlight. It could be 2 units or 9 units and still appear blank white in the final print. Thus, 7 units of flash exposure is also a guess, and several attempts may be necessary to determine the optimum amount of flash exposure. It may turn out that the best print involves a small amount of additional burning of the area plus a flash exposure afterwards. These three variables—basic exposure, burning, and flash exposure—must be juggled about to obtain the best result, but for a magnificent print, the result justifies the effort.

When I printed my negatives of English cathedrals on graded papers, I employed this technique frequently to get a full-scale print of the interior architecture while maintaining detail on the stained glass. The windows, of course, are the light source for the interiors, and it’s not easy to get detail on a light source. In order to achieve what I wanted, I generally used a grade of paper with sufficiently high contrast to yield a full range of tones for the interior architecture, apart from the windows. Then I flashed (and often burned as well) to bring out detail in the windows. Without flashing, the windows printed as blank holes devoid of detail, and burning, alone, put an obvious halo around them.

Without flashing, the only approach I could have taken to print the cathedral negatives on graded paper would have been to print on a low contrast paper—making the interior dark, somber, and muted—while the window served as the sole source of brilliance. That would have been a legitimate interpretation, but it’s not how I saw or felt the cathedrals. Thus flashing provided a tool for me to interpret the cathedrals as I felt them.

In general, don’t exceed threshold in your flashing exposure. If threshold is equaled or exceeded, the highlight area will appear gray and dull rather than improved with detail. The whitest white within the highlight area should still remain white. In the cathedral prints, I wanted the clear glass portions of the windows to be pure white, but I wanted the colored glass—and especially the lead mullions separating the panes—to be plainly visible. If I had grayed the clear glass in flashing, the window would no longer appear to be the light source, and the light quality would have been lost.

Diagram 10.2: Selective Burning or Flashing
An L-shaped card is held atop the hole in the lower card and is used to open or close the opening, or change its shape. This two-card system can be used for both burning and flashing.

For flashing, when the negative image is focused on the easel, place cards adjacent to the easel to mark coordinates of area(s) to be flashed. After the negative exposure is completed, remove the negative and hold two cardboards with an appropriately shaped hole above the enlarging paper. Expose the paper for a predetermined length of time. This method allows flashing only in the portion of the print that requires it rather than the entire print. Some prints may require flashing of more than one area, each for a different length of time. To do this, use several sets of coordinate markers.

Flashing with Variable Contrast Papers

Variable contrast papers make flashing a rarely needed tool. Going back to printing my English cathedral studies, the task becomes far simpler with variable contrast papers rather than graded papers. The bright windows are the major problem. It is difficult to obtain detail on them while maintaining good contrast and brilliance in the rest of the interior. Using variable contrast paper I print for the interior, essentially ignoring the windows initially. I use a moderate to significant amount of magenta filtration to get the contrast level I want. Then I dial the magenta down to zero and dial up the yellow filtration to burn the windows. Burning the windows entails a bit of excess darkening of the adjacent stonework, but by burning at low contrast it is not darkened to the point that a halo appears.

If I did the burning at the same contrast level as the basic exposure, I would have the same problem that I had with graded paper. But the variable contrast allows me to burn at lower contrast levels, giving me a print almost identical to that of the graded paper print with a bit more tonal separation in the windows. This is due to burning at low contrast rather than flashing at no contrast. A further advantage of this procedure is that I don’t have to remove the negative from the enlarger to complete the print. Thus, the print is marginally improved and significantly easier to print.

While flashing is rarely used with variable contrast papers, it can still be a lifesaver. One example is a photograph I made in 1996 in Utah. On an unusually humid and hazy morning, the sun was coming up behind the imposing Fisher Towers northeast of Moab. From my camera position, the sun’s rays radiated out through the atmosphere, magnificently separating the near cliff and central tower from the distant cliffs and towers. But the entire sky was so much brighter than the backlit rocks that when I tried to print the image, the blank white sky killed it. Flashing saved it (figures 10-5a and 10-5b)!

I used a burning card with a broad concave edge and flashed the upper part of the image, slowly moving the card up and down the sky and even partway down into the central tower and background cliffs. Little of the flash exposure hit the middle or lower portions of the imposing tower in the center of the image because of the shape of the card, but progressively more affected the areas around and above that tower. At the corners, I exceeded threshold substantially, putting a pleasant gray tone into the sky and making it appear that the light was truly emanating from behind the central tower.

The portion of the tower that was exposed to the small amount of flashing showed no appreciable effect. But I could not have done it with burning, even at the lowest possible contrast level, because even the lowest possible contrast (i.e., the highest level of yellow filtration) still has some amount of contrast, whereas flashing has zero contrast. Printing at the highest level of yellow filtration produces an image; flashing at white light yields only levels of gray tonality.

This is an unusual, but very pertinent, example. In general, the ability to burn highlights at low contrast levels (without the need to remove the negative, as flashing requires) can more easily accomplish the same effect as flashing on graded paper. In fact, burning at a low contrast level is often superior because even the lowest contrast level (i.e., a #0 or #00 filter below the lens or in the enlarger, or maximum yellow or green filtration in the enlarger) still yields some tonal separations, whereas the flash exposure with no negative has no separations. It simply boosts the separations made through the negative closer to threshold, or above threshold.

Flashing, either with graded or variable contrast papers, extends your reach into even higher negative densities. This should further free you from any fear of higher zones (those well above Zone 9), and also relax you about getting exposures above the toe of the curve and onto the straight-line portion of the curve. I regularly expose highlights at Zone 9, 10, 11, or higher, then develop the negative as needed (with full consideration of all printing options) for optimum results. Remember that you can expose negatives into the fully usable mid-teen zones, but you don’t want to develop them to such high densities. However, for portions of the negative developed to Zone 9, 10, or 11, you can use burning, low contrast burning, or flashing to bring them into visibility. In the next section on masking, you’ll learn yet another technique to allow use of the higher zones.

Figures 10-5a and 10-5b: Sunburst, Fisher Towers
In figure 10-5a, the background towers are brilliant, and the sunbeams streaming around the central tower are spectacular. However, the distant cliff wall to the left of the central tower is missing, while the blank white sky kills the image. Burning the sky at any contrast level creates problems due to the cliff, which gets too dark during burning. So, following the basic exposure, I remove the negative from the enlarger, close the aperture down to f/45, and add a two-stop neutral density filter from my enlarger. Using a convex-shaped card, I flash the sky downward from the upper corners, going well beyond threshold exposure and tapering to nothing halfway down each side, with far less flashing exposure in the center. In figure 10-5b, the gray sky tonalities are due to flashing, which is also enough to bring out the cliff wall while affecting the left edge of the cliff very little.

Masking

Masking involves the creation of a second negative (the “mask”) from the original negative. When re-registered with the original negative, the sandwich of the two can accomplish some extraordinary tasks. Good masking may involve the use of exposure registration equipment, which is easy to use and very much worth the cost.

There are two types of masks: the first, and more widely known, is contrast reduction masking or “unsharp masking.” This mask decreases overall contrast while increasing local contrast and apparent sharpness. The second type is highlight masking, which blocks out all shadow and mid-tone areas of the negative, allowing you to print highlights without darkening the other tonalities. Let’s discuss them one at a time.

Figure 10-6: Pisa, 2000
I found it exciting to create a composition of the Leaning Tower of Pisa that is different from the millions made annually. However, the area under each arch and window would have been unpleasantly dark without the use of a mask in printing. By adding small amounts of density to each of those areas, I was able, in essence, to dodge them all simultaneously.

#1 – Contrast Reduction Masking (Unsharp Masking)

The contrast reduction mask is useful when the overall contrast of your negative is simply too much to handle, indicating that you developed it at too high a contrast level. Here, the mask is used to correct a mistake. Another use of a contrast reduction mask is when an image has multiple areas that need to be dodged simultaneously. Since we’re not built like octopuses and have only two arms, multiple dodging is impossible. In this case, a mask makes the print far superior (figure 10-6).

This mask is made on low contrast negative material. Any fine grain negative material developed to low contrast (Kodak T-Max 100, Ilford Pan F, Fuji Acros Neopan, etc.) can serve the purpose. To make the mask, place the material below the original negative in a contact printing frame or under a sheet of heavy glass atop a foam rubber base, just as you’d make a contact proof. It’s best to separate the two with several sheets of clear negative material (I recommend T-Max 100 because its base is so clear when fixed). This assures that the mask will have soft, unsharp edges when exposed under the enlarger. (See diagram 10.3 for the setup.)

Expose and develop the mask so that the highlight areas of the original negative (the densest areas) yield little or no density in the mask. The densest areas of the mask (exposed through the thin portions of the negative) should have low density compared to the densest areas of the original negative. The mask is a low contrast, unsharp positive of the negative (making it look like a fuzzy, out-of-focus, low contrast contact proof).

When you re-register the two, you add little or no density to the highlight densities of the negative but significant density to the shadow areas. In printing the sandwich of the negative and the mask (without the intermediate spacers used in making the mask), you normally increase the contrast you would have used for the negative alone.

Because the mask is unsharp, it tends to be smooth-toned in areas that have fine, small-scale local contrasts in the negative (hair on someone’s head or beard, leaves on forest trees, etc.). It doesn’t lower the local contrast but simply adds density to those areas, necessitating longer exposures. But it significantly lowers overall contrast by broadly adding density to shadow areas without adding much (if any) to highlight areas. So this explains a third use of a contrast reduction mask: reducing overall contrast while increasing local contrast, a commonly encountered problem.

If you increase the contrast level at which you print the negative (using a higher paper grade or higher contrast filtration), you can slightly increase local contrast while reducing overall contrast, or greatly increase local contrast while maintaining overall contrast.

In some cases, the alteration of local vs. overall contrast can be exceedingly valuable. In other cases, it can be destructive to the mood you wish to create. Be careful with it and use it wisely. It is a terrific tool when used selectively and intelligently.

It’s ironic that a technique called “unsharp masking” actually increases the apparent sharpness of an image. When a negative has a sharp contrast edge, it changes abruptly from one density to another. The mask’s lower densities are opposite those of the negative, and they change softly from one density to another because the mask is intentionally unsharp (diagrams 10.4a and 10.4b).

Diagram 10.3: Set-up for making contrast reducing mask
If you are printing a negative at the highest contrast level available, contrast reduction masking is unlikely to be a benefit. Since it reduces contrast, generally necessitating higher contrast levels, it has nowhere to go. Of course you can make a mask and try it. You have nothing to lose but time and effort because the original negative is unaltered. It may turn out that all you needed was increased local contrast. It works best for negatives printed at low or moderate contrast levels without the mask.

When the original negative is sandwiched with the mask, the two density curves are added together (diagram 10.5). The original negative is the dominant curve because the mask is intentionally lower in contrast and density. Notice the odd thing happening adjacent to the abrupt density edge. Just before the density of the original negative makes the quantum drop at the edge, the mask begins to increase the overall density. At the edge it suddenly drops, then slowly increases density again before leveling off. Thus, the sandwich creates imperceptibly thin light and dark lines around every contrast break, yielding an appearance of increased sharpness. Every object is outlined because of the mask.

(Note: This procedure does not improve sharpness in an out-of-focus negative. It yields an appearance of increased sharpness in a negative that is already sharp.)

It’s worth noting that this is the essence of the “sharpening tool” used (and often overused) in digital printing. Digitally, if you can see a black line along the edges of any sharp tonal break (i.e., a dark building against a bright sky or a sunlit aspen against a dark background, etc.), you’ve overused the sharpening tool. This would be like making thick light and dark lines around all tonal breaks via unsharp masking. The remedy: simply pull back on the use of the sharpening tool until it’s invisible to the naked eye. Too many digital photographers fail to notice and correct this rather obvious quirk.

#2 – Highlight Masking

Arista-II Ortho Litho film is the best choice for a highlight mask. Place this high contrast film directly (emulsion-to-emulsion) in contact with your original negative in a contact printing frame or under heavy glass. After exposing through the negative, develop it in high contrast Arista Powder A/B Developer or Arista Premium Liquidlith A/B Developer. (Note: The entire procedure can be done under safelights because Ortho film is blue light sensitive only, so neither yellow nor red safelights affect it.) These products—and many other traditional photographic materials—are available through Freestyle Photo in Los Angeles.

If your exposure is too low, only the thinnest shadow areas of the original negative will achieve density in the mask, and those areas will develop to extremely high densities. Giving more exposure on a second try will yield a mask with high densities in the shadow and midtone areas of the original negative. The highlight areas of the negative will remain clear in the mask. Be sure to follow the directions for proper development; if you quit development too soon, it won’t work.

The density developed in the mask greatly exceeds all densities of the original negative (in essence, the mask is opaque). So when the two are perfectly re-registered in your negative carrier, all midtone and shadow areas of the original negative are blacked out. You can now burn the highlight areas without fear of darkening the midtone or dark areas adjacent to them.

Let’s go back to the example of the old, abandoned house with a window to the outside landscape (see the section on “Burning with Variable Contrast Papers”). When printing the negative, you can first make an exposure with no mask to get the tones you want in the interior. Then black out the interior with the mask in perfect registration, and print only the exterior through the window. With this procedure you can really get those high negative densities to work for you.

Diagram 10.4a: Negative density at contrast edge

Diagram 10.4b: Mask density at contrast edge

Diagram 10.5: Addition of original negative and mask

You may also want to print the exterior at lower contrast to give it a more atmospheric, distant feel. A word of caution: be careful, because this can be overdone. You can burn the sunlit exterior too much, rendering it too dark and thereby losing the look and feel of it being much brighter than the interior. In fact, if you go hog wild, you can burn the exterior so much that its tonalities nearly match the interior. It would be absurd to do that, as you would lose any sense of realism. So, while you have immense flexibility and many options, it’s best to remain subtle and sensible with an eye toward tonal logic.

In chapter 11, on the digital zone system, you’ll see how you can do this with two photographic exposures—one for the interior, a second for the exterior—layered together in Photoshop. It’s a simple process, but here, too, the results can be utterly illogical unless some semblance of subtlety and common sense are invoked.

Beware of another serious potential problem: the highlight mask must be perfectly registered emulsion-to-emulsion with the negative when printing. Therefore, you must use a glass negative carrier to ensure perfect contact between the negative and mask. (This is also strongly advised for unsharp masking.) Unless you’re reversing the image by placing the original negative in the enlarger upside down (i.e., with its emulsion up), the highlight mask must be placed below the negative. Be sure to place a clear negative of equal thickness below the negative for the basic exposure, the one giving you the interior tonalities. If you fail to do this, you’ll alter the plane of the negative for the second exposure, and you’ll get a slight ghost image at the edge.

It should be apparent that masking—either contrast reduction masking or highlight masking, or both—are extraordinary tools. But like other good tools, they can be overused and abused. It was Mark Twain who said, “If the only tool you have is a hammer, it’s amazing how many things look like nails.” If you find yourself resorting to masking too frequently, it may indicate another underlying problem. It may be that your negatives are chronically overdeveloped, forcing you to print at low contrast levels in an effort to retain detail in extra-dense highlights. Cutting back on your negative development may solve the problem more easily and more effectively. (Of course, if the problem is underexposure, give more exposure to all your negatives in the field. That’s the only real solution to that problem.)

I strongly recommend obtaining a pin registration system. Pin registration equipment for mask making includes a punch to put holes along the edge of the negative, a glass with embedded pins corresponding to the negative holes for alignment, spacers, and a negative carrier with registration pins custom made to your enlarger. At the time of publication of this book, these items can be purchased from the following two sources: Lynn Radeka at www.radekaphotography.com and Alistair Inglis at www.alistairinglis.com. Their systems allow your negative carrier to be removed and reinstalled in exactly the same place for perfect alignment with any number of masks. After each exposure, the carrier can be removed (under safelights, of course, because the paper is still in the enlarger!), the current mask removed, another mask inserted, and the carrier reinserted into the enlarger for another exposure. The cost for the equipment is moderate, but the benefits are enormous, and it’s only a one-time cost.

Inspection, Evaluation, and the Myth of “Dry-Down”

All of the techniques of controlling the print during exposure and into development have now been discussed: dodging, burning, flashing, masking, variable contrast printing, and two-solution development. The final advanced technique of print control, reducing (also known as bleaching), takes place after the print has been fully developed and placed into the fixing bath. Before discussing reducing, let’s first work our way through chemical processing and on to the all-important inspection and evaluation of the image.

After I develop the print, I quickly transfer it to a stop bath for several seconds to terminate development. (I use glacial acetic acid for this purpose.) Next, I place it in the fixer (I use Kodak’s general-purpose fixer with hardener) for approximately 15 seconds with continuous agitation. I then turn on an initial inspection light to view the image while still in the tray.

The intensity of this initial inspection light is far more important than most people realize. My own experience—and my experience with hundreds of students in years of workshops—is that lack of thought about the inspection light can undo all of the good printing techniques performed to this point. In fact, you need two separate inspection lights: an initial inspection light and a final inspection light. Let’s discuss the initial inspection light first.

Most printers feel that any normal room light serves as a good darkroom inspection light. Wrong! Others feel that a good, bright light best shows the print for proper evaluation. Disastrously wrong! The best initial inspection light is a rather dim light—a low wattage bulb placed rather far away from the print. The reason is simple. You have been in a room lit by safelights from the time you removed the enlarging paper from the box, placed it in the easel, exposed the negative with your basic exposure plus extra burning or flashing steps, then developed the print (hopefully for at least four or five minutes), stopped it, and placed it in the fixer. Since you’ve been in that dim light for approximately 10 minutes, your iris is wide open to gather in the light. Then you put on a bright light. It’s like walking out of a matinee into the noonday sun! If the print is actually too dark, it will look good to you. And if it’s printed just right, it will look too light. A dim light will give you a far better feel of what the print really looks like.

 Many feel that any normal room light serves as a good darkroom inspection light. Wrong! Others feel that a good, bright light best shows the print for proper evaluation. Disastrously wrong!

What wattage bulb should be used for the inspection light? It depends how far it’s located from your fixing tray. The only criterion is this: if your finished prints consistently look too dark under normal lighting, or if they consistently lack the shadow detail under normal lighting that you saw under the inspection light, then your inspection light is too bright. Replace the bulb with a lower wattage bulb or move the light farther away. In other words, balance the way you see the print in the fixer with the way it looks when dried, mounted, and viewed under good lighting.

In fact, when I do my initial inspection, I look at the shadow detail, virtually ignoring the midtones or highlights. I try to lock the detail I see in my mind for later comparison with the finished, dried print under good room lighting. Adjust your initial inspection light to give you the same dark detail you see in the final print under good lighting.

After your eyes adjust to the dim initial inspection light, you can turn on a brighter light for a complete, thorough inspection of the print. I first remove the print from the fixer tray and place it on a nearly vertical sheet of white acrylic plastic, and then turn on the bright lights. This may seem to contradict the need for a dim light initially, but it does not. The reason for the dim light is to let you see the print initially as you would see it under normal lighting when your eyes are fully adjusted. If the initial light is too bright, you will see shadow detail that is not visible in the finished print (unless you view the print in midday sunlight). The psychological importance of the initial inspection is critical, for once you see shadow detail in the print under a light that’s too bright, it’s hard to strike that impression from your mind. You will always end up fighting that first impression. When you see the finished print, you will attribute the loss of detail in the shadows to “dry-down.” It’s not dry-down, the alleged darkening of an image as it dries; it’s an inspection light that’s too bright!

Once the print is on the white acrylic plastic under the bright lights (i.e., good gallery-quality lighting, not intense lights), I carefully inspect the entire image, especially the highlight detail. I squeegee off the layer of liquid fix from the emulsion. That thin layer of liquid hides the subtle details in the highlights. Again, dry-down is often cited for the appearance of highlight detail in the finished print that was not visible during inspection; it’s not dry-down, but failure to view the print without the layer of liquid fix obscuring highlight detail.

I urge you to try this for yourself by removing a print from the fix after carefully inspecting it in the tray. You’ll notice that more detail immediately shows in the subtle highlights as the print is removed. Then put it on a vertical surface, such as white acrylic plastic. When you squeegee off the remaining liquid, still more detail appears. No more will appear after the print dries. Now hose it down with water or re-immerse it in the tray of fix, and watch those subtle highlights immediately disappear! I call this effect “wet-up”!

Although no more detail appears in the finished print than you see using good inspection techniques, the subtle highlight detail is more pronounced in the dried, finished print. I believe that the reason for this is the slight shrinkage of the print as it dries. A wet 16×20 print may be more than a quarter inch longer than a dried print. The developed silver grains bunch together more closely as the print dries and shrinks, so the subtle detail appears more prominently. This intensity increase in the highlights during drying is the only dry-down effect I have ever observed (I call it “shrink down”); I have not observed any new detail appearing. (Note: Adox MCC110 paper expands when wet, but strangely does not shrink back down when dry.)

Dry-down is an overused excuse for improper inspection. In fact, if there is a change to be seen, it is the other way. When a print is wet, its blacks appear richer, and they lose some of the intensity when the print dries. This is simply due to the way light scatters off the paper from a wet or dry print. (Matte papers exhibit a dramatic loss of brilliance in the blacks when they dry because the surface disperses light far more than glossy or semi-glossy surfaces.) I call this effect “dry-up”!

Most papers can be inspected effectively shortly after the initial dim light is turned on, your eyes adjust, and a second inspection light is turned on. However, most variable contrast papers have a noticeable yellow-ocher cast to the paper base at first. This yellow cast makes it hard to judge the degree of brilliance of whites in the final print, especially if whites and light tones dominate the image. The yellowish cast gradually disappears in the fix, then completely disappears when the print is placed in a holding tray of water after fixing is completed; but the “whitening” of the base can take ten minutes or more. This is frustrating and time-consuming, indeed, but the ultimate brilliance of the paper justifies your wait.

One final note concerning the inspection light: don’t use a light with a rheostat dimmer switch for inspection purposes. The rheostat contains two hidden problems. First, unless you have the dimmer permanently set to a fixed brightness level, you will never have the same brightness level for every print you inspect, and this inconsistency will throw your ability to judge your prints out the window. Second, as a rheostat is adjusted downward from its brightest setting, it yellows noticeably, and this, too, will make your judgment of prints more difficult. Stick with a fixed wattage bulb and determine the proper distance of the bulb from your print for good, consistent results.

Potassium Ferricyanide Reducing (Bleaching)

After the print has been fully developed, stopped, and placed in the fix for a sufficient length of time to allow inspection, reducing (commonly known as bleaching) can begin. A liquid solution of potassium ferricyanide can be applied to portions of the image in order to reduce density by removing developed silver from the emulsion. This should be done under normal or bright lighting. My procedure is as follows: I remove the print from the fix, place it on a vertical sheet of stiff white acrylic plastic, and rinse it thoroughly to wash the fix from the print’s surface. Rinsing the print is important because the fixing bath acts as a catalyst to the bleach. If potassium ferricyanide is applied directly onto the fix, it may act too fast to control.

Potassium ferricyanide is a crystalline substance that can be purchased in one pound bottles. (A bottle of this size should be enough to last for many years.) A tiny amount of the orange crystals—perhaps a quarter of a teaspoon—is dissolved in water for subsequent application as a bleaching agent. I pour the crystals into a small glass container, add about two ounces of water, and stir until all the crystals are fully dissolved. The amounts of crystals and water are not terribly important—except that the more dilute the solution is, the slower it will work, and the more concentrated, the faster. I vary the concentration to suit my working procedures. I simply dissolve the crystals until the solution assumes a yellow color—not too deep a yellow. If the bleaching solution is too strong, it works too fast for me to control. That’s critical to remember, for my experience tells me that most people who have difficulty bleaching tend to mix too strong a solution.

 If the bleaching solution is too strong, it works too fast for me to control. That’s critical to remember, for my experience tells me that most people who have difficulty bleaching tend to mix too strong a solution.

I cannot overemphasize the problems caused by mixing too strong a solution, and the pervasive tendency to mix too strong a solution. Many people think that ½ teaspoon mixed into a few ounces of water is proper, but that dilution is far too strong with most papers. It surely is too strong with the Foma or Adox papers I use. Try starting with ⅛ teaspoon or less, recognizing that even this dilution may be too strong.

When the print is on the vertical sheet of acrylic plastic and fully rinsed, I dip a paintbrush into the ferricyanide solution and proceed to “paint” areas of the print that I want to lighten in tone. I do this while the sheet of water from the hose rinse is running down the surface of the print to help even out the bleaching and prevent streaks. I direct a constant stream of running water onto the print just below the area I’m reducing to keep the bleach from running down and affecting other areas. When the bleach hits the stream of running water, it’s immediately diluted to such a high degree that it can’t bleach areas that are farther down the print. I work on one small area at a time in order to avoid streaks.

Of course, I can orient the print on the vertical plastic in any direction (upside down, sideways, etc., throughout a full 360° circle of orientation) to avoid even the smallest amount of unintended bleaching. I “paint” for only a few seconds at a time before aiming the hose at the bleached area to rinse it thoroughly. Then I resubmerge the print in the fix.

As stated above, the fixer acts as a catalyst for the potassium ferricyanide, speeding up the bleaching action while at the same time neutralizing the bleach. By thoroughly rinsing those areas of the print where bleach has been applied before resubmerging the print in the fix, I can mute the catalyzing action. Using this procedure, only the bleach embedded in the emulsion will be catalyzed by the fix. If I fail to rinse the bleached area prior to resubmersion, the catalyzing action may be so strong that it bleaches away all existing tonalities.

After 15 or 20 seconds in the fix, all further bleaching action is completed—unless the bleach is so concentrated that a yellow stain is still visible, in which case bleaching will continue. I then remove the print from the fix, place it on the plastic sheet, and inspect it for results. If additional bleaching is desired, I repeat the process as many times as necessary to reach the desired tones. There is a limit, however, to the amount of bleach that can be applied—and the degree of lightening the print will accept—from numerous repetitions. If overdone, the print will stain yellow and the stain cannot be removed. The limits of bleaching vary from paper to paper.

Always remember to follow these important steps:

Prior to applying bleach, rinse the print.
Apply the bleach.
Quickly rinse the bleached area again.
Resubmerge the print in the fix.
Then inspect it to see how far the bleaching has gone.

If you watch the bleaching take place until densities are reduced to the desired level, then rinse and resubmerge the print in the fix, it will almost certainly go too far! Again, don’t mix too strong a solution, for it can become uncontrollable if it isn’t adequately diluted.

Some papers contain an additive that resists potassium ferricyanide reducer. (The additive also makes these papers resist selenium toning; see below.) If you use a paper that fails to respond to the bleach as outlined above, try using a more concentrated bleach solution, and do not rinse off the fix prior to applying the potassium ferricyanide. This usually overcomes the resistance. However, it’s quite difficult to accomplish subtle amounts of bleaching with such papers. It’s like trying to push a door that’s stuck—nothing happens as you push harder until it finally gives way and you go flying through! Ilford Multigrade IV notably resists bleach and toner. Surprisingly, Ilford’s Multigrade Warmtone responds well to both bleach and toner, though the same manufacturer produces both papers.

Reducing can be used under many circumstances. If an area of a print is too dark, the bleaching procedure can lighten it and even bring out unseen details in black areas. If an area of a print is too small or intricately shaped for successful dodging during exposure, the ferricyanide treatment can do the job after the print is developed. Note that brushes of any size can be used, from tiny ones for bleaching minute areas to large ones for lightening broad areas at once. When tiny, intricate areas require bleaching, it is best to squeegee the water from the print’s surface, paint the bleach on the precise area that needs reducing, then rinse and proceed as usual.

Reducing can also be used to lighten small areas throughout a print, enhancing highlights or opening up shadow detail. This is especially useful in cases when going to a higher contrast paper would make the overall print too harsh, or when a lower contrast paper would make the overall print too flat.

 Reducing (bleaching) does not produce the same effect as dodging!

Potassium ferricyanide reducing increases contrast; dodging does not. Reducing removes silver equally from all areas bleached, whereas dodging lightens all areas proportionately. Let’s look at what this means. Suppose an area of a print contains a range of tones from light gray (say, 30 units of exposure under the enlarger) to medium gray (say, 200 units). If the area is dodged for one third of the exposure time, the light gray area would drop to 20 units, and the dark gray would drop to 133 units. Both tones would be lighter, but the relative contrast between them would remain about the same. However, if the same area is reduced with 20 units of light (or silver) taken away, the light portion would drop to 10 units, which is the threshold of print tonality, and the dark area would drop to 180 units, or only a slight change. Contrast between the two tones would be greatly increased by ferricyanide bleaching.

Contrast increase can be a double-edged sword—beneficial in some cases and detrimental in others. Many times I have tried to salvage an image that was printed too dark, only to find that as the overall tonalities started looking good, the highlights bleached out completely and disappeared! On the other hand, if I have a print that needs a local contrast increase, I can print it slightly too dark in that area, then bleach it back, gaining additional contrast via the procedure. To bleach areas that are rather light in tone, I dilute the bleach far more than usual to slow its action and give me greater control.

Potassium ferricyanide reducing is deceptively difficult. I have ruined many prints—particularly through excess bleaching in the highlights. It’s a fabulous tool when necessary, but I advise you to use it only when absolutely necessary. I use it only if I must.

Recently, I found out that if too much bleach is applied, there may be a way to correct the situation. Instead of rinsing the print and placing it back in the fixer, place it back in the developer where some of the reduced density may return to the image. Then move it to the stop bath and fixer. Not all of the density from the bleached image will return, but some of it may—and it may be enough to salvage the print.

I have several examples of extensive use of potassium ferricyanide reducing. One photograph from my English cathedral series is of the west doors at Bath Abbey, two magnificently carved wood doors set in a sandstone wall of nearly the same color. Working hastily at the scene, I metered the doors but not the stonework; it appeared to me that the doors were slightly lighter than the adjacent stone, and I figured I could increase contrast through expanded negative development, thereby lightening them even more in relation to the stonework. But my seeing was wrong: the stone was actually slightly lighter than the wood doors, and the extended development pushed them further apart tonally, in the wrong direction! I wanted the viewer’s eye to gravitate toward the doors, not the stonework. Frantic dodging of the doors did little more than make them slightly lighter than the masonry. So I turned to reducing.

I started by printing the entire image intentionally dark, dodging the doors throughout the exposure. Then by bleaching the doors, area-by-area (slowly, over a long period of time), I gradually brightened them and simultaneously increased their contrast.

The final print transforms the intricately carved (but tonally dull) doors into an apparent masterpiece of metallic craftsmanship. I never would have envisioned the final result prior to making the print, for I was merely seeking to make the doors the center of attention through the use of light (figures 10-7a and 10-7b).

Figures 10-7a and 10-7b are a prime example of using darkroom techniques for personal interpretation. In this case, the personal interpretation went beyond my initial goal, but I never would have started down the path to the final print if I did not have the desire to make the doors the center of attention.

The same rule that applies to burning or dodging applies to reducing a print: no matter how extensive the procedure is, it must not be apparent. Even in the example of the abbey doors, they appear to be shiny metallic doors, not the result of a contrived photographic technique.

A second extreme example—a true tour de force of bleaching—is shown in figures 10-8a, 10-8b, and 10-8c. This photograph pushes all printing methods to the limit. I printed the upper quarter of the image at 35 units of magenta filtration (just a bit above average contrast) while fully blocking out any exposure on the bottom three quarters. I dialed magenta filtration to the maximum of 170 units on my LPL dichroic enlarger and exposed only the bottom three quarters of the image. Then I progressively burned further down toward the bottom of the print, all the while dodging the boulder in the center, particularly its darker underside. I intentionally made the lower three quarters too dark at this stage, with the knowledge that I would later bleach large portions of that area.

Figures 10-7a and 10-7b: West Doors, Bath Abbey
The intricately carved wooden doors attracted my attention, and to my eye they appeared lighter than the surrounding stonework. Instead, they were darker. I was fooled by the attractive door carvings (figure 10-7a). To direct the viewer to the doors, I printed for the stonework while dodging the doors throughout the exposure, then burned the sidewalk in front of the doors extensively using a concave-shaped card. At this stage, the doors were slightly lighter than the stonework. I then carefully bleached the carved doors, preventing any area from bleaching back to pure white. The bleaching gives the doors a bronzed metallic glow, thus exceeding my goal (figure 10-7b).

It turns out that the negative has two separate areas of contrast: the upper quarter, which has fairly good contrast, and the lower three quarters, which has very low contrast. So I had to deal with those two parts separately, almost as if they were two distinct images. Of course, I had to mesh the two parts smoothly and seamlessly. With great care I bleached the wave form, the central rock, and the striped rock that forms the floor, dramatically increasing contrast of those areas.

But notice that when bleaching the striped floor, I didn’t bleach the portion below the central boulder (figure 10-8c). Because I did not use any bleach in that area, there appears to be a shadow below the boulder, making it look like the rock is teetering at the edge of a precipice. The straight print (figure 10-8a) and the fully burned and dodged print (figure 10-8b) show no such precipice. Hence, for this image, bleaching adds another dynamic to an image that is already filled with dynamism.

Figures 10-8a and 10-8b: Boulder and Metamorphosis Wave
This photograph was made under leaden skies in the late afternoon, revealing everything in the scene, including the deep rock hollows at the top. The upper portion has good contrast, but the lower portion is quite low in contrast (figure 10-8a).

The straight print fails to move the viewer’s eye toward the rock that looks like a breaking wave behind the central boulder. To achieve that, I initially exposed only the top third of the negative through 30 units of magenta filtration, with no exposure on the lower two thirds. Then I dialed 170 units of magenta into the enlarger and exposed the lower two thirds of the image, with additional burning on the lower half, further burning in the lower third, and still more in the lower left quarter (figure 10-8b). At that point, the print was too dark and lacked overall contrast.

Usually, potassium ferricyanide reducing is far less extensive and far subtler. Many of my prints have no bleaching whatsoever. Some have small touches here and there for tonal adjustments. Only a few have the extensive bleaching of these examples. Furthermore, I try to do as much as possible with appropriate contrast filtration, burning, and dodging before I turn to bleaching. But as these examples show, it’s an extraordinarily powerful tool.

The bleaching procedure has no harmful effect on the permanence of the print. When you use potassium ferri-cyanide, always fix the print fully after reducing is completed, just as if the print had first been transferred from the stop bath to the fix. If this step is not completed, the bleached areas will not be fully fixed. For proper fixing of the image, I use two trays of fix. Both are Kodak standard fixer with hardener, packaged as a powder to be dissolved. I mix the second fix before each darkroom session and pour it into the first fix bottle at the close of each darkroom session (after dumping out the first fix). Thus, the first fix is always previously used as a second fix, and the second fix is new. The reason for two fixes is that the first actually does all the fixing (i.e., removing undeveloped silver from the emulsion) and the second removes harmful silver salts that build up in the fix and cannot be washed out later.

For several months in the mid-1990s I switched to a rapid fix, but I began observing problems caused by its use. Moderate or extensive bleaching caused yellow stains. Extended bleaching over long periods of time—even small amounts of bleaching in numerous areas scattered about the print—caused the entire print to become lighter as a result of extended immersion in the rapid fix. As soon as I returned to the standard fix, the problems disappeared. Thus, I recommend standard fixers for printing, not rapid fixers.

Final Fixing of the Image

All of my reducing and reimmersion is done using the first tray of fix. After about five minutes in the first fix if there is no bleaching, or five minutes after all potassium ferricyanide reducing is complete, I transfer the print to the second fix for another few minutes. I then rinse the prints thoroughly with a hose (just like I do prior to bleaching) and place them in a holding tray of water for the remainder of the darkroom session.

Figure 10-8c: Boulder and Metamorphosis Wave
The final step was to bleach the wave, the striped canyon floor, and the central boulder. This increased contrast throughout the bleached areas, drawing the viewer’s attention to the “wave.” However, there is no bleaching on the striped floor directly below the central boulder, thus creating an apparent shadow that was not part of the scene. The boulder appears to teeter at the edge of a precipice, adding a further level of dynamism to an already dramatic scene.

Periodically during the day, I remove a print from the holding tray and place it on my acrylic sheet for additional inspection. I may notice problems on the second or third inspection that I missed at first, and I can return to that negative and reprint it during the same session.

The first fix stabilizes the image by removing all undeveloped silver while preventing the remaining silver from staining or slowly disappearing. As it removes the undeveloped silver from each print, silver salts build up in the fixer tray. Eventually, when enough prints are developed in one printing session, the salts can build up to a saturation point, and then embed themselves into the emulsion and paper base of subsequent prints. These salts cannot be washed out in water, and they will eventually degrade the image. The second fix removes the salts. Thus, if you make only a few prints, there’s no need for a second fixing tray. You’ll have to make many, many prints to saturate the first fix. Light, high key prints exhaust the fixer quicker because more silver is removed.

At the end of my printing session, I pour the remaining potassium ferricyanide solution into the first tray of fix to neutralize it. I also rinse both the glass container and the brush with the fix to neutralize them. I then use a small silver recovery system to remove silver from the fix before disposing of it. As for disposing of photographic chemicals, it is surprising to learn that when developer, stop bath, and fix are all mixed together, they neutralize with a small amount of ammonia left over. Since ammonia is a perfect fertilizer, the best place to dump it is on your lawn! Believe it or not, it will improve your lawn noticeably. The second fixing solution then becomes my first fixer in my next darkroom session, and I mix a new solution for my second fixer.

Figure 10-9: The Empty Road
This image breaks all the rules. The sky and ground are divided in half. The edge of the road splits the lower portion in half. I wanted to create a stark, ominous image of this little-traveled road leading toward a powerful incoming storm. The sky was brighter than the ground, but burning the sky (easily done at the horizon line) was a simple fix to bring the two portions into tonal equality, imparting a foreboding feel to the composition.

Local vs. Overall Contrast Control

One of the greatest difficulties encountered in printing is the common yet perplexing situation in which overall contrast is high but local contrast is low. For example, suppose you have a landscape with a great disparity between the darkness of the land and the brightness of the sky. Yet when you look only at the land, there is relatively low contrast; and when you look at the sky, there is low contrast between the sky and the clouds.

The problem is apparent. If you lower the contrast to accommodate the vast difference between the sky and the ground, you end up with a photograph that is easier to print but lacks punch. Both the sky and the ground are lifeless. On the other hand, if you raise the contrast to make both the ground and the sky more attractive, then the disparity between them is enormous, making it almost impossible to print.

What do you do in a situation like this? My recommendation is that virtually 100 percent of the time you’re better off if you base your printing on the local contrasts. If you work with the local contrasts in order to make each of them visually interesting, you have the option of dodging the darker areas and/or burning the brighter areas to bring the two closer to one another, and therefore bring the entire print into better overall balance.

If the situation is as simple as the example in figure 10-9 (i.e., if the horizon is a horizontal, straight line) then it’s easy to burn the sky after exposing the ground for the correct amount of time. Of course, with variable contrast papers you can even adjust the degree of contrast for the burn in the sky. In fact, you can expose the ground to one level of contrast while dodging the sky entirely, then burn the sky at a completely different level of contrast—adjusting the exposure given to each so as to meld the two parts into one smooth, believable, finished exposure.

But what if the dark and light portions of the print are not as easily delineated as in an image with a dark foreground, a straight horizon line, and a bright sky? It may turn out that some complicated dodging and burning, perhaps using the burning tools detailed above, can solve the problem. However, if the array of darks and lights is so complicated that it’s effectively like a checkerboard, then masking may be the best approach (figure 10-6). This, in fact, is one of the chief reasons for masking in the first place: an array of light and dark areas that becomes too complicated to effectively burn and dodge with only two hands.

Figure 10-10: Road to Monument Valley
This is an enormous landscape, but the photograph has never been printed larger than 5×7. The reason is that the dark areas of uninteresting sagebrush on either side of the road would simply be too dominant and oppressive in a bigger print. Yet those areas look wonderful in a small print. As an aside, the road, which may appear to be dodged to make it glow, is actually burned extensively. Sunlight on the asphalt turned it astonishingly bright.

Another method would be to print any or all of the local areas a bit too dark, then work carefully to lighten those areas by reducing (bleaching)—thereby increasing the local contrast as bleaching does so well.

However you approach a photograph that has the disparity of high overall contrast but low local contrast, I strongly recommend doing whatever is needed to increase the local contrast as the prime consideration.

Scale

For display purposes, I usually have a good idea about the size of the final print as I stand behind the camera to make my exposure, since I feel it’s a necessary part of visualizing the final image. Sometimes, though, I alter that initial previsualization. Size is an important consideration to me because the scale of a print materially imparts an emotional response to the image. For this reason I print each of my exhibition quality photographs in one size only. The same negative printed in 8×10 and 16×20 has a decidedly different character in each size. In general, I print only the size that I feel best compliments the mood I want to convey, and I don’t display an image in any other size. On occasion I find an image that looks good in more than one size, but that is a rare print, indeed! Beyond that, I make even larger prints from selected 16×20 images, going to 20×24, 24×30, and even 30×40.

There are several determining factors in regard to size. Technical considerations are, of course, preeminent. If the print appears sharp as an 8×10 but not as an 11×14 (and if sharpness is important, as it usually is in my images), then 8×10 will be the maximum size. On the other hand, if everything is technically perfect, tonal considerations are next in importance. Sometimes an area of soft tonal modulations holds up well at 8×10 but becomes too diffuse or boring at 16×20. Other times, a dominant area of deep tones or light tones can become visually oppressive if enlarged too much.

 I usually have a good idea about the size of the final print as I stand behind the camera to make my exposure, since I feel it’s a necessary part of visualizing the final image. Sometimes, though, I alter that initial previsualization. The scale of a print materially imparts an emotional response to the image.

Sheer size is another factor. The scale of the various compositional elements has great emotional impact. A sweeping compositional line may be impressive in 16×20 but merely pleasant in 8×10 or smaller. Large prints tend to have greater impact, so if I’m looking for impact I gravitate toward the larger sizes. If I want a quieter image, I tend toward the smaller sizes. Of course there are exceptions to this general rule, but most often it holds true for me.

Subject matter used to be very important to me in determining print size (a vast landscape had to be big; a tiny flower had to be small), but it plays little role anymore. The size of the image I print is based on the characteristics of the photograph alone, not on the subject (figure 10-10).

Finally, there is a subjective feel that nudges me larger or smaller as I see fit. I would be hard-pressed to say anything more than, “It just feels right in that size!” A musical analogy explains it best for me: some pieces of classical music are written for a string quartet and some for a symphony orchestra, and they should not be reversed. I wouldn’t want to hear Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony played by a string quartet. It wouldn’t work! The scale of orchestration is similar to the scale of a photograph; it should be appropriate for the image.

I have heard many photographers talk about making some prints small in an effort to force people to look at them closely and carefully. This is fallacious reasoning. I have observed people looking at photographs for over forty years, and they always look at a photograph closely no matter how large it is! Perhaps they are looking to see if it’s sharp, or grainy, or something else of great moment that I have yet to discern, but it never fails. Thus, a photograph of any size will draw the viewer close, but a small print eliminates the distant view. I feel an image should be printed to the size that best enhances the intended message: small if a small size enhances its message, large if a large size enhances it.

Whatever size I choose, I can generally employ the same burning and dodging procedures, as well as similar flashing or reducing techniques as on the 8" × 10". Sometimes the printing technique changes a bit. Sometimes it changes drastically, because the size demands a different look to maintain the tonal integrity of the image. As the emotional impact of the print changes with scale, printing may have to change to compensate for it. Some of the changes can create very surprising results.

Selenium Toning Prints

After I complete all my printing for a darkroom session and accumulate the prints in a holding tray of water, I tone them. Toning is a post-development procedure that takes place in full room lighting, and has several effects on the print. First, it alters the color of the print either greatly or subtly depending on the paper, the toner and its concentration, and the length of time the print is immersed in the toner. Second, it gives the print greater overall contrast and increased density in the blacks. Third, it gives the print greater permanence by making it less susceptible to damage from aerial contaminants, particularly acids.

I tone all my prints in Kodak’s Rapid Selenium Toner. I don’t use Kodak’s recommended dilution, however, for I feel it’s too strong, producing a red-brown color that I find terribly distracting. On the toner’s label it states that the print should be thoroughly washed otherwise yellow stains may appear. I have found that warning to be correct. To avoid any yellow stains, I first place each print in Kodak’s Hypo-Clearing Agent. This assures that no significant amount of fix remains on the print that can cause staining. I place one print at a time in the solution—about a minute apart—and gently rock the tray periodically. After five prints are in the tray, I remove the bottom one each time I add a new one and place it in a holding tray of water. When all the prints have been through the Hypo-Clearing wash and are in the holding tray, I proceed with toning.

I dilute four ounces of Kodak Rapid Selenium Toner in a gallon of water with Fomabrom V111 paper (my primary paper today) and I put seven ounces into a gallon of water for Adox MCC 110. Then I place the first print from the holding tray into the solution and rock the tray gently for a minute, then place the next print on top of it. After another minute of agitation, another print is placed on top. After five are in the tray, I pull the bottom one out and compare its color and density with the one just placed in the solution. The toned print is altered in color—its gray-green tone is changed to gray-blue or gray-purple. Also, contrast is increased as the selenium combines chemically with the silver of the emulsion, intensifying the deep grays and blacks.

Because toning occurs slowly, it is unwise to watch a single print tone until it reaches the right color. It’s like watching the hour hand of a clock: it moves, but you can’t see it happening! The best thing to do is to compare a toned print with an untoned one. If my comparison shows that the print’s color has not changed sufficiently, I leave the print in the solution and add another print at approximately the same one-minute interval. When the print finally reaches the desired color, I remove it, place it on my vertical plastic sheet, and hose it thoroughly with water. It then goes into another tray of fresh water. With that, I have established an assembly line timing system in which I add and remove a print every minute or so. If there are many prints to be toned, I gradually lengthen the toning time as the toner slowly exhausts itself. Of course, If I’m using several different papers during my printing session, each may respond to the toner at different rates, so I alter my procedure to account for that.

I used to mix the Rapid Selenium Toner into the Hypo-Clearing Agent, but I could use the solution only once because Hypo-Clearing Agent oxidizes rapidly, rendering it useless a day or two later. Selenium is a metal and does not deteriorate in solution. By separating the two processes, you can simply dump the Hypo-Clearing Agent after each use (which represents no real environmental damage, to my knowledge). Today, with the exceptional artesian well water I have at my home, I no longer see a need for Hypo-Clearing Agent. Since few people have such pure water, it may be wise to use Hypo-Clearing Agent (or it’s equivalent) to be sure all the fix has been washed out of the image. Use it separately from selenium and dump it after each use. I now use the Rapid Selenium Toner several times. After toning is completed, I pour the solution back into a gallon bottle and cap it tightly. After several uses, the toner is quite exhausted and the clear liquid turns a bronze color, making it difficult to judge the degree to which prints are toned. After five or six uses, it must be discarded.

Because of characteristic toning differences among papers, I always begin my toning with the prints that I want to tone the longest and end with those that require shorter toning times, when the toner is a bit exhausted. I use my dilution rather than Kodak’s recommendation to give only a subtle color change. I generally feel that black-and-white prints have more impact with subliminal color variations than with overt color variations.

I have also seen some remarkable prints that benefited from overt color shifts through toning to help create a strong mood. For the most part, though, I want only the subtlest deviations from neutral tones in my final prints. I don’t like heavily colored browns, reds, or other obvious colorations. This preference is purely subjective, and you should allow your own tastes to dictate your toning desires.

Coloration of the print through toning is subjective, and my likes may be widely divergent from your likes. It’s best to try a variety of toning approaches and settle on those that help convey your message most strongly.

Selenium in the toning solution combines with the silver of the emulsion to form a silver-selenium chemical bond that is more resistant to acid decay than the silver alone. Thus, selenium toning—followed by a proper washing of the print—greatly enhances the lifetime of an image. In fact, if handled properly, the print should last hundreds of years; even under strong lighting, it should not fade.

Other Toners

There are a number of other toners besides selenium. Sepia toner is the most common, giving the black-and-white print a drastic color change to warm brown-and-white. Sepia toners are two-solution processes: the first is bleach and the second is a redeveloper. When the print is immersed in the first solution, the image bleaches until it totally disappears. After a short rinse, the print is transferred to the redeveloper where the image reappears in brown tones just seconds later. The intensity of sepia toning can be moderated by the degree of the initial bleaching. If you immerse the print for only a short time in the bleach, redevelopment yields a subdued sepia effect. Experiment to suit your own taste.

Sepia toning adds almost the same degree of permanence to the print as selenium. However, it has an awful smell, much like rotten eggs. There are alternative toners that produce similar visual effects without the smell, the most notable being thio-urea or thio-carbamite.

Brown toner, as the name implies, puts a deep brown tone on prints. Using the manufacturers’ recommendations, you can obtain rich brown tones; by diluting the solution far more than recommended, you can get softer, more silverbrown tones. It’s worth investigating the range of tones that this toner can impart into some of your prints.

Gold toners are made by several manufacturers. Each brand imparts a very different color and unique depth to the toned print, so it’s impossible to give any overall results. Some photographers use gold toner in combination with another toner (generally selenium), first toning a bit in one, then the other to get just the effect they want.

Chemical Coloration

Selenium toning followed by potassium ferricyanide bleaching turns light gray tones to soft rose-beige, while dark tones remain virtually unchanged in color. This effect may be rather pronounced with some papers but nearly imperceptible with others. The duotone coloration can be done with great subtlety and is quite beautiful with certain subjects. The procedure destabilizes the emulsion, so the print must again be fixed, rinsed, and then lightly selenium-toned once more prior to final washing to impart permanence to the image. As a sidelight, note that a color change almost always occurs if a toned print is then bleached, so don’t attempt to reduce a toned print with potassium ferricyanide unless you want the color change. Such “discoloration” can become a rich source of creativity and personal expression.

Painting portions of a print with more concentrated selenium and following that with potassium ferricyanide bleach can produce a remarkable range of warm tones that are permanent when the print is fully washed. I have delved into the use of selenium toner and potassium ferricyanide to produce a range of deep browns, purplish browns, rose tones, yellows, and other variations. Using just these two chemicals, creative possibilities are virtually endless.

Creating colors in black-and-white papers through toning can go beyond the use of selenium, sepia, brown, or gold toners. Copper, blue, and other toners can be used—or grotesquely abused—for a variety of effects. Using a combination of toners, such as sepia or thio-urea together with iron-blue toner, will impart blue overtones in the shadow areas but warm browns and beiges in the highlight areas.

Chemical coloration of black-and-white prints offers creative opportunities that should not be ignored. The book Elements of Landscape Photography by Eddie Ephraums details numerous toning combinations. Photographer’s Formulary in Condon, Montana has a remarkable catalog of photographic chemicals, including a wide range of toners.

On some of my photographs I partially bleach selected areas, then apply concentrated selenium toner to those areas prior to completion of the bleaching. I control the degree of chemical coloration depending on how much bleaching I do before and after applying the toner. If I do most of the bleaching prior to applying the toner, the color change is almost subliminal. But if I apply the toner early, the change can be quite profound. The bottom line is this: if you hear someone say, “Never bleach after toning,” you may want to try it just to see what happens. Any “forbidden” procedure may open up rich creative possibilities.

Full Archival Processing of Prints

After toning, I rinse off the prints with a hose, and then place all of them into a holding tray of water. Once they are in the holding tray, I let them stay there for a minimum of five minutes with water gently running into the tray. I make three more fresh water tray changes to complete the washing, allowing the prints to soak in each tray at least 10 minutes before transferring them—one at a time—to the next. Finally, I squeegee the prints and dry them emulsion side down on large fiberglass window screens. This air-drying technique gives the prints a semigloss surface, which to me offers the optimum in surface qualities between a glassy ferrotype surface and a dull matte surface.

I don’t use a print washer, nor do I feel it necessary to do so. The purpose of washing is to progressively dilute the harmful contaminants embedded in the emulsion or fiber base (residual acids, salts, etc.) to the point that they are rendered harmless to the longevity of the image. Several fresh water tray immersions accomplish the job nicely. I tested my results with Kodak’s Hypo-Eliminator Kit, and the tests showed a perfect wash. All good print washers do the same thing, but they cost more and often use more water to accomplish the same task.

However, if you are pressed for time, a good print washer is a time-saver. The only drawback to my method is the time spent moving prints one-by-one from tray to tray. (Note: Only two trays are needed. When all the prints are transferred from one tray to the next, I empty the first tray, rinse it thoroughly, and refill it to receive prints from the other tray after the appropriate length of time.)

Concerning archival permanence, I’m somewhat skeptical about the information presented to photographers for two reasons. First, tests that simulate the aging of a print may not be accurate. At best, they simulate (in a laboratory environment) what is currently believed to be a factual model of aging. They may not simulate actual aging conditions. Second, no matter how clean the final print is, it is still subject to the high acid content of the air in our modern world. If the acidic air is destroying stone monuments, it is surely doing damage to photographs, even ones protected with selenium. The only way to truly protect a print from damage is to hermetically seal it from any contact with the atmosphere. However, I do recognize that toning and complete washing surely give it greater longevity—if not permanence—than a print lacking that treatment.

 Due to the poor quality of the tap water where I used to live, I added one step to this process. After squeegeeing each print, I swabbed it down with a sponge using distilled water and Photo-Flo, and then I squeegeed it off a final time. Without this final swabbing, the print dried with a bothersome film, giving it the degraded look of a print covered with a sheet of old plastic. I found that if I failed to do the final swabbing, the print could not be saved through rewetting and swabbing again. Apparently a precipitate from the water embedded itself in the emulsion and permanently degraded the image. If your prints exhibit uneven gloss or other strange surface characteristics, it may be due to subpar water in your area, and you may well consider this swabbing procedure to eliminate the problem.

Furthermore, the issue of archival permanence is overblown, and often of concern only to photographers. If we turn to painting, watercolors are highly impermanent. In 1981, after I completed photographing the English cathedrals, I was lucky enough to see the Turner watercolors displayed at the Tate Gallery in London. To my understanding, these magnificent paintings are exhibited only once every 10 years for approximately three weeks, and even then they are shown under dim lighting. The reason is that watercolors fade quickly under strong lighting. Nobody raises the issue of impermanence of these treasures, but photographers go on at great lengths about the correct methods of preserving photographs. I think it’s a bit silly. I do the best I can with the information available; I suggest you do the same. Concentrate on your personal expression and your art. Let time do what it will to your vision.

In the early 1990s, David Hockney had an exhibition that included collages in mixed media. Large portions of the work included color photographs, which lack true archival permanence. At the opening, someone reportedly asked him, “How can you charge $10,000 for a work that won’t last 20 years?” Hockney replied, “How much does a Porsche cost, and how long does it last?”

The processing procedures outlined throughout this chapter constitute black-and-white archival print processing. They include two fixing baths for full removal of salts from the emulsion and paper base, selenium toning for greater resistance to environmentally induced damage, and complete washing of prints to remove all remaining acids and salts.

A quick review of my current steps toward black-and-white archival processing may be useful:

Use two fixing baths to remove all silver salts.
Fix prints for a total of seven minutes in the two standard fixers (see manufacturers’ recommendations for varying this time for some fixing baths).
After fixing, hose rinse each print and place in a tray of water with water trickling into it.
Accumulate all fixed prints in the holding tray of water.
Bathe all prints in a hypo-clearing agent bath (to prevent staining in selenium toner).
Accumulate all prints in a holding tray of water.
Selenium tone all prints. (Other toners may be used instead of selenium.)
Hose rinse each print and place in a tray of water with water trickling into it.
Place prints in the second, third, and fourth trays with water trickling into each.
Squeegee each print and place on a screen (emulsion side down) for drying.
Toning, Intensifying, and Reducing Negatives

Negatives, too, can be selenium toned to increase contrast, density, and permanence. Just as selenium combines with the silver in the paper’s emulsion, it combines with silver in the negative’s emulsion to increase density. This process does not increase grain, an unwanted effect of all other negative intensifiers. Also, all other negative intensifiers, such as chromium intensifier, theoretically degrade the permanence of the negative; selenium treatment enhances it! I use a strong 1:1 dilution of Rapid Selenium Toner with water to intensify negatives.

Selenium treatment of negatives is performed after the processing is completed, so it can be done days, weeks, or years later. A low contrast negative can be intensified, but it works to best effect if the negative has good density to begin with. A thin negative does not offer sufficient silver to combine chemically with the selenium. Just immerse the negative in a solution of selenium and agitate for 15–20 minutes for full effect. Re-wash the negative after treatment, immerse it briefly in Photo-Flo, and hang it to dry. If agitation time is shorter and the contrast increase is insufficient, repeat the process. However, there is an upper limit to the amount of selenium that can be bonded to the existing silver in the emulsion, and therefore an upper limit on the possible contrast increase.

The increase in contrast due to selenium toning of a negative may be the equivalent of an N+ development instead of N. This has particularly important consequences for roll film users, as it extends the use of the zone system to subsequent redevelopment of the negative. Selected frames can be cut out, increased in contrast with selenium, and enlarged more effectively afterwards. It also allows for rethinking negative development in situations where it’s difficult to decide on the appropriate level of contrast. You can always choose the lower contrast option, then later switch to the higher contrast approach via selenium treatment of the negative!

Potassium ferricyanide can reduce density in overly dense negatives. Interestingly, though reducing a print increases contrast to a great extent, reducing a negative (at least the Kodak Tri-X negatives I have subjected to potassium ferricyanide) seems to reduce contrast slightly. I previously used to do this in trays, but found that tray immersion and agitation of the negative lead to unevenness of the reduced negative. I now use the same procedure for reducing an overly dense negative as I use for developing the negatives: in hangers for my sheet film and reels for my roll film: I simply move the hangers or reels from immersion in the bleach solution, to water, and then to a fix solution. I go back and forth—always with immersion in water between the bleach and fix in both directions—as many times as needed to sufficiently remove the excess density.

The key is knowing when to stop this procedure! Always maintain ample tonal density and separations in the shadow (thin) areas of the negative. If you continue the process for too long a time, you can lose those critical shadow areas, permanently destroying the negative. At first, the changes may seem painfully slow because the negative is so dense. After you get past the grossly dense stage, watch it carefully, for the same amount of bleaching will seem to yield far greater density changes than will serve you well.

Cold, Neutral, and Warm Tone Papers

Another aspect of black-and-white papers that was mentioned earlier but not discussed is the inherent coloration of the paper. “Cold tone,” “neutral tone,” and “warm tone” papers each have their adherents. Cold tone implies a blue/white base, neutral tone implies a relatively neutral white base, and warm tone implies a yellow/white base. Some photographers print on one type of paper to the complete exclusion of others. I use neutral papers; Jay Dusard used to use only warm tone papers, until switching to digital imagery. Both of us find cold tone papers to be too blue in it’s base. Some people feel that warm tone papers impart a pleasant, “old” look to a print. Some people prefer to print on neutral or cold tone papers and then use a sepia, brown, or heavy selenium toner to obtain a brown image—one with a different coloration from the warm tone papers.

My observations show three major differences among the papers. Warm tone papers have a warmer, yellower base than all neutral or cold tone papers. Toning does not change the base color of papers, so a toned neutral or cold tone print will not have the same overall look as one printed on warm tone paper. Warm tone papers are much, much slower to expose under the enlarger than the neutral or cold tone papers. They may require two stops of extra exposure to obtain the print you would get on a neutral or cold tone paper. This can present difficulties if your negatives are small and your enlargements are great, and/or if your negatives are very dense. Ultimately, the choice you make is largely subjective, so you simply have to please yourself. And, isn’t that the bottom-line reason for any decision you make about your photography?

Review of Contrast Controls

Before moving on to a brief discussion of traditional color negative printing, it will be helpful to review the numerous controls discussed throughout the book for increasing and decreasing contrast. I have often seen photographers avoid subjects in the field that they feel are either too high or low in contrast, and I hope this review may embolden some to rethink the artistic possibilities of such subjects. (Also see the following section on “Infinite Contrast Control for Black-and-White after Negative Development.”)

In addition to the controls listed below, be aware of the fact that the light source on your enlarger affects the contrast of your print. For complete information on the differences between diffusion, condenser, and point source enlarger lights, see Appendix 2.

Summary of Methods for Contrast Increase
Filtration during negative exposure. The appropriate filter can further darken a dark area in relation to a lighter area, or brighten a light area in relation to others.
Long exposures and reciprocity failure effects. If the light is dim enough, the film is already in the realm of reciprocity failure and therefore increased contrast. If the scene is bright, a strong neutral density filter—perhaps in combination with another filter—can extend exposure times into the realm of reciprocity failure.
Extended negative development.
Selenium toning of negatives.
High contrast grade of enlarging paper.
High contrast developer, such as Dektol.
Selective dodging or burning of the print to decrease density of highlight areas and/or increase density of shadow areas.
Potassium ferricyanide reducing of prints.
Selenium toning of prints.
Summary of Methods for Contrast Decrease
Filtration. The appropriate filter can bring divergent tones together, thus lowering contrast.
Reduced or compensating negative development.
Low contrast grade of paper.
Low contrast developer, such as Selectol-Soft.
Selective dodging or burning to increase density of highlight areas and/or decrease density of shadow areas.
Flashing.
Masking.
Infinite Contrast Control for Black-and-White after Negative Development

Despite all the methods listed above for increasing or decreasing contrast of your negative (either an individual negative from sheet film or a single frame from a roll), the contrast level may still be either too high or too low for you to print successfully with existing papers. There is still a surprisingly simple way to either increase or decrease contrast from that of the original negative.

Suppose the negative is too low in contrast, and printing with even the highest contrast filtration yields a print lacking sufficient contrast. Here’s how to overcome that problem. Start with the original negative and make a contact image on the same negative material (or any finer-grained film, e.g., T-Max to T-Max, Tri-X to Tri-X, HP5+ to Delta 100), just as you would make a contact proof print. Make sure that the original negative (placed on top, of course) is placed emulsion to emulsion with the unexposed negative. Then develop the newly exposed negative material with increased contrast. This will yield a higher contrast positive image.

Then make a second-generation negative by placing the newly created positive in contact with another unexposed negative. Again increase the contrast when developing the new negative. Now you have a new negative (created via an intermediate positive) in which you increased contrast twice. Of course, the degree of contrast increase at each stage is controllable by you, so you can raise the contrast slightly or greatly via the intermediate positive and the final negative.

Since each of the images is made via a contact process, there is no loss of sharpness. You can repeat this two-step process as many times as you wish (though it would be extremely rare that more than one set of negative-to-positive-to-negative would be required), increasing the contrast to any extent you wish, giving you infinite contrast control. Obviously, for contrast decrease, simply lower the contrast when making the intermediate positive and again in making the final negative.

Also, you may simply wish to end this process with the intermediate positive (either an increase in contrast, decrease in contrast, or no change in contrast) and then use the positive as you would use a negative, producing a negative image. This can be quite creative and extremely effective.

Color Printing

Color negative printing can be more restrictive because classical color processes offer no variable contrast options for printing from negatives. The difficulty with color negatives is that “reading” a color negative is difficult, primarily due to the overall orange overlay on all color negative materials, and success comes only with years of experience.

Much of the information presented in the sections on black-and-white printing is directly applicable to the printing of color negatives. Dodging, burning, masking, and flashing are all usable techniques with color negatives. There is no color equivalent of either potassium ferricyanide reducing or toning. However, color printing allows one interesting variation on both burning and flashing: both can be done with a change in color filtration to shift the color balance of the burned area in relation to the unaffected areas. In general, this must be done with subtlety or the effect will be or appear heavy-handed. If the subject matter is abstract rather than realistic, more leeway of the color shift is acceptable. With complete abstraction, any color balance may be acceptable.

For years, I had used color transparencies rather than color negatives; therefore, my familiarity with color printing had been exclusively through positive-to-positive materials, specifically Ilford’s Ilfochrome (previously known as Ciba-chrome). Recently, however, Ilford discontinued Ilfochrome. That leaves two options for printing from transparencies: (1) You can either create an internegative from the original transparency and then print traditionally from the internegative, or (2) you can scan the original transparency and then print digitally from the scanned transparency, now converted to a digital file.

Option 1: Printing Traditionally from an Internegative

Creating an internegative is simple. You just contact print the original transparency to a negative material the same way you would make a contact proof by printing directly from a negative onto paper. Make sure the transparency and internegative are emulsion to emulsion so there is no loss of sharpness in exposing the internegative. Of course, you’ll have to experiment with the proper exposure for the internegative, as well as the proper development for it. Alternatively, you could have a commercial lab do the entire process, or have a commercial lab just develop the exposed internegative after you have made the exposure. (Unfortunately, even those options are becoming scarce, as the number of commercial labs has dwindled in recent years.) Then you would print the internegative, as you would proceed with any negative, using the guidelines I described earlier for black-and-white printing.

There is a problem here, however. The original transparency has a lower contrast range than a negative exposed to the same subject matter. That means a transparency has a higher inherent contrast than does a negative, and therefore it reaches the limits in both the highlights and the shadows sooner than a negative would if exposed to the same subject matter. So, if you had photographed the same scene originally with negative material, you may have obtained more information on the negative in the highlights or the shadows, or both, than you would have on the transparency, assuming the scene exceeded the range of the transparency film. You cannot get that lost information back when making an internegative from the transparency. But with care, you can maintain all the detail that exists in the original transparency, and even some detail that was previously available for printing only via various complex masking procedures. So the making of an internegative to preserve as much detail as possible can be quite exacting, though not terribly difficult to do.

Option 2: Printing Digitally from a Scan

The other option is to scan the original transparency and then print it digitally. This is the approach I recommend. Producing a high-quality scan is critically important—just as making an internegative is critically important—in order to preserve every bit of information contained within the transparency for later printing. Today, I recommend scanning as the superior approach for color printing from a transparency because color digital printing offers much greater contrast control than the limited contrast control available via traditional color printing techniques.

Please note, this distinction is not an issue for black-and-white printing, since black-and-white papers already have exceptional variable contrast control. In my opinion, black-and-white digital techniques do not trump traditional approaches. Furthermore, I still feel that nothing approaches the glow and luminosity of a traditional black-and-white silver-gelatin print. This is not to debase or degrade the quality of digital black-and-white prints, many of which are quite wonderful, but they just aren’t silver prints, which still produce the finest black-and-white results.

For those interested in scanning color transparencies followed by digital printing, I refer you to the next two chapters of this book, and to the many books on the market (which are updated frequently) on digital printing techniques. Applications such as Adobe Lightroom and Adobe Photoshop, along with numerous others, are available for digital printing.

The Final Product Is What Matters

Times are changing, and it’s logical to change with the times. I have watched the changes in both color and black-and-white printing approaches, and I feel comfortable staying with and recommending traditional approaches for black-and white photography, while recommending digital approaches for color photography.

My basic philosophy about this is the following: Whichever approach you choose (i.e., traditional or digital) is a perfectly good approach. Learn it thoroughly and pursue it to obtain the finest prints you can achieve. If, along the way, you become disenchanted with either the final printed image or the process used to obtain that print, try the other approach. Then, use that alternate approach to work toward obtaining the finest print you can achieve. You have to love both the process and the final result. It’s difficult to proceed if you are unhappy with either of the two. Ultimately, the final product is a photographic print, and you want to present the best product you can create. It’s not the process that’s important—both are perfectly valid—it’s the final product. Does the final print convey what you want it to convey? Does it get your point across? In fact, is there a point you’re trying to convey, or a question you’re trying to ask via your photography? These are the important questions to ask yourself. I have much more to say about these ideas in the final chapters of this book. To answer them successfully, you have to choose the process that yields the best results for you.

In the following discussion about scanning a color transparency, the goal is to get the best possible TIFF or PSD file achievable. The discussion does not go further, into printing that file because papers, inks, printers, and attendant software changes so rapidly that any discussion in this book is likely to be outdated soon after publication (or even before publication). It is best to obtain printing information from books and/or videos that specialize on the topic.

Scanning from Film

Scanning is the bridge that takes you from film, as a starting point for exposure, to digital methods to complete the process of image editing and printing. Many photographers today are using film for their black-and-white photography because of its ability to encompass a much higher contrast range than digital sensors can; or they shoot with color negative films, which also have a very high contrast range. They may also use color transparencies because they love the immediacy of the imagery garnered through a positive transparency. Many such photographers now complete the process digitally, using a hybrid of traditional and digital methods to obtain the final image.

With the demise of Ilfochrome paper and chemicals, few options remain for printing color transparencies directly, so more and more photographers are turning to scanning and digital processing of transparencies. They scan the original, turn it into a digital file, and then proceed with the necessary moves to create the final image. For myself, I’ve exposed color transparencies for years, and now find the flexibility of digital color processing to exceed that of traditional methods, so I have been scanning original transparencies (mostly 4"×5", 6×6 cm, and 6×4.5 cm) for several years. I’ll confine the following discussion to the scanning of color transparencies as a substitute for Ilfochrome printing.

Scanning itself is an art. It requires some deft handling of the original to turn it into the most useful digital file for successful completion of the final image. But it’s really a game of horseshoes: if you’re close enough, you’ve probably done a really good job. Nobody can tell you what the optimum scan may be for any transparency, or any negative, for that matter. But those who understand scanning can surely tell you when the scan is simply not a good one, or when it’s unlikely to yield desirable results.

I don’t want to get caught up in the specifics of hardware or software required for good scanning. But let me note that today, there are flatbed scanners selling for hundreds of dollars that scan at quality levels virtually indistinguishable from the finest drum scanners that sell for many thousands of dollars (although some experts may challenge that claim). There are also a variety of software programs for scanning, and many do an acceptable job, perhaps an exceptional job . . . and the differences are probably discernible only to the most knowledgeable and sophisticated of users. Perhaps in a true blind test nobody would see the differences.

As of the writing of this book, I have an Epson Perfection V750 Pro flatbed scanner and I use SilverFast software for processing. Both are common products, and together they do an excellent job.

My first recommendation for scanning is to decide initially what is likely to be the largest size you may want for the finished print. I recommend a scan of the transparency that can give you about 400 dots per inch (dpi) in that final size. You’ll modify the dpi depending on the printer you use, and its optimization settings. At that degree of resolution, you cannot see the dots without a loop. So the quality is excellent. For example, if your starting point is a 4×5 transparency, and you decide that you want to produce a 16×20 print, then it follows that to obtain the 400 dpi print, your initial scan must be 1600 dpi. If you choose a lower dpi, the final print may lack the smoothness you wish to attain. If you go higher in dpi in your scan, you’re dealing with larger files that take much longer to process and occupy far more memory on the computer. Obviously there’s a trade-off here. So my choice is a practical one. If later I decide to make a larger print, I can always re-scan the original transparency at a higher resolution, and then proceed with the same processing steps to arrive at a comparable print in the larger size. But I won’t do that with every transparency so as not to get slammed with all that memory usage or all that processing time for every scan I perform.

Once you’ve chosen a sensible scanning resolution, it’s important to keep in mind that the better the quality of your scan the less you will have to deal with in Lightroom, Photoshop, or any other subsequent processing. So try to get a scan that has the best possible contrast and color balance, even if the original lacks good contrast or has poor color balance. Don’t put all of that off for the final processing.

Next, check the histogram to be sure that everything on the transparency will be encompassed in the scan. If portions of the histogram go beyond the right edge, you’ll get blank whites in the digital file where there are subtle highlight details in the transparency, so be sure the histogram encompasses those highlights. You’ll need to do the same thing for the shadows: make sure you can get everything down to the most opaque blacks before going any further.

If you want really bright highlights, make sure the rightmost portion of the histogram comes close to touching the highlight marker, but still ends just to the left of the marker. You can give it a little more breathing space if you can work with somewhat lower-level highlights. Then, move the mid-tone marker to the left and right, seeing what those moves do to the thumbnail image. You’ll quickly see where that mid-tone marker should be for best results. It’s all done visually, and it’s quick to master.

Then there are the gradation adjustment curves, which I see as all-important for scanning. My experience is that transparencies fall into several broad categories, and that each requires a specific curve to obtain a good scan as a starting point for final processing. So I’ll run through the categories I’ve found, and share my recommendations for the types of curves that have yielded the best results for me. (There are many options in SilverFast software, some of which I have never used, but the ones I’ve used—primarily the scan curve—seems to me to be the most useful tool, and the one I will concentrate on in the following recommendations.)

Diagram 10.6: The Straight Line Curve
For the well-exposed transparency with a full tonal range, the Straight Line curve appears to be the best choice for your scan. (Note: You can see slight offsets of the different color channels, and these can be perfectly aligned or spread apart to alter color balance.)

SilverFast’s Gradation Curves tool allows you to adjust the gradation, contrast, shadows, and highlights, as well as overall brightness. As with Photoshop curves, you can manipulate the master or individual color channel curves in any way we choose. It’s possible to manually reshape the curve for specific image requirements. In the next section we’ll look at the following four basic scanning curves I work with using the SilverFast Gradation Curves tool:

The Straight Line Curve
The S-Curve
The Reverse C-Curve
The C-Curve

Diagram 10.7: The S-Curve
For the well-exposed transparency that has a limited contrast range, the S-curve appears to be the best choice for your scan, for it spreads out midtone contrasts a bit, giving the image a little more snap.

Diagram 10.8: The Reverse C-Curve
For an overexposed transparency with overly bright pastel colors and tones, the Reverse C-curve separates the close-tone highlights while also deepening and enriching the colors.

Diagram 10.9: The C-Curve
The C-curve spreads apart the deepest shadow details to the greatest extent, and tends to work best for an underexposed transparency, or even a well-exposed transparency dominated by dark areas. (Note: In the curve shown here, the individual color channels have been modified by lowering the red channel to a large extent and the blue channel to a lesser extent, in relation to the green channel, which was done to rebalance a transparency that had a magenta color cast to it.)

Please understand that none of the recommendations I suggest below should be taken as rules. They’re not rules; they’re recommendations . . . simply starting points to consider. There are always exceptions to any rule. As James Thurber once said, “There is no exception to the rule that every rule has an exception.” If there is anything that comes close to being a rule, it’s that I have found it best that all scanning curves start at the extreme upper-right corner to get my highlights as bright as possible. This is the equivalent of pushing your histogram to the far right when exposing a digital image for optimum results. This concept is thoroughly discussed in chapter 11.

Recommended Scanning Curves for Transparencies

The Straight Line Curve: For well-exposed transparencies that contain a full range of tonalities, I have found that a Straight Line scanning curve, starting at the extreme upper-right corner, and sloping down toward the lower left at the same fixed angle throughout its length is excellent. I don’t go to the extreme lower left (hmmm . . . maybe that’s a rule!) because it may have too little information for the image editing software (i.e., Lightroom or Photoshop) to work with, but I go to a low point on the left edge of the grid above the extreme lower-left corner (diagram 10.6).

The S-Curve: If the transparency is well exposed but doesn’t have a large contrast range (perhaps lacking bright highlights and dark shadow areas, but instead has all mid-value tonalities), I often introduce a slight S-curve variation to the Straight Line curve, which tends to pleasantly increase mid-tone contrast. You’ll have to experiment with the degree of curvature of the S-curve. Sometimes just a slight variation from the Straight Line curve is best; at other times it can be a more pronounced S-curve for greater separation of the mid-tones. With just a small amount of experimentation, you’ll begin to quickly see when the straight line is best, when a slight S-curve is best, or when a pronounced S-curve best serves your purposes (diagram 10.7). Of course, you may want the finished file to be of low contrast, perhaps high key (or not), in order to convey a feeling of quiet and calm, in which case you may wish to use a straight line, rather than any amount of an S-curve into your scan, with the acknowledgment that it’s the mood you want to convey, the feeling you want to impart to the viewer, which is the most important thing. High contrast does not always serve your purposes best.

Figure 10-11a: El Capitan Sunrise—straight curve scan
The view of Yosemite’s El Capitan from Taft Point is awe inspiring, particularly at sunrise. Taft Point, on the south rim of Yosemite Valley opposite El Capitan, stands 3,000 feet above the valley floor. From there, the astounding height of El Capitan above the valley’s conifer trees becomes apparent in ways impossible to gauge from the valley floor. The image was made just as the sun moved far enough around to allow a continuum of sunlight from the floor to the top. But the transparency, exposed in the mid-1970s, pushed tonal limit from highlights to shadow, and has faded to magenta over the years, as seen in this straight curve scan of the transparency.

The Reverse C-Curve: For transparencies that are overexposed—those dominated by light tonalities with few or no shadows (yet containing no blown-out, blank areas)—I have found that a Reverse C-curve is best for the scan. This is a curve somewhat in the shape of the letter “C” as viewed through a mirror. Of course, if the transparency is so overexposed that some areas are blank, you’re sunk. You can’t obtain detail via a scan where none exists in the original transparency. This overexposure is similar to clipping a digital exposure, or pushing it beyond the right edge of the histogram, but by a degree that can’t be recovered in Lightroom or other software programs. Again, see chapter 11 for the complete discussion of this.

Figure 10-11b: El Capitan Sunrise—modified C-curve scan
The image pushed the limits of tonalities, from the nearby sunlit cliff of Taft Point (on the left side) and the distant sweep of El Capitan, to the deep shadows on the lower-right corner, and to those in the distance, in the upper center. Scanning with a C-curve helped separate tonalities in those shadows. Modifying the basic curve by lowering the red component and increasing the green negated much of the magenta case caused by four decades of fading.

Now, if detail exists everywhere in the transparency, I have found that by starting at the extreme upper right corner of the SilverFast gradation adjustment grid, the curve initially drops quickly down the right side as it slowly turns left toward the lower left, becoming ever-flatter (i.e., more horizontal) as it approaches the lower-left edge. Again, I don’t go to the extreme lower left corner, but to a point above that. (You’ll have to decide the optimum height for yourself.) Another way of picturing a Reverse C-curve is to start with a straight line going from the extreme upper right corner toward the lower left, but gently pushing the middle of that straight line downward and to the right, as if it were a flexible strand of rubber (diagram 10.8). The Reverse C-curve separates the tonalities of those pale, overexposed highlights, giving them some needed depth and brilliance. Neither the Straight Line curve nor the S-curve can adequately do that because their initial downward slope from the upper-right corner of the grid is too flat. Further, the S-curve tends to make matters worse, since its initial slope is even flatter than a straight, sloping line. So the very scanning curve that could serve to energize a well-exposed but low-contrast transparency could be the worst choice for scanning an overexposed transparency.

Figure 10-11c: El Capitan Sunrise—Final Image
Further refinements in Photoshop—primarily using Curves for the overall image to bring out additional shadow detail, plus using the Paint Brush to selectively paint the sunlit cliff of Taft Point to reduce glare and slightly increase contrast—yields an image that largely conveys the dimensionality and enormity of the scene I experienced that morning.

Keep in mind that you may want some bright, pastel-dominated images—ones that may appear overexposed at first glance—to be exactly that: an image of soft, pastel colors and tones. This is not an overexposed transparency, but a purposely-made high-key transparency. To preserve that feel in the scan, use the Straight Line scan.

The C-Curve: I have found that a C-curve is best for gradation adjustments for transparencies that are either underexposed (yielding a lot of dark tonalities) or even ones that are well exposed where there was a lot of initial contrast in the scene and with an abundance of dark areas that still possess detail, but are nearly lost in darkness. In the C-curve, you again start the scanning curve at the extreme upper right corner of the grid, and travel leftward with only a slight downward slope to the curve, making it progressively steeper as you approach the left edge, again ending up somewhat above the extreme lower left corner. This is equivalent to pushing the Straight Line curve up and to the left from the middle. Of course, if there are areas of pure black—lacking any detail—in the original transparency, you can’t create visibility in the scan. But if there are simply very dark areas with visible separations, detail can be pulled out via a good scan. I have found that this C-curve is the optimum curve for opening up the deep dark areas of the transparency to greater visibility (diagram 10.9), with the color channel modifications explained in the next section below).

With underexposed or predominantly dark transparencies, the Straight Line curve or the S-curve fails to work well because the lower-left portion of the curve—exactly where you want to separate detail in those overwhelmingly dark areas—is too flat. So instead of separating the dark tones, those curves compress them.

These are four basic scanning curves to work with: (1) the Straight Line curve, (2) the S-curve, (3) the Reverse C-curve, and (4) the C-curve. You’ll find the odd transparency here and there that may not conform to any of those four categories, but those four basic types, with minor variations for each transparency, should serve your purposes for at least 95% of your scans. There will be variations—maybe the upper half of the curve being a straight line, while the lower half is a bit of a C-curve, or a Reverse C-curve—but in general, these four basic curves tend to do the job.

Altering Curves for Faded or Off-Balance Color Transparencies

Some of my transparencies are decades old, and are noticeably faded. Some have taken on the look of an overexposed transparency even though the initial exposure had been quite wonderful. More often, the color balance has gone way off track. I have scanned many such transparencies that have now faded into a deep magenta cast. But these are often correctible via clever scanning, as in the C-curve shown in diagram 10.9 where I have offset the individual color channels. With any of the curves recommended above, I can separate the red, green, and blue channels prior to scanning, making one or two more or less pronounced. In the case of an overall magenta cast, I have found that lowering the red channel below that of the green and blue does a marvelous job of color correction in the scan itself. Sometimes, also lowering the blue a little, along with the lowering of red, eliminates the magenta cast entirely (diagram 10.9). Further tweaking of the individual color channels in the highlights, mid-tones, or shadows can give you more exacting results (figures 10-11a, 10-11b, and 10-11c).

Another example of separating the color channels for scanning would be a scan of an outdoor transparency film that was exposed in shade. Outdoor film is balanced for sunlight, so it tends to go blue in shade. In scanning a transparency like that, the blue channel can be lowered compared to the green and red channels to rebalance the color. Indoor transparency film is balanced for tungsten light, and any other light (including even a window allowing daylight into the room) could throw the color off balance. Again, depending on the color shift of the imbalance, separating the color channels in making the scan can correct the imbalance to a great extent. Using the same techniques, if you want to purposely introduce an imbalance you can do it by adjusting the curves in the scan. You can even introduce specifically desired imbalances into the highlights, midtones, or shadows as you see fit.

With that in mind, consider raising or lowering just a portion of one of the component color channels in the scan to optimize color balance for your creative purposes.

Learning to Use Scanning Curves

My mathematical background has been invaluable in helping me understand the meaning of scanning curves because a mathematical curve has real meaning in the real world. So I was guided toward these curves just by recognizing that a steep portion of the curve will separate tonalities to a greater extent, while a shallower portion of the slope does not. Furthermore, I recognized that I can’t exceed limits—the blackest black is the darkest I can go; the whitest white is the brightest. I had to work within those limits. Everyone has to work within those limits. So there are trade-offs involved. You simply can’t expand every part of the curve. Yet, despite my mathematical insights, I still had to actually apply the curves to real transparencies to prove to myself how they work, and under which conditions the appropriate curve works best. Hence my suggestion to take a few diverse transparencies—a well-exposed one, an overexposed one, an underexposed one—and apply each of the suggested curves to each transparency to get a good feel for how they work. It’s very much worth the time.

In making these recommendations, I caution you to be realistic. You can’t make a silk purse out of a sow’s ear no matter how good your scanning prowess may be. You can go only so far. Do not expect to make a wretched transparency into a great digital image, any more than you can make a wretched exposure into a great image, or a poorly seen color transparency into a great print traditionally, no matter how great your printing skills in the darkroom may have been. Furthermore, a great scan doesn’t mean you started with a great composition, or that you were working with good lighting in the field, or that you had anything of importance to say from the very beginning. A good scan is a good scan, but a good photograph starts with all the necessary ingredients discussed in the early chapters of this book along with the thoughts about creativity and imagination conveyed in the later chapters.

By contrast, a poor scan can damage or destroy the inherent qualities of a fine transparency, or the possibilities residing within an improperly exposed transparency that still may still have the makings of a fine photograph. Scanning is important, so it’s a good idea to learn to do it well.

This section was meant to be simply a brief explanation of scanning and my recommendations. There is a lot more to learn about hardware and software. For more on this subject, please check out Scanning Negatives and Slides, 2nd Edition, by Sascha Steinhoff (2009 Rocky Nook, Inc.).

===== FILE 18/28: Text%2fchapter11.xhtml =====

Figure 11-1: Llama Viewing Machu Picchu in Fog
Llamas are the lawn mowers at Machu Picchu, in Peru. They roam freely. Early one morning I saw one apparently taking in the panoramic view of the ancient ruins and perhaps the mountains beyond . . . assuming they became visible during a break in the fog. There was both a surprise and a dash of humor in noticing this solitary llama leisurely enjoying the view.

The contrast in the fog was low. The histogram is easily encompassed on the scale, and was pushed to the right of center to achieve maximum smoothness of tonality.

CHAPTER 11
The Digital Zone System

THE INFORMATION ON FILM AND DARKROOM PROCEDURES in the preceding chapters is directed at giving you, the photographer, control and predictability over the final image. Although digital logic differs from that of classical (i.e., traditional) photography, the goal is the same in the digital realm: predictable, controlled results.

The discussion that follows begins with a summary of how the photosites and related filters (collectively, the sensor) inside the camera work; turns to digital exposure, and how to optimize it; and then discusses techniques to use multiple exposures when the brightness range of the scene exceeds that of the sensor. This will explain how to work with virtually any brightness range to produce the best possible print quality. The digital sensor’s range falls far short of that of negative film (both color and black-and-white), but multiple exposures merged together can equal, or perhaps even exceed, that range under ideal conditions when the light remains fixed and nothing in the scene is moving. So, just as the making of a silver print cannot be separated from the properties of light-sensitive materials and their related developers, digital photography cannot be separated from the processing of the information produced by the camera’s sensor and the refinement of the image in the software.

The following discussion will also be based on cameras that record the full color image. However, there will be discussion of converting a full color image to black-and-white for the final image in this chapter and in chapter 12.

At the heart of optimum digital exposure is the largely unprocessed data referred to as the “RAW” file. The RAW file consists of sensor data together with ISO, exposure, and other information (referred to as metadata), that is saved to the camera’s memory card and from which a photograph can be rendered. By its nature, a RAW file is not an image and cannot be viewed directly. Rather, it is information from which an editable image can be formed by a computer using software referred to as a RAW converter. (The RAW file is analogous to exposed film—the latent image—prior to chemical development. It’s there, but it has no life yet and you can’t see it until it’s developed.) The output from the RAW converter is saved in a commonly recognized image format such as Tagged Image File Format (TIFF), JPEG (Joint Photographic Experts Group), or Photoshop Document (PSD) (analogous at this point to the developed negative, ready for printing), and the image file can later be printed or opened and refined in an image-editing program such as Adobe Lightroom (Lightroom), Adobe Camera Raw (ACR, which comes with Adobe Photoshop), or Adobe Photoshop (Photoshop).

In brief, the sequence from the memory card to the print is as follows:

Import the RAW data from the memory card into a RAW conversion program.
Use the RAW conversion software (which may be a standalone program or may be integrated into your image-editing program) to set values for global adjustments to the image (including color balance, overall contrast, the correction of aberrations, and initial sharpening); apply the adjustments and process the RAW data into an array of picture elements known as pixels with each pixel being composed of three color channels, one each for red, green and blue information; and then save the resulting file in a common image format such as TIFF or PSD.
In your image-editing program (which may or may not be the same as your RAW conversion software), refine the image, perhaps a TIFF or PSD file, by adjusting such things as contrast, brightness, color balance, and sharpening; burning and dodging selected areas; resampling (changing the number of pixels per inch) and resizing the image for printing; and doing any number of other modifications available in your image-editing program. All this is done to prepare your image for printing.

Because there are a number of excellent books on the use of specific RAW conversion and image-editing programs, the goal here is to place the digital process in context, explain some fundamentals, and give you the tools to optimize your exposures for the best possible prints.

Basics of Digital Exposure

Let’s start with the sensor output, showing how it relates to classical film processes. In the film world, the result of an exposure is the latent image recorded on film. In the digital world, the result of an exposure is electrical output from the many photosites on the camera’s sensor. Although the specifics vary among manufacturers and among camera models, all digital sensors are composed of a number of photosites arranged in a geometric pattern known as an “array.” Each photosite provides an electrical signal in proportion to the amount of light striking it. For the overwhelming majority of sensors, photosites are capable of measuring brightness but not color. To record the information required to produce a full color image, a single color filter is placed over each photosite, arranged in what is referred to as a color filter array (CFA), often consisting of a repeating sequence of one red, two green, and one blue filter known as a Bayer pattern. (Other arrays and color filter patterns are in the works, so we can expect CFA patterns to evolve.) An illustration of an array and its CFA are shown in diagram 11.1.

Diagram 11.1: Diagram of a sensor and color filter array

At the conclusion of an exposure, the electrical signals from all of the photosites are transmitted to the camera’s internal processor, where the signals are converted to binary digital data and are either given minimal processing and written to the memory card as a RAW file or are fully processed in the camera and written to the memory card as a fully processed JPEG file or a TIFF file.

Let’s look into optimizing the image quality from the point of initial exposure in the field. Most cameras allow the photographer to select RAW, DNG (Adobe Digital Negative), or JPEG image quality. The choice is simple: For the highest quality, set your camera to save all of your exposures in RAW format using the highest bit setting available.

As noted, with the camera set to write to the memory card in RAW, the camera does little, if any, processing of the digital information and simply records the sensor information and related metadata to the memory card. In contrast, if you set your camera to write JPEG or TIFF files, the camera processes the sensor output into three grayscale images, each of which is referred to as a channel (one for each of the three primary color filters), applies a contrast curve, adjusts the color balance, makes other modifications based on the camera settings, performs edge sharpening, and saves the fully processed image to the memory card. In the case of JPEGs, the image is limited to 8 bits per color channel and is compressed in such a way that some of the image information is irretrievably lost. Any post-exposure change to a JPEG or TIFF file will result in a loss of data. With a RAW file, before doing any editing of the image, the original exposure information should be saved and kept available as a starting point should you wish to try a different rendering in the future. (This is similar to keeping your original, untouched negative.)

The term bit depth, also referred to as color depth, identifies the amount of color information that is associated with each pixel. Bit depth describes the number of brightness levels, or shades, that are available to describe the color of each pixel. Greater bit depth means more shades resulting in higher color fidelity, smoother and more subtle tonal gradations, and files that will withstand substantial editing without visible degradation. Let me caution, however, not to confuse bit depth with the number of pixels; pixel count is analogous to film resolution, whereas bit depth is the measure of the number of discrete tonalities each pixel can represent.

Although the JPEG and TIFF logic of the camera producing a completely processed photograph is convenient, JPEG and TIFF images contain less information than do RAW images, and the information will be progressively lost as successive edits are made. However, there are two things worth considering about JPEGS. First, the screen display on the back of your camera is a JPEG image. So, in fact, the camera always creates a JPEG image in buffer memory. However, that file is not permanently saved (unless you specifically request it saved with or without a RAW file). Second, if you’re a sports photographer using JPEG, you can make your image, download it to your laptop via a wireless link, and have it to the newspaper in seconds. (Soon—if not already—you may be able to go directly from camera to newsroom, making things even faster.) It’s hard to beat that speed. Furthermore, if you want snapshots of your kids to send to relatives, or vacation shots to send to friends or to post on the Internet, JPEGs will do the job nicely, and will do it instantly. Again, that’s hard to beat. Many cameras can be set to save both the RAW file and a JPEG from the same exposure at the expense of some incamera processing time and the use of additional memory. For this book, we’re really talking about personal expression, not quick-and-dirty (or really, to be fair, quick and clean) uses of the photographic process, so from here on, we’ll confine the discussion to the higher quality RAW files.

Presently, most digital single lens reflex (DSLR) cameras record RAW information as either 12- or 14-bit data. With 12-bit data, each pixel can represent more than 4,000 levels of brightness (212) in each of the 3 color channels. Fourteen-bit data can represent more than 16,000 levels of brightness (214). By comparison, 8-bit data, such as JPEG, can represent only 256 levels per channel (28). To take full advantage of your camera, set your camera to record RAW files with maximum bit depth and to either not compress or use lossless compression.

To preserve all of your photographic information from the original camera exposure to print, be sure to set both your RAW converter and your image processing software to work and save in a large gamut color space with a bit depth of 16 bits per channel. For example, if you are using Adobe Camera Raw (ACR) included with Photoshop, from the Image menu select Mode and choose 16 Bits/Channel and from the Edit menu select Color Settings and choose Adobe RGB or ProPhoto RGB from the color space drop-down menu. If you are using Lightroom, which incorporates the same conversion technology as ACR, under the Lightroom menu select Preferences, choose the External Editing tab, set the color space to Adobe RGB or ProPhoto RGB, and set it to 16 Bits/ Component.

Differences in the levels of information (i.e., 8 bits, or 16 bits) are significant, particularly in shadow areas. This is so because more information produces smoother tonal gradations and because changes to the image resulting from RAW conversion or post-conversion editing, including changes in white balance (to be discussed below), contrast, and brightness levels always result in the loss of data. If enough data is lost in processing, the resulting photograph will be noisy (i.e., it will exhibit undesirable grain, texture, or random color data that has no meaning), and will possibly present the abrupt changes in what should be smooth transitions (such as the sky toward the horizon) known as posterization, or banding.

Today’s hardware and software almost universally support 16-bit processing. However, if your camera or software is limited to 8 bits, you can nevertheless produce fine quality photographs, but it becomes all the more important to obtain as much shadow information as possible by giving the maximum exposure you can without blocking (i.e., overexposing) the highlights, commonly referred to as “clipping.” (More on this later. Stay tuned.)

The Sensor’s Useful Brightness Range

Each sensor has its inherent brightness response range (referred to as the dynamic range). The range varies from one camera model to the next and may vary with ISO setting. Just as with film, the digital sensor requires a minimum level of light to register shadow values (equivalent to the exposure threshold for film). All brightness levels in the photographic subject that fall below the sensor’s response threshold will be depicted as black. (This is similar to the film negative having areas exposed below threshold, having no density, and therefore supplying no information for the print. For transparency film, it’s simply getting unexposed black areas.) In addition, at low brightness levels (equivalent to exposures slightly above the film threshold), random electrical signals generated by the sensor and related circuitry will constitute a significant portion of the information and can be expected to appear as noise (i.e., random, meaningless dots filling in empty spaces that lack true information from the basic exposure). At the highlight end of the sensor’s range, above a maximum brightness level, the sensor will “clip” the highlights, that is, it will not differentiate additional brightness (equivalent to a pronounced shoulder on film) and all brightness beyond the dynamic range will appear as blank white. Clipping is analogous to overexposing transparency film to the point where the highlights are rendered as clear film base.

In the early days of digital cameras, the dynamic range was similar to that of most outdoor color transparency film, a range of approximately 5 f-stops. Current digital cameras have a dynamic range of as many as 10 or more f-stops, and even up to 14 stops, using RAW exposure, the camera’s base ISO, and no image adjustment, thus equaling, or even exceeding, the former indoor transparency films, but still falling short of the useful range of color or black-and-white negative film. However, major expansions of brightness range have been developed, and more can be expected in the future. The expansion of the sensor’s brightness range has been a huge improvement in recent digital technology, and should prove to be key improvements into the future. The useful dynamic range may vary with the ISO setting and can be expanded to some extent in both the shadows and highlights using the shadow and highlight adjustments in the RAW converter. Determining the dynamic range of your camera is discussed in the next section.

The brightness information from each photosite is converted by the camera’s circuitry from analog output to digital data, which quantifies brightness in a geometric progression. That is, the output from a photosite that receives an exposure of up to one f-stop above the threshold will contain one bit of binary data representing one of two possible responses—black or the first brightness level of red, green, or blue (depending on the color filter over the photosite) that is lighter than pure black. The output for the same photosite that receives up to 2 f-stops above the threshold will contain 2 bits of data representing any one of the next 4 lighter shades of its color. The output for the same photosite that receives up to 3 f-stops of exposure above the threshold will contain 3 bits of data representing any of the next 8 lighter shades of its color. The progression continues so that a photosite that receives an exposure within the last f-stop of the dynamic range will record any one of several thousands of shades of its color from very light to white.

The photographic importance of the geometric nature of digital output is that exposures made at the first stop or two above the threshold will contain larger tonal jumps than will an exposure of the same subject made with more exposure. With each f-stop increase in exposure, the number of tonalities doubles and soon there comes a point where neither the printer nor the human eye can distinguish between the increased number of smaller tonal steps. Additionally, as brightness increases, electronic noise becomes increasingly less visible. Thus, up to the point of clipping (i.e., overexposing beyond the sensor’s range), more exposure results in smoother tonal transitions and better color fidelity. More exposure also provides a reserve of data with which to make major tonal modification in your RAW converter or image editing software, and produces cleaner shadows. These are all desirable results obtained at the minimal expense of maximizing your exposure.

Translating Theory to Excellent Digital Exposures

Technical explanations aside, the practical point of understanding this geometric progression is this: Give as much exposure as you can without clipping the highlights. The exposed RAW file will result in more data and better print quality. This is critical to the understanding of optimum digital exposures, for it explains that the higher on the scale you can make your exposure—short of clipping—the more information you have, and therefore, the smoother the fully processed image will be. Don’t worry if your image looks overexposed and “washed out” on the camera display; you can easily preserve shadow detail and dial back the effect of the increased exposure using the settings in the RAW converter (to be discussed shortly, and in more detail in chapter 12).

While this isn’t exactly analogous to my recommendation (maybe my demand) to expose the shadows in Zone 4 in traditional photography, it’s close. In traditional (i.e., classical or film) photography, I’ve stressed the importance of exposing the shadows in Zone 4 to achieve better separations, even if you want them printed in Zone 3. Here, you want to push the exposure higher to get smoother, better, more detailed information. More information—particularly more shadow information, where it decreases with a lower exposure—means tonally richer images, with better gradations from one dark tone to the next. The limit to exposure is the dynamic range of the sensor. As long as you do not increase exposure to the point where the highlights are clipped, the result will be shadows with more tonalities, smoother tonal transitions, and less noise. The histogram discussed in the next section is your onboard tool for getting the exposure just right. In low contrast situations—such as in outdoor foggy conditions—you can expect the histogram to appear like a sharp bell curve or even a narrow spike, and it’s best to expose such images with the curve or spike farther to the right rather than in the center or, worst of all, pushed to the left side of the scale (figure 11-1).

The importance of smooth tonal gradations cannot be overemphasized. Years ago I was shown a comparison of a classical (darkroom) print with a digital print derived from a scan of the original negative. From a distance they looked reasonably similar. But close inspection revealed disturbing artifacts in the digital print. The photograph contained dark bushes along a winding road in fog. In the straight classical print those bushes had minor tonal gradations that made sense. The digital print, however, had random blacks and grays intermixed that made no sense. It would be difficult to describe the difference, but perhaps this will suffice: If you’ve ever painted a wall in a room with a roller, you know how it gets spotty as the roller gets dry (that’s when you dip the roller back in the paint trough for more paint). Now try to imagine vertical strokes with a relatively dry black paint roller and horizontal strokes with a relatively dry gray roller directly atop it. That’s how the bushes looked in the digital print. But that was years ago. Today, working in higher bit depth and with proper exposures, you can avoid that type of noise.

The Histogram—The Heart of the Digital Zone System

The histogram is a graphic representation of the distribution of brightness levels within an exposure. The histogram can be displayed on the camera, in the RAW converter, and in the image-editing program. The lowest brightness level appears on the left edge and the brightest level appears on the right edge of the display. A typical histogram for a properly exposed image appears in diagram 11.2.

Diagram 11.2: Histogram of a good exposure

For any exposure, if the endpoints of the histogram do not extend to the left and right boundaries, the brightness range of the scene is fully contained within the camera’s dynamic range. If the left edge of the histogram touches the left boundary, some of the lowest brightness levels in the scene may fall below the sensor’s threshold and will be recorded as empty black. If the right edge of the histogram touches the right boundary, some of the brightest portions of the scene may exceed the sensor’s dynamic range and will be recorded as empty white. If you reduce the exposure (i.e., use a higher shutter speed, smaller aperture, and / or lower ISO), the histogram will shift to the left; if you increase the exposure, the histogram will shift to the right. (Keep in mind that the RAW file slightly exceeds the limits of the on-camera histogram, which reflects the more limited range of the JPEG image seen on the monitor. But don’t count on it exceeding those limits by a lot. Some testing and some experience will tell you how far beyond the on-camera histogram you can go. I simply urge caution when pushing the right or left edge of the histogram.)

If the brightness range of the scene is less than the camera’s dynamic range (i.e., when the histogram does not extend to the full width of the display), it’s best to increase your exposure and thereby force the histogram closer to the right edge (rather than the left edge) to take advantage of the increased amounts of information that come with more exposure (short of clipping it at the right edge, of course). This is the critical issue pointed out in the previous section. You simply want the histogram to be pushed as far to the right as possible—short of clipping—to maximize information for your exposure, which translates to maximizing smoothness in your finished image. In other words, pushing the histogram to the right ensures the finest possible imagery. Excellent imagery starts with the best possible exposure—digitally or traditionally—so the attention you put into it at the start is directly related to the quality at the finish.

To see the histogram in action, set your camera to manual exposure. Using an aperture and shutter speed that will underexpose the scene by at least 5 stops, make an initial exposure; increase that first exposure by 1 stop and make another. Repeat the process 10 times and then scroll through the exposures and corresponding histograms. If your first exposure was sufficiently underexposed, the image display will appear black and there will be a thin trace along the left edge of the histogram. With each increase in exposure above the sensor threshold, the right edge of the histogram will move to the right. As you scroll through the exposures, you will come to the point where the deepest shadows are sufficiently overexposed to be beyond the dynamic range of the sensor, the display will appear blank white, and there will be a thin trace on the right edge of the histogram.

Diagram 11.2 shows the histogram for a properly exposed image with the highlight values approaching, but not quite touching, the right edge. This particular histogram also shows that there will be good shadow detail, as the exposure is sufficient to record information in the shadows. If the scene contains specular highlights (such as sunlight glinting off of a curved chrome piece on a car), the histogram from a proper exposure will show some pixels at the right edge. Here is when the flashing overexposure/underexposure display (discussed below) is helpful in interpreting the histogram. Don’t worry about those areas, since you’ll want such specular reflections to be blank white. But if other highlight areas that demand detail show up as being overexposed, reduce the exposure and make another exposure.

Diagram 11.3 shows a theoretic histogram of a good exposure, and diagram 11.4 shows the histogram of the same scene with one stop less exposure. While not optimum, the exposure depicted here will likely produce an acceptable result, although the lower values can be expected to show less separation and possibly some noise.

Diagram 11.5 shows the histogram of the same scene with 2 stops less exposure. The increased gap at the right edge and the bunching at the left edge indicate that the exposure is now seriously underexposed. The concentration at and near the left edge tells us that the image will have blank and noisy shadows. Although a RAW converter may be able to pull out acceptable midtone and highlight values, there will be significant areas of empty black shadows and the overall image quality will be less than optimal. If your initial exposure shows a histogram with the right edge falling as far to the left as the one in diagram 11.5, give at least one stop more exposure and check again. You may need another half-stop . . . and maybe even more. Keep giving more exposure until you get the histogram as close to the right edge as possible.

Diagram 11.3: Histogram of another good exposure

Diagram 11.4: Histogram for an underexposed image

These hypothetical histograms of hypothetical images are designed to give you insight into proper reading of the histogram. I urge every digital photographer to carefully review the histogram on every scene, until you fully understand the relationships between its high and low points and the distribution of light levels (brightnesses) in the scene as you view your camera monitor. Once you can fully understand those relationships, the histogram becomes a quick second-nature check on your exposure, much as the zone system for traditional film exposure becomes a quick procedure that simply becomes a part of your basic workflow. It’s analogous to learning to drive a car: when you’re learning, it requires all your concentration, but once you’ve done it, it becomes second nature when you drive, allowing your thoughts ramble to a variety of other things (though, hopefully, you remain an alert, careful driver).

Diagram 11.5: Histogram for image that was underexposed by 2 f-stops

Diagram 11.6: Histogram where the brightness of the scene exceeds the dynamic range of the camera

But, what happens when the brightness range exceeds the dynamic range of the sensor? Diagram 11.6 shows a histogram for such a scene. The histogram shows significant concentrations at and near both edges, which tells you that you cannot contain the entire brightness range of the scene in a single exposure. Here, it would seem that you have a limited set of unpleasant choices: #1) Expose for good shadow detail by giving sufficient exposure to move the histogram away from the left edge and thereby cause additional higher values to be clipped; #2) Expose for good highlight detail by reducing exposure enough to move the histogram away from the right edge and thereby cause additional lower values to be rendered pure black; or #3) Expose for the midtones and live with empty shadows and blocked highlights.

Fortunately, these aren’t the only choices. In the section below under the heading “High Dynamic Range Images—The Extended Zone System for Digital Photography,” we’ll see how to overcome those limitations and extend the range of the sensor by making multiple exposures—though likely no more than two—at various settings and then, in the computer, integrating two or more exposures into a single image. Not surprisingly, the decision of how to proceed depends on your desired interpretation of the scene. While the histogram cannot make the artistic decision, it provides you with the information with which to set the exposure to favor the shadows, the highlights, or the midtones.

Now that you understand the histogram, it’s time to get a feel for how the histogram on your camera’s display responds to changes in exposure, and in particular, increases in exposure as you approach overexposure. This time, let’s obtain a sequence of exposures with the camera on a tripod or placed on a tabletop. Choose as your subject an evenly lit, uniform surface such as an evenly illuminated interior wall. Place the camera a foot or so from the wall, turn off autofocus, use maximum focal length if you are using a zoom lens, and focus at infinity. The idea is to have as uniformly lit a target as possible. Make a series of exposures from grossly underexposed (histogram bunched at the left edge of the display) to grossly overexposed (histogram bunched at the right edge of the display) using one-half or one-third stop increments.

Scroll through those exposures with the histogram display visible and you will quickly get a feel for your camera’s dynamic range, and the amount by which the right edge of the histogram moves with each increase in exposure. The dynamic range can be estimated by counting the number of exposures (how many one-third or one-half stop exposures) it takes to have the majority of pixels move from the left edge to the right edge. Note the sensitivity of the histogram to increases in exposure as the right edge of the histogram approaches clipping. Your understanding of the relationship between changes in exposure and the response of the histogram will serve you well in quickly setting exposures in the field. So far, we have been working with the luminosity histogram, which displays the perceived brightness of the scene with color information being weighted to take into account human color perception. The luminosity histogram is usually sufficient if the final output is to be black-and-white, generally referred to as “grayscale.” For more precise control, which is especially useful for high-fidelity color output, you can view histograms for each of the red, green, and blue channels.

Most cameras allow the user to display the histogram for the three channels in one of a couple of formats: #1) In a three-channel composite similar to the one shown in diagram 11.7 or #2) in three distinct color channels similar to the one shown in diagram 11.8.

Both display formats convey the same information: a channel-by-channel depiction of the distribution of brightness in the basic exposure. If your camera gives you a choice, pick the display that you find easier to read. At the risk of overselling, if you expect your final image to be rendered in color, it is best to view the three-color histograms rather than the luminosity histogram, because the overexposure—clipping—of any one of the color channels may result in a distortion of highlight colors. Even if the final image is to be rendered in black-and-white, it is helpful to be able to review all three channels of information for ease in making selections in your editing software and for maximum flexibility in converting the RAW color file into a grayscale image. Remember, every digital RAW exposure contains the information from which a full color rendering can be produced, even if you intend the final product to be a black-and-white print.

Diagram 11.7: Three-channel composite histogram

Diagram 11.8: Individual channel histograms

Some cameras have a dedicated histogram button; other cameras permit the user to assign the histogram display to a button. If your camera has, or permits, the assignment of the histogram display to a designated button, you will save time and improve your images by making the assignment and using the histogram button to quickly review your exposures. Most of the exceptionally good mirrorless digital cameras display the histogram together with the image as you are composing, and this can prove especially beneficial to guide you to the best exposure possible. As an additional aid, many cameras can be set to cause the display to indicate areas of underexposure and clipping by highlighting or flashing such areas in a contrasting color. The flashing display is particularly helpful when used with the histogram. If, for example, the histogram shows significant bunching at the right edge but the flashing display shows that the overexposed area is nothing but blank overcast sky, there is no advantage in reducing exposure. It’s best to ignore the apparent overexposure and see if the shadows need additional exposure. If, on the other hand, the flashing area contains important detail, a reduction in the exposure setting or taking two or more exposures (discussed below) may be the best way to proceed.

So, let’s prescribe a sensible sequence that will usually assure optimum exposure (this assumes the scene to have a brightness range within the sensor’s dynamic range):

Start with a test exposure at the exposure suggested by the camera.

Review the histogram.
If the histogram is now biased toward the right, you have your exposure and can expose your image. If necessary, adjust the exposure based on the histogram (i.e., give additional exposure if there is room at the right edge of the histogram, give less if the histogram indicates highlight blocking).
Take a new exposure.
Recheck the histogram to see if your image is underexposed on the left or clipped on the right, and also (if your camera has this feature) view the image display to check which sub-threshold areas or overexposed areas are flashing.
Readjust if necessary.

If your exposures consistently require you to apply highlight recovery in your RAW converter, you are probably overexposing; set your camera to reduce your exposures by one-third of a stop and try a few more exposures, using the same procedure outlined above. Repeat the process until you get consistently well-exposed RAW files. Depending on your camera’s controls, it will probably be most convenient to remain in automatic exposure mode and use the overexposure/underexposure setting to bias the exposure for your current lighting and subject environment. Alternately, you can increase or decrease the exposure in manual mode. As long as the ambient lighting and scene conditions remain substantially constant, the same exposure bias should apply. Just be sure to view the histogram from time-to-time to be sure the lighting has not changed significantly. The histogram serves very much like a light meter in this respect, so use it that way.

If you intend to print in grayscale (i.e., black-and-white) you should nevertheless use RAW for your exposures and, if possible, optimize the exposure as you would for color output. Full color high bit depth information will give you the flexibility to alter the grayscale rendering in a manner analogous to using different contrast filters when exposing film (see chapter 12 for details of black-and-white conversion from the RAW color files). In fact, with practice you can even go further, effectively using the equivalent of different filters for different parts of the scene. Imagine the following: you want to use a red filter on the sky (perhaps to increase contrast between blue sky and clouds), and use a green or yellow filter to lighten the foliage in the foreground, but of course you can’t do both in traditional photography, so you chose the best compromise option. However, while postprocessing the RAW file, you can do something that’s equivalent to those wishes of yours by processing each portion of the final image, emphasizing the channel you want for each location. This can be grossly overdone (please refrain from going overboard), but if done with subtlety and sensitivity, it affords a wonderful set of controls.

The histogram is calculated in real time by the camera’s processor from a low-resolution JPEG image, even if the camera is set to record only RAW files. Because the RAW data is recorded in high bit depth and receives only limited processing, the RAW exposure is likely to contain more information in the highlights and shadows than is indicated in the histogram. All of the information contained in the RAW file can be extracted by the RAW converter discussed below and in chapter 12.

Be aware that the histogram and, with some cameras the RAW file, may be affected by camera settings for contrast and sharpening, so you may find it desirable when working in RAW to dial down the setting for contrast and, if possible, turn off (or at least minimize) sharpening. If your camera has memory banks for retrieving camera settings, you will save time by setting one memory bank for your dialed down RAW exposures, and another bank for your typical JPEG settings.

 The histogram is very useful in graphically indicating exposure, but its shape is of no artistic significance. The histogram may well indicate a perfect exposure of a perfectly horrible image.

Keep in mind that while the histogram is very useful in graphically indicating exposure, its shape is of no artistic significance. The histogram may well indicate a perfect exposure of a perfectly horrible image. It simply tells you if the exposure is on target. Look to the end points for proper exposure; concentrate on compositional elements for artistic quality. Also realize that when you bias your exposures toward the right edge of the histogram, the camera display may appear washed-out. It’s best to ignore that appearance. You may want to make a second, darker exposure to show you a better rendition of the final image you’re after, but you’ll get better results from the washed-out exposure for final processing, unless you’ve clipped the right edge. But even that washed-out display can be useful for examining distractions at corners and edges, and evaluating overall compositional cohesiveness. You will later correct the washed-out rendering in the RAW converter with simple post-processing adjustments.

The RAW Converter—Processing the RAW Exposure

The processing of the RAW data into an editable image format such as TIFF or PSD requires a number of operations, including demosaicing (de–mosaic–ing), which is the interpolation of the brightness information from each of the photosites into pixels containing red, green, and blue color data; the modification of the linear brightness response of the sensor to correspond to the response of the human eye; the proper rendering of color by setting of the white balance and the making of color corrections through the application of a camera profile; the correction of aberrations; the removal of noise; the increasing of edge contrast, known as sharpening, to compensate for losses resulting from the projection of the image through the camera lens onto the geometric array of photosites; and lastly the saving of the processed image in a recognizable format such as TIFF or PSD. All of these operations, and more, occur in a computer program that we refer to as the RAW converter. A brief explanation of each of the processes is discussed below.

RAW converter programs go by any number of names, many of which do not include the word RAW. Among camera manufacturers, Nikon publishes NX2; Canon publishes Digital Photo Professional; Sony publishes Image Data Converter; and Olympus publishes Olympus Master 2. In addition, there are standalone conversion programs, including Adobe Camera Raw (ACR); Capture One Pro, published by Phase One A/S; DxO Optics Pro, published by DxO Labs; and RAW Therapee, published by RT Team as shareware, to name but a few. Because the structure of the RAW file differs from one camera manufacturer to the next—indeed, sometimes from one camera model to the next—and because some manufacturers encrypt their RAW files, make sure the RAW converter you choose is compatible with your camera.

Predictably, each RAW converter program has its characteristics and each program has its preferred sequence of actions referred to as a workflow. Also, as digital technology evolves, software engineers include an ever-increasing number of features in their converter software. Most software publishers offer a trial version, so you can try a few before buying. As with photographic films, enlarging papers, and developers, every RAW converter has its ardent supporters as well as its detractors. Again, as with traditional photography, you’ll be best served by mastering the features of a limited body of software. For the discussion that follows, I’ll use the ACR converter common to both Lightroom and Photoshop. The user interfaces and controls of other converters will be different but the fundamental principles will apply.

In summary, all RAW exposures require subsequent processing outside the camera in a RAW converter. Each RAW converter has its unique user interface, controls, features, and workflow, and each will render the RAW file differently, in much the same way that different film developers will produce negatives with different characteristic curves.

While the controls for each RAW converter vary, most allow you to zoom to the pixel level, preview the results of prospective changes as you readjust the settings, and permit you to make iterative adjustments. That is, you can go back and change earlier settings based on the results of subsequent settings, and you can make any number of revisions before clicking on the Open Image button. For the preservation of the RAW file, be sure the processed file will be saved separately from the original—you want the original RAW file to remain unaffected and the converted file to be saved in TIFF or PSD format.

We will look at a brief summary of each of the following operations that are available in a RAW converter:

Demosaicing
White Balance and Camera Profiles
Adjusting the Black Point, White Point, and Contrast
Correcting Aberrations
Sharpening the Image
Converting the Image to Black-and-White
Output Formats and Bit Depth
Batch Processing
Demosaicing

Demosaicing the color array is the process of filling in the incomplete color information resulting from the brightness data gathered through the CFA (color filter array). That is, the demosaicing process supplies, for each pixel, the two channels of color information not recorded through the specific photosite’s color filter. The RAW converter does so by interpolating from information recorded at neighboring photosites. Because demosaicing requires the estimation of missing color information, and each converter uses a different algorithm, the color rendering of a RAW file will vary from one converter to the next. In other words, the computer fills in the red and green components for each site with a blue filter (and the corresponding channels for the other photosites) based on data from nearby photosites. The demosaicing process results in three grayscale images, one for each of the red, green, and blue color channels, which are integrated by the software into a full color photograph.

White Balance and Camera Profiles

The RAW file is not color balanced. Instead, the camera’s white balance setting is saved as a part of the metadata that accompanies the RAW exposure and becomes the default white balance setting in the RAW converter. Importantly, as with the other setting in Adobe Camera Raw, no color correction will be made until the end of the conversion process, so you are free to change white balance settings, select intermediate color temperatures, preview the results, and change again, all without incurring any losses. This gives you immense control at any time, allowing you to change things as your seeing and thinking evolve.

The ACR’s White Balance drop down menu offers a number of preset color temperatures including Daylight, Cloudy, Shade, and Tungsten, and you can select any value you wish by moving the Color Temperature and Tint sliders or by directly entering numeric values for each of these settings.

Do not confuse these ACR White Balance settings with those on the camera. When you made the exposure, your camera was set to one of the white balance settings available on the camera, such as Daylight, Cloudy, Shade, Fluorescent, or Tungsten or any other to make the image look sensible at the time of exposure (figures 11-2a, 11-2b and 11-2c). That setting is not the same on every Canon or Nikon or Sony or any other brand camera, and now you’ve put that RAW file from your camera into ACR, which has its own settings. You can maintain the original setting by selecting Shot As Is or you can choose any one of ACR’s selections, and/or set things to your own customized values via ACR’s Color Temperature or Tint sliders or fill in your own numbers for those choices. Your choices are virtually unlimited.

Figures 11-2a, 11-2b, and 11-2c: Neon Canyon Wall with Tunnels
My experience in the canyons of Arizona and Utah, from the narrow slit canyons to the wider canyons, is that no white balance setting can replicate the colors of the canyon walls I see before my eyes. The two that come closest are Cloudy (11-2a), which is always too red, and surprisingly, Fluorescent (11-2b), which is always too blue. No other White Balance comes close. However, careful alterations in ACR of the Temperature and Tint controls, Exposure and Contrast, Curves, and the Vibrance and Saturation sliders, with perhaps further alterations in Photoshop via Curves, HSL (Hue, Saturation and Lightness), can create an image from either white balance setting that replicates what I remembered my eye seeing (11-2c). Using those tools I can create a final image from either that is virtually identical to one another. This shows the remarkable control available through these applications.

The variations shown here are at the astounding tunnels that water has carved into Utah’s Neon Canyon, which must be an awesome show at flood stage with water pouring through the tunnels, though it’s unlikely anyone could see the show and survive to tell about it.

Try the presets, move the sliders, and use the settings that render the image as you wish. As with the other settings in ACR, trying different white balance settings alters the RAW data only (but not the original RAW file) and is applied to the processed TIFF or PSD file only when you open or save the image. When you save the converted image, the file will be saved as a new file. The RAW file retains all of the information from the initial RAW exposure should you want to go back to your original and try other converter settings. So nothing is permanently lost from your original RAW file.

For images that require precise color fidelity (suppose you’re photographing a 17th century painting for preservation purposes), you can first photograph a neutral gray or white target in the prevailing light. If you are using a DSLR or one of the more advanced point-and-shoot cameras, the camera will include the measured color temperature in the metadata, and the field determined color temperature will become the default white balance setting in the RAW converter.

In general, I look at my camera monitor to see if the color balance seems right or wrong. Obviously, if I were to go from an outdoor location to one indoors, I will quickly see that the outdoor color balance looks awful under the tungsten or fluorescent (or whatever) ambient lighting is supplied, and I can quickly change the white balance to something more sensible. Of course the same will apply if I transition from indoors to outdoors. Beyond that, I don’t worry much about white balance for two reasons: 1.) If I’m close enough to what I perceive with my own eyes, I recognize that I can use the exacting digital controls to edge the balance to my desires in post-processing. 2.) This is all interpretive anyway, so I will ultimately present the colors as I want them presented, whether they exactly match reality or not. This is the essence of personal interpretation. (Just consider how far any black-and-white photograph departs from reality, and yet we still talk about it being “realistic” or not.) I simply do not want to start the process so far from what I’d like that I’m placing unnecessary obstacles in my path toward obtaining my desired image.

Color temperature and balance are but two elements of the larger subject of color management—the science and art of causing each color in the scene to be rendered identically throughout the digital process. It is the goal of a color management system to cause the colors in front of the camera to be accurately rendered on your computer display, on the Internet, and on the final print. In reality, the goal cannot be achieved fully because each physical device has a limited universe of colors that it can render, display, or print. Furthermore, reflective images (prints) have different properties than do light-transmitted images (such as computer displays and transparencies). The universe of color that any device can record or reproduce is known as its “gamut” and, in the real world, the gamut of the camera is larger than the gamut of the computer display, and the gamut of the display is different from and often larger than the gamut of an inkjet printer. Diagram 11.9 shows a graphic depiction of the gamuts of the visible spectrum, the Adobe RGB color space, the smaller sRGB color space, and the gamut for a typical inkjet printer, though printer improvements—and therefore gamut increases—are occurring.

Diagram 11.9:
Graph of gamuts for human vision, Adobe RGB, sRGB, and a typical inkjet printer.

(Graphic created by Stephen Laskevitch.)

The task of maintaining color consistency across physical devices is the function of the color management system. Needless to say, the subject of color management is highly technical, and beyond the scope of this chapter. However, there is one part of color management that you should be aware of as you convert your RAW files and that is the subject of camera profiles. Camera profiles are data tables used by the RAW conversion and image-editing software to cause the computer display to render color as it appeared at the time of the exposure in the field.

Camera manufacturers and software vendors include profiles in their proprietary RAW converters, thereby ensuring consistent color rendition across its family of cameras. ACR offers a default profile for almost all cameras and, for the ultimate in color control, allows the photographer to apply a custom profile for any specific camera and lens combination. If you are working with ACR, you can access any custom profile you may have under the Camera Calibration tab. As you work with camera profiles and white balance, keep in mind that color rendering is subjective and is therefore fair game for the exercise of artistic judgment. There are no absolutes; there are no rules. Always keep your options and goals in mind, for they’re the heart of expressive photography (and, in fact, of all art).

Adjusting the Black Point, White Point, and Contrast

The response of the camera’s sensor is linear, meaning that a change in brightness produces a proportional change in electrical response. Because the linear response of the sensor, without modification, produces a low-contrast, dull photograph, the RAW converter must modify the contrast to render an acceptable image. In addition, the RAW converter must set the black-and-white points, that is, the brightness levels which will be rendered pure black and pure white. In ACR, the settings that control what levels are to be rendered pure black, pure white, and contrast are found under the Basic tab. It is generally useful to modify the settings in the order in which the sliders appear in the user interface. Here is where you can take the washed-out image that you see on your camera display and change it to get the full tonal range you want in the final print.

To most quickly familiarize yourself with the tools of ACR/Lightroom and Photoshop, I strongly recommend working with an image on your computer monitor as you march through the tools available in both applications in this chapter and the next. Without an image in front of you on your screen, what you read takes on theoretic value only, whereas actually working with an image as you read about the tools accords substantive meaning for each of them. (It’s like learning to drive a car: you’ve got to get behind the wheel to make it real. Reading about driving in a book or learning about it in the classroom will not make you a good driver.)

So, let’s get going. Perhaps the most important aspect of the new version is that upon opening the image the Creative Cloud (CC) version of ACR initially displays more detail in both the highlights and shadows than the older versions. So, before you have to resort to the sliders to bring desirable detail into your image, the CC version of ACR gives you more to work with. This is a marvelous improvement. Some of my RAW files that needed Recovery or Fill Light control in the older ACR versions need none in the CC version; those that required significant adjustments in the past tend to need only minor adjustments in the newer CC version.

On the ACR Basic panel start by adjusting the Exposure. This allows you to brighten or darken an image . . . but keep in mind that if you “properly” exposed the image by pushing the histogram to the right, you’ll generally be darkening the image by moving the slider to the left. Pushing the slider to the right is not as good, since you’re introducing some false data. So, push the Exposure slider to the right only when necessary.

Beyond that, things have changed with the CC version of ACR. In the past, you could recover apparently clipped, but important, highlight values using the Recovery slider, thereby setting the white point, then by using Fill Light to lighten shadows, and Blacks to set the black point. Then proceed to the Clarity, Vibrance, and Saturation sliders for fine-tuning. Although editing the washed-out RAW exposure can be postponed until you edit in Photoshop, it is generally best to get as close to the final image as early in the process as possible, and make your refinements later on.

Also, in the older editions of ACR, the Exposure and Recovery sliders set the white point; the Blacks slider set the black point. The white point is where you begin to see the brightest portions of the image rendered in red on your monitor; the black point is where you begin to see the darkest portions of the image rendered in blue. Together, the three sliders provided the pure black and pure white endpoint references from which the other tonalities are measured; however, the settings do not compel you to include pure black or pure white in your photograph.

In the CC version of ACR the controls have changed significantly. The Recovery and Fill Light sliders are gone. Instead there are sliders labeled Highlights, Whites, Shadows, and Blacks, which more accurately control different tonal values of the overall image. For example, the old Recovery slider brought in good detail in apparently lost (i.e., overexposed or clipped) highlight areas, which tended to be information contained in the RAW file but invisible when viewing the JPEG image on the camera’s monitor or the RAW file when first brought up on the computer monitor. Sliding the Recovery slider from the starting point at 0 to 10 or 20 often brought in significant detail. However, pushing it beyond that level often introduced major undesirable artifacts throughout all other tonal portions of the image. The latest CC version eliminates those undesirable effects through more effective algorithms of the Whites and Highlights sliders. These new sliders are better confined to the lighter tonal range of the image.

I recommend putting up an image, and moving the sliders to the right and left while viewing the changes in both the image and the histogram to see how each slider affects the image. There is overlap, so the best approach is to work the sliders on a number of images to get a feel for how they work, and how they overlap. Careful use of the two bright tonal range sliders will bring in as much or more detail into highlight areas without the strange defects that plagued the former Recovery slider when pushed too far.

At the other end of the scale, the Shadows and Blacks sliders can be employed to alter those portions of the tonal range without the adverse defects of the older controls. But always beware of the noise that can accompany recovered detail in the darkest portions of an image.

Note that at the upper right and upper left of the histogram are small triangles. Click on those to toggle between viewing the image with red showing up all areas of blank white (right triangle) and blue showing in all areas of dead black (left triangle), or toggled the other way, viewing the image without the warning colors. When viewing the image with the warning colors turned on, the moment the first bit of red shows in a white area, that’s the “white point”; when the first blue appears in the black area, that sets the “black point.”

However, you may find that the apparent recovery of highlight detail can be deceptive at times. Blown-out highlights in the RAW file appearing as red on the computer monitor may quickly disappear as you move a slider to the left, indicating that detail has been recovered. But sometimes the blown-out white areas may be replaced by indistinguishable light gray, with no tonal variation, although it is no longer pure white. On the dark end of the scale, detail may show up, but beware of the amount of noise that shows up with it. You’ll have to balance the detail versus undesirable noise to suit your taste.

I must admit to a serious personal dislike of the order in which these sliders are now positioned on the Basic panel. It seems to me that they should be placed in logical order from the brightest to the darkest (or vice versa), but instead they are shown on the Basic panel in the order of Highlights, Shadows, Whites and Blacks. I suspect Adobe has a rationalization for this order, but it eludes and irritates me.

If you want to produce a high-key image, the best way to start is by pushing the histogram to the right during image exposure in the field (and the “field” can be anywhere, indoors or outdoors, controlled, as in a studio, or uncontrolled, as in pure nature). If the tonal range of the histogram is relatively small, all tones will be rendered as quite light. If the tonal range is greater, you should see how increasing the Exposure, Whites, and Highlights settings, and perhaps pushing the Shadows and Blacks sliders to the right, can render the darkest portions as midtones or light tones. Don’t confuse the setting of the black point with having a black in the image. ACR will set a black point, or you may well set a black point, but a high-key image may still have nothing darker than a midtone gray. In other words, the black point is a reference from which other tonalities are measured, but you do not have to have any black in your image. So, setting a black point doesn’t force you into having a black if you don’t want one. Nor, of course, does setting a white point force you to have a white when none is desired. (See figures 3-4 and 3-5, respectively, as examples of images lacking a black or a white.)

If your initial exposure appears too dark, you can increase the exposure (i.e., push the Exposure slider to the right), and the histogram will reflect the lighter rendering by moving to the right. As the histogram is driven to the right, pixels near the right edge reach the edge, indicating that the brightest pixels will be rendered pure white. Conversely, decreasing the Exposure setting will darken the image and shift the histogram to the left.

While the Exposure slider shifts the entire histogram to the right, the Whites and Highlights sliders control the extreme highlights by allowing you to dial back the highest values. To fine-tune the rendering of the extreme highlight values, move the Exposure slider to the right to increase overall exposure and then move the Whites and Highlights sliders to the left to restore highlight details. Depending on the amount of exposure the highlights received, you may be able to recover detail in some or all of the highlights that appear in the camera’s histogram display to be blocked. By working the Exposure and Whites and Highlights sliders, you can adjust the appearance of the image. However, if the initial exposure is too badly overexposed (i.e., clipped), all clipped pixels will be rendered pure white.

As an extremely valuable aid in setting the white point, hold the Option/Alt key while moving the Exposure or the Whites and Highlights sliders. The screen will appear black except for those areas that will be rendered pure white. As you move the Exposure, Whites, and Highlights sliders to the right, more of the image will be rendered pure white and will appear red on the screen. As you move them to the left, more of the highlights will disappear into the black screen indicating they will not be rendered pure white. Release the Option / Alt key to view the image. Adjusting the three sliders individually to fit each image will give you the best choice for that image. Again, be mindful that just because you have the control to render portions of the image as blank white, you are not required to do so and in most instances you will want only small areas of the image to be rendered pure white. Your artistic judgment should guide you in deciding which areas, if any, should be rendered pure white.

Thus far, we have addressed the lighter portions of the image; we now turn to the darker areas by setting the black point. This time move the Exposure, Blacks, and Shadows sliders to the left or right to render the darker portions of the image as pure black (where the observed darkest areas are shown on the monitor as blue). To observe the areas that will be rendered pure black as you move the sliders, hold the Option/Alt key while moving any of them or several of them. The screen will appear white except for those areas that will be rendered as pure black. Again, there is no requirement that you render large portions, or any portion, of your image pure black; use your judgment.

Last, the display of your work, whether it is backlit as on a computer display or reflective as with an inkjet print, will influence the appropriate setting of the black-and-white points in an image. Backlit displays will reveal details in deep shadows that would be lost in an inkjet print. Similarly, highlight tonalities will appear different depending on whether they are backlit or reflective. Indeed, prints may need to be adjusted for different viewing conditions. Observation of your work under various lighting conditions will soon give you the judgment to relate the appearance on the computer display, and the numerical data from your software’s color sampler, to your intended form of output. It will prove to be of great help to use the eyedropper tool in Photoshop as a densitometer to correlate the image on the screen to your output, and this will be particularly useful for printed output.

In practice, try all of the controls, observe the image as you change settings, and remember that you can keep changing the settings until you get the result you desire. In other words, play around with it. Toggle the triangles in the upper-left and right-hand corners of the histogram on and off to display any areas of underexposure and overexposure. See what you can and can’t do. Experiment. Only when you tell the program to Open Image (or Save Image or Done) will the settings be applied and the results be saved as a converted image.

In addition to using these five sliders in ACR together with other adjustments you make in ACR (see chapter 12 for a review of the most useful adjustment tools), after you finish adjusting the RAW file in ACR and open the image in Photoshop, you can further fine-tune the settings using a Curves layer. To illustrate using Curves, first create a new Curves layer: From the Layer menu select New Adjustment Layer and choose Curves. Photoshop will prompt you for a name for the new layer. Insert a descriptive name such as Global Contrast, and click OK. The Curves palette will open and present both the histogram and a default 45° straight-line curve. At the lower left of the histogram is a black triangle that sets the black point of the image. Moving the black triangle to the right forces darker pixels to pure black. Hold the Option/Alt key down and slide the black triangle to view the portions of the image that will be rendered pure black. Similarly, at the lower right of the histogram is a white triangle that sets the white point of the image. Moving the white triangle to the left forces brighter pixels to pure white. Hold the Option/Alt key down and slide the white triangle to view the portions of the image that will be rendered pure white. While you have the Curves layer open, you can adjust the overall appearance of the image by altering the curve. This, of course, is the primary use of the Curves layer, and the one I employ mostly for the work I do in Photoshop. To me it is the most valuable of all the Photoshop tools.

Figure 11-3a: HDR—View from My Home: Highlight exposure
Any single exposure of this scene exceeded the dynamic range of the camera sensors. This “Highlight” exposure retains detail in the exterior snow-covered slopes of Mt. Pilchuck, and also the interior sunlit angled ceiling of our living room. Fading into black on both sides are the stone fireplace (on the left) and louvered closet doors to the right, and a large potted plant and vase to the right of the stairway.

Correcting Aberrations

The projection of the scene through your camera lens onto the photosite-CFA induces a number of undesirable effects including color fringing, vignetting, the introduction of noise, and loss of sharpness. RAW converters have a number of tools for the correcting of aberrations. A high quality, calibrated monitor zoomed in to 100% magnification will provide a uniformly lit viewing environment and will aid you in correcting your RAW conversions.

Figure 11-3b: HDR—View from My Home: Shadow exposure
The exterior is utterly washed out in this exposure, with major sections clipped, including the interior sunlit ceiling, but all of the areas that were black in the highlight image are now revealed with detail, including the stone fireplace and louvered closet doors, even without the ACR/Lightroom lens corrections. Hopefully, seeing the uncorrected curved line with barrel distortion will prove bothersome enough to you, the photographer, that you’ll always correct this lens problem (unless you want to have it for specific expressive purposes.

Many zoom lenses exhibit barrel distortion (e.g., if you had photographed a perfect grid of horizontal and vertical lines straight-on, the center is slightly bubbled out toward you, with the edges pushed out in the center of the image’s edges, and coming back together at the corners) at one end of the zoom range and pincushion distortion (e.g., where the center is puckered in, with edge lines pushed inward at the center of each edge, and pushed outward toward the corners) at the other end of the zoom range. If your RAW converter (ACR/Lightroom or another converter) supports your camera model, you can quickly correct for either lens distortion. For most images, you’ll never see the distortions, but if you’re working with architectural subjects or anything that requires perfect fidelity, even minor distortions can be distracting, bothersome, or fatal. See figures 11-3a, b, and c, exhibiting barrel distortions, purposely left uncorrected. In particular, you can see how the vertical edge of the louvered door on the right “bubbles” out toward the edge in the center, curving back inward at both the top and bottom of the image. This common lens aberration is easily straightened with a 100% distortion correction.

Figure 11-3c: HDR—View from My Home: Composite
Following the steps detailed in the text, 11–3a and b have been combined to create this full range image, in which detail shows throughout. Final adjustments were made in Photoshop using Curves and HSL to refine the composite to replicate how my eye saw the scene as it moved around it, seeing detail throughout. Yet the image exhibits good tonal separations throughout, and a believable look to enjoy the view from my armchair.

See if your camera and lens are included in the ACR list. If not, check periodically to see if they were belatedly added (you may have purchased a new camera/lens combination not yet included in the ACR list, but due for inclusion soon, which can be used with an online update). The images discussed above were made with an excellent but older point-and-shoot camera, not a digital SLR.

The uniformity of the viewing environment (i.e., the ambient lighting where you view your computer monitor) is critical, for if your ambient lighting changes throughout the day and night, you can’t tell with any degree of precision what you’re working with. You’re playing a game with movable boundaries. So, if your monitor sits adjacent to an open window, things look quite different on a sunny day, a cloudy day, at night, or under any other set of changing conditions. If you’re serious about obtaining the best possible images, you must create an environment where the lighting remains constant whenever you are working. This is the equivalent of proper inspection of traditional prints in a standard darkroom under two different light brightnesses discussed in chapter 10, and the importance of consistent ambient lighting for judging your digital imagery cannot be overstressed.

In ACR, the Lens Corrections tab includes sliders to correct for color fringing and for lens vignetting. The Sharpening tab contains the settings for noise reduction. The Camera Calibration tab is the place to import and apply any custom camera profile you may have and to fine-tune the color rendering in each of the color channels. Move the sliders and study the results. When you have arrived at a group of settings that gives consistently good results with your camera-lens combination, you can save the settings for each tab in ACR and apply the settings automatically to any number of exposures taken with the same camera and lens.

Typical of ACR, the settings are not applied until the image is processed, so you can go back and forth between settings and tabs if necessary, and your custom settings can be saved and recalled for reuse.

 If you’re serious about obtaining the best possible images, you must create an environment where the lighting remains constant whenever you are working.

Sharpening the RAW Exposure

One area of image correction that deserves particular attention is that of sharpening. Each step in the process from the initial exposure to print causes a degradation in the sharpness of the image. The fix is what is referred to as sharpening and works by increasing the local contrast along the boundaries between lighter and darker portions of the image. In theory, the software finds edges (the boundaries between lighter and darker areas) and then darkens the darker side and lightens the lighter side of the edge. In practice, what Photoshop registers as an edge may simply be an area of local contrast where you do not want to exaggerate tonal differences. To be effective, sharpening must be strong enough to carry the illusion of sharpness but not so strong as to create undesirable halos or visible outlines, introduce granularity in areas of more or less smooth tonalities, or worse yet, pucker skin tones. Not surprisingly, the difference between effective sharpening and oversharpening is often small, leading to the truism: sharpen but don’t oversharpen.

Common practice is to perform sharpening in two stages. First, do a modest sharpening in the RAW converter to produce a realistic presentation with which to do your editing, and then do a second, output sharpening just before printing. Every photographer has his or her approach to sharpening and you will acquire your own.

To get started with sharpening in ACR, you will find the sharpening controls under the Detail tab. Zoom in to view the image at 100%. To see the effect of your changes, first exaggerate the Amount setting, and then refine the Radius and Detail sliders. As a rule, images with predominately fine detail (e.g., pine needles on the ground, old wood on an abandoned building, stonework inside a cathedral, etc.) often look best with a small radius setting such as 0.7–0.8, and images with areas of smooth texture (e.g., skin tones, lightly rippled water, smooth surfaces like concrete) often look best with a radius setting of 1.2 to 1.4.

Next adjust the Masking slider to confine the sharpening to the true edges. Increasing the masking slider restricts the sharpening to tonal differences that are more likely to be edges. If you want to view the mask as you make changes to the Masking setting, hold down the Option / Alt key and move the Masking slider. The black areas are masked and will not be sharpened; the white areas are treated as edges and will be sharpened. Finally, dial down the Amount until the overall effect is barely visible when viewed at 100%. Use the preview check box to toggle between the sharpened and unsharpened versions. Refine as needed but resist any temptation to oversharpen. Depending on your camera, your computer display, and a number of other variables, you may find you need to increase or decrease the Amount. As you gain experience with different subject matter, you will acquire the judgment to sharpen any number of RAW files of similar subject matter. You can save and recall the sharpening settings you routinely use.

The second stage of sharpening, output sharpening, should not be done until the image has been fully edited, saved as a separate file, resampled to final print size, and any layers you may have created in Photoshop have been flattened. The settings for the output sharpening depend on a number of factors including print size, image content (whether the image is made up of fine detail or broad areas of smooth tonalities), viewing distance, and the output medium (whether printed on glossy or matte paper).

Converting the Image to Black-and-White

Digitally, there are a number of approaches for converting the full color RAW file to grayscale. For example, in ACR, go to the HSL/Grayscale tab and check the Convert to Grayscale check box. On the image window, use the Target Adjustment Tool (use the v key as a shortcut) and drag the cursor over portions of the image. ACR will increase or decrease the percentage contribution of the color you dragged over. Alternatively, you can move the color sliders and observe the changes in the resulting grayscale image. Keep in mind that the resulting image will be saved as a grayscale image that you can convert to a three-channel RGB image in Photoshop if you wish.

If you’re working with the Develop module of Lightroom, you can use the On-Image adjustment tool to adjust the conversion of specific areas of the image. In the HSL-Color-Grayscale box, click on the double arrow symbol to the left of the palette, place the cursor over any part of the image, press the mouse key, and move the cursor up or down. Moving up will lighten the value of the color beneath the cursor; moving down will darken the value. Make changes over other parts of the image and watch the grayscale image change.

As an alternative to converting from color to black-and-white in ACR or Lightroom, you can save the file as an RGB color file and do the conversion with a Black and White adjustment layer in Photoshop. (Before moving on, I should note that all experienced digital practitioners avoid converting the color image to Grayscale as a conversion because so much control is lost, and all color information is destroyed.) In Photoshop, in the Layers menu select New Adjustment Layer and choose Black and White. An Adjustment palette will open. Click on the On-Image adjustment tool (indicated by a pointing hand and a double arrow) in the upper left of the palette, go to the image, click on an area, and move the cursor left and right. Moving to the right will lighten the grayscale rendering of the color information under the cursor: moving to the left will darken it. Move to different areas and repeat until you get the rendering you want. Alternatively, or in addition to using the On-Image tool, you can work the color sliders in the Adjustment palette and observe the results. One of the features of the Black and White layer is that the layer is nondestructive; you can always revise the Black and White layer settings after you have made other adjustments. You can also make more than one Black and White adjustment layer, compare the results, and use layer masks to reveal different portions of different Black and White conversion layers. I discuss more about masking below.

Output Formats and Bit Depth

Output from the RAW converter should be saved using a file format that preserves all of your hard-earned data. The two most commonly used formats are TIFF and PSD. Although there are technical differences between the two, both will preserve all of your photographic information as long as you set the output to be saved in 16 bits / channel with the color space set to ProPhoto RGB. Be aware of the fact that the default option of importing a RAW file from ACR to Photoshop (with whatever changes you made in ACR) is to open it as an 8-bit file. You will have to change that default to 16-bit to maintain high quality. There is a further option for 32-bit output, but you’ll have to balance that with the enormous size of the file that would create. (It seems odd—almost incomprehensible to me—that Adobe sets the default to 8-bit rather than 16-bit for a RAW import.) In ACR, the output settings for 8-bit, 16-bit, or 32-bit files are located at the bottom center of the image window.

Batch Processing

To save time, RAW converters permit the batch processing of selected exposures and will run in the background while you edit a different image. This means that you can apply the settings for a particular subject and lighting condition to any number of exposures. To batch process in ACR, select the RAW exposures you want to batch process using Command-Click (Mac)/Ctrl-Click (PC) in Photoshop Bridge. Press Command-R (Mac)/Ctrl-R (PC) to open ACR, click on one of the images listed on the left-hand side of the window, and fine-tune the selected image using curves, color balance, or any of the other adjustments. When you are satisfied with the settings, press the Select All button in the upper-left corner of the window, then press the Synchronize button immediately below. The Synchronize panel will prompt you for a list of the adjustments you wish to apply to the other exposures; the default is to apply all of the settings other than Crop, Spot Removal, and Local Adjustments. Because you selected a series of exposures of similar subjects under similar lighting conditions, you can go with the defaults unless you have a specific reason not to apply a particular setting to an exposure. Press Save Images located at the bottom left. ACR will present the Save Options panel; complete the panel and click Save. ACR will apply your settings, convert the images, name, and save the converted files to the designated file folder.

High Dynamic Range Images—The Extended Zone System for Digital Photography

Suppose the brightness range of a scene exceeds the dynamic range of the sensor. The histogram will touch each edge as shown in diagram 11.10. This is where high dynamic range (HDR) imaging comes into play. HDR is where you can make several exposures to encompass the full range of a high-contrast subject, and then combine them to access the full range from the darkest to the brightest portions of that subject. For example, you can make two exposures: one that encompasses all of the darkest tonalities in the scene, and goes well into the midtones (while all highlights are blown out, i.e., clipped), and another that encompasses all of the brightest highlights and down into the midtones, while everything darker plunges into meaningless black (where there is no useful information, i.e., no recorded data). Or you can make three exposures: one for the brightest highlights, a second for the midtones, and a third one for the dark shadows. In all cases there must be overlap of the brightness ranges to encompass the full tonal range of the scene.

Diagram 11.10: Another histogram where the brightness of the scene exceeds the dynamic range of the camera

However, major improvements in the dynamic range of camera sensors, and further refinements in Lightroom, Photoshop, and similar applications that can pull in more useful information from your RAW file, have made the need to resort to HDR progressively less important. In particular, today’s digital camera sensors encompass a greater tonal range than those available just five years ago, and these constitute the most important recent digital advances. With many of today’s cameras and with the post-processing applications now available, you can now encompass the full dynamic range of nearly all subjects.

But not all. So there’s still a place for HDR in today’s digital world . . . and there may always be one. (It’s much like the need for “compensating development” with traditional black-and-white film processing, which I detailed in chapter 9, including the two-solution development that I invented in 1996, which further extended the film capabilities in high-contrast situations, even after using the single-solution development procedure so successfully for 16 years.)

In the first edition of this book, several different approaches to employing HDR were presented. I don’t believe all are necessary to detail due to the technological advances I’ve just mentioned above. So I’ll confine this brief discussion to the one I feel is most relevant and easiest to use.

Let’s start by nailing down a method of determining the number of exposures needed—now, rarely more than two—to encompass the full dynamic range of the scene when it exceeds the limits of the histogram. Use a tripod, either a remote/cable release or the camera’s self-timer, and mirror lock-up, if available, to eliminate vibration and to record all of the exposures in registration. Focus any way you like (on a stationary subject) and then set the camera to manual focus to assure the camera does not change focus with successive exposures. Set your camera to manual exposure mode (you don’t want to change depth of field), select an aperture based on your desired depth of field, and make a test exposure. Review the histogram of the test exposure and adjust the shutter speed (but don’t change the aperture or refocus as changes will affect the depth of field or image magnification) so that the highlight (right) side of the histogram falls approximately one-quarter of the way from the right edge of the display. Now make your first exposure of the series.

Increase the exposure by a full stop and expose again. (Note: Generally, full-stop bracketed increments are fine, though you may prefer greater or lesser steps.) Review the histogram—it will have moved to the right. Again, increase the exposure by a stop and expose again. Review the histogram again—it will have moved farther to the right. Repeat while incrementally increasing the exposure and reviewing the histogram until the shadow (left) side of the histogram enters into the display and falls approximately one-quarter of the way from the left edge of the histogram. That’s it! You’ve now recorded the entire brightness range of the scene.

Later, during post-processing, you’ll combine the exposures to make a final image that encompasses the entire brightness range of the scene. You might not need all of the exposures, as there will be significant overlap. In the majority of cases just two will probably suffice. Maybe three. There are a number of ways to combine several “bracketed” exposures into a single image, and combining additional or different exposures will produce a different result, so if you are not satisfied with a particular combination, try different combinations.

Below, I describe two different approaches to merging multiple exposures: one technique for two exposures and another for three or more. For these approaches you should work directly from your RAW files. The techniques discussed below require that all of the images be of the same pixel dimensions, so work with uncropped images.

With today’s digital cameras and sensors, and their expanded brightness ranges, virtually any scene can be recorded with just two successive exposures taken two, three, or four stops apart. If the histograms of two bracketed exposures fully contain detail throughout the entire brightness range (fully contained on the left; no clipping on the right), then two exposures are all you need. That should suffice for nearly all situations you’re likely to encounter.

Now that the two files are ready, we will look at how to combine them.

Using Two Exposures and a Luminosity Selection in Photoshop

With this procedure, the computer makes a selection in proportion to luminosity and uses the selection to paint on a layer mask. When you give the command to make a luminosity selection, Photoshop will select pixels in proportion to luminosity: white being 100% selected, perceived middle gray being 50% selected, and black not selected.

Prepare the two images in ACR (or whichever RAW converter you normally use): refine the good highlight exposure to properly render the lighter values, and save it with a name that includes the term “Highlights” (figure 11-3a). Refine the darker values of the other exposure and save it with a file name that includes the term “Shadows” (figure 11-3b).

The thing that may prove confusing at first is that the Shadow Image is the bright one; the Highlight Image is the dark one. Once you give it just a bit of thought, the confusion clears up. The Shadow Image is the one picking up detail down toward the darkest portions of the scene; therefore, in grabbing detail down to the darkest portions of the scene, the rest of it will be quite overexposed (i.e., likely clipped) . . . hence it’s quite bright, overall. The Highlight Image picks up detail in the brightest highlights, and then goes quite dark in the rest of the image; hence it’s quite dark overall. Confusing at first? Yes. Logical upon further thought? Yes.

Open the two images in Photoshop and arrange them so that both are visible, and be sure the Layers palette is visible (if not, go to the Window menu and click on Layers). Next, make a copy of the Background in each of the images; do so by activating one of the two images and in the Layer menu select Duplicate Layer, and then repeat the process for the other image. Now, rename the new Background Copy layers with the names “Highlights” and “Shadows,” respectively.

It’s time to move the Highlights layer to the Shadows image. To do so, select the Move Tool (top tool on the left side, or press “v”), activate the Highlights image, and using the Move Tool Shift-drag the Highlights image over the Shadow image and release. The Highlights image will appear as the top layer in the Shadow image. If, for some reason, the Shadow appears above the Highlights layer, drag the Shadow layer down in the Layers palette. Now that we have the two images as layers in the same photograph, save the composite as a new file with a file name that includes the word “Composite” in the title and close the Shadow file. If the exposures were handheld, auto-align the layers, select all of the layers by doing a Shift-click on every layer, and then from the Edit menu select Auto-Align Layers. Photoshop will move the layers into alignment.

Now that you have both images in a single Photoshop file, the objective is to create a composite image containing shadow information from the Shadow layer and highlight information from the Highlight layer. In the steps set out in the next paragraph, you will make a luminosity selection of the Shadow layer (that is, select the brightest, and therefore overexposed, portions of the Shadow layer) and use the selection to create a mask on the Highlight layer. The luminosity mask will mask the darker (underexposed) portions of the Highlight layer, thereby allowing the good shadow detail from the Shadow layer to contribute to the composite. If this sounds confusing, try the steps below on a few images and the logic will become apparent.

Here are the steps. In the Layers palette make the Highlights layer not visible by toggling off the eye symbol. Next, make the Shadows layer active and visible, and do a luminosity selection by pressing Command-Option-2 (Mac) / Ctrl-Alt-2 (PC). Photoshop will select pixels of the Shadows layer in proportion to their luminosity. That is, Photoshop will select the overexposed and brighter portions of the Shadow layer. The marching ants on the display will outline the areas of the Shadows layer having a luminosity of 50% or more. The last step is to follow the exact same procedure to make the layer mask for the Highlight layer, which reveals the luminosity selection, that is, reveals the brighter portions of the Highlight layer and masks its darker portions. At this point, you’ll have two layers, each with marching ants strutting around them. To make the layer mask, activate the Highlight layer and make it visible; in the Layer menu select Layer Mask and choose Reveal Selection. Photoshop will build a layer mask that reveals the lighter portions of the Highlight layer and conceals the remainder of the layer. Be sure to then toggle the Shadow layer back on—along with the highlight layer—to see the composite.

The result is a composite of two layers with the visibility allocated in proportion to the luminosity. You can fine-tune the relationship between the layers by reducing the opacity of the Highlights layer in the Layers palette. Save the composite image and then make additional post-processing adjustments in Photoshop as needed. See chapter 12 for discussion of the basic tools used in ACR and Photoshop, but after getting your composite image as detailed above, Curves would be my recommended choice for final adjustments, along with any other adjustment, such as HSL (figure 11-3c). After all, before creating the composite, you’ve worked to refine each of the two component exposures in your RAW converter, so most of the preliminary work has already been accomplished. Now it’s simply a case of refining the composite. If you have not corrected for lens aberrations in ACR, it’s too late. There is no such tool available in Photoshop. So if lens distortion is critical, you must make the correction in ACR before layering them into a single file in Photoshop.

The luminosity mask in Photoshop is but one example of using a mask to restrict the effect of an adjustment to a particular portion of an image. This procedure should cover virtually all high-contrast situations you’re likely to encounter. In fact, the example in figure 11-3c, which encompasses an extremely wide range of brightnesses, was produced with an older digital camera that doesn’t have the sensor range of the newer cameras.

There are always limitations. One key limitation is when you’re dealing with a subject that is in motion or any part of a scene that may be in motion, where two exposures may create unacceptable dissonance simply because the two don’t mesh. When the brightness overlap is in an area of motion, be aware of the possibility that two exposures may not work, though it’s certainly worth trying. It’s worthwhile being a bit experimental; sometimes it works, sometimes it doesn’t . . . and it can be wonderful when it does. Try it and have fun doing it.

Before moving on to the next HDR procedure, let’s add a few words about the point-and-shoot camera used for this example. It’s an older camera with limited dynamic range in its sensor. Most of today’s digital sensors have greater dynamic range. Yet even with its limited dynamic range the extreme range of brightness was successfully accommodated with just one highlight and one shadow exposure. The scene includes sunlight hitting the slanted A-frame ceiling, a distant mountain disappearing into high clouds, and an inside plant with deep green leaves in a black vase, for which there was no desire, intent, or attempt to obtain detail. The vase was intended to remain black on the shaded side facing the camera, for my eye saw no detail in it. This is a scene of extreme contrast. Could more exposures have provided more detail? Perhaps. That’s where you have to make the decision of when enough is enough.

Concerning the barrel distortion of the lens, I could have corrected both the highlight and shadow exposures during the ACR post-processing, and then merged them in Photoshop as explained, which would have given me a final image with no such distortion. For illustration purposes, I chose to leave the aberration uncorrected, in hopes that you find the final image disturbing enough to force you to make such lens corrections when they are obviously needed . . . if not for every exposure.

Let’s get back to HDR needs. In the most extreme lighting situations, there could be a need for more than two exposures, which will be explained in the next section.

Using the Merge to High Dynamic Range Function in Photoshop for Multiple Exposures

To accomplish the first step, merge the three or more exposures you’ve made; in the File menu, select Automate and choose Merge to HDR Pro, which will open the Merge to HDR Pro dialog box. In the dialog box, use Browse, and select the RAW exposures you wish to combine. (Note: If the several RAW exposures were handheld, check the Attempt to Automatically Align Source Images box, and then click OK.) When you’ve selected the several RAW exposures, click OK. Photoshop will load the files, perform some processing, and open its processed composite to another Merge to HDR Pro dialog box. Here, you can move the various sliders to the left and right, understanding that nothing changes until you release the mouse after moving any slider. (In other words, it doesn’t show the changes in real time as you’re moving the slider, but only after you stop and release the mouse.)

Be aware of the fact that there are no rules here; the correct settings are those that give you the image you want. Don’t expect those settings to be the same for each image. Each one must be determined based on its own merits, which should be no surprise to you. Finally, here is a technical point to keep in mind: If your image was handheld, select the Remove Ghosts check box to compensate for any possible camera motion, and set the Mode to 16 bits to get a 16 bits / Channel file.

Third-Party Software

ACR and Photoshop together are certainly not the only avenue to produce satisfactory images in situations where one exposure cannot encompass the full brightness range of the scene. There are many others, with apps being created regularly. An effective way to automate the integration of two or more exposures is to combine them in a third-party HDR program such as Photomatix Pro, HDR PhotoStudio, HDR Efex, or Aurora HDR, just to name a few. Trial versions are available, as are tutorials.

For a comprehensive discussion of Photoshop, consider acquiring one or more up-to-date publications that focus on this topic. Also, scour the Internet, where you will find video tutorials, blogs, and discussion groups that may be of help.

Let me close this section on HDR by suggesting an idea that can be of value to black-and-white digital printers. It’s the idea of making a 9-zone step tablet. I don’t use anything like this for my traditional darkroom printing because I’ve refined my inspection and evaluation of prints in the darkroom (see chapter 10), but you may find this to be of value at the computer to help correlate the image as it appears on the computer display with the tonalities of the black-and-white print.

To make the step tablet in Photoshop, open a new file (from the File menu select New), size appropriately (say 4×8), use the Rectangular Marquee Tool (m) to draw the boundaries of the tablet, select the Gradient Tool (g or Shift+g), set the colors to default (d), and draw a gradient from black to white. Then posterize the image: from the Image menu select Adjustments and choose Posterize with levels set at 9. You can augment the step tablet by typing the ink percentage on each step using the sampling tool to determine the ink density for each step.

Print the step tablet on the same paper you use for your prints and have it available for reference as you refine your images. You can also paste the tablet onto the edge of an image you are editing for ready reference as you work. Use the sampling tool to compare values in the image to a known density in the step tablet. Note that I have intentionally avoided making recommendations for the placement of values. Objects in grayscale imagery are amenable to an almost unlimited variety of tonal renderings. Regardless of whether the process is traditional or digital, you should feel free to place values as you deem appropriate. The step tablet simply gives the digital photographer tonal references to help visualize the final image.

Converting Digital Color Exposures to Black-and-White

This section is based on the original digital exposure being color, and then converting it to a black-and-white final image. It does not cover specialized cameras that only make black-and-white exposures. For information about using such cameras, and their post-processing, I urge readers to check with the camera manufacturers, specialized books devoted to that topic, or online chats and videos about it.

Let’s start with the key thing to avoid: never take the original color exposure and convert it to “Grayscale” immediately. Every practitioner of quality black-and-white digital imagery swears that by doing so it virtually ensures a dull black-and-white final image of subpar quality. Instead, maintain it as a full RGB color image while viewing it as a black-and-white. This will allow you to still use all color modifications, including filters that are designed to work like traditional black-and-white film filters to alter tonalities within the image—for the overall image, or even section by section within the image—to ultimately achieve the final image you’re seeking. Only after all adjustments are made using any of the tools of ACR first and then Photoshop should you then convert the image to grayscale.

Having said that, I have already admitted that I immediately convert my RAW image to grayscale when I re-photograph my finished black-and-white darkroom images to digital for all reproductions used as illustrations in this book or other publications. But in my case, the original “scene” is nothing but a black-and-white photograph—not a true scene possessing natural colors as found in nature or in architectural or studio settings. So this is a specialized situation in which immediate conversion makes sense.

The remainder of this topic will be deferred to chapter 12, in the section titled “Hue, Saturation, Luminance, Grayscale, and the Targeted Adjustment Tools,” where it will mesh far better with the review of digital tools.

Panoramas and Other Image Combinations

I do not do any of these things, so I have no advice to offer. Nor do I do black-and-white conversions from color digital exposures—instead doing all of my black-and-white work traditionally with film and darkroom procedures—but I feel such digital approaches are too important to be left out of this book. So, all of the information above is what I’ve learned from the best practitioners of the process, and wish to pass on to the readers.

Panoramas can be exquisitely done, and stacking multiple exposures to gain complete depth of field sharpness throughout an image can be extremely wonderful, but you’ll have to look elsewhere for the necessary “how to” details. As the book’s subtitle says, this is a personal approach to artistic expression, so I am sticking to those I do myself, and a few more that I feel deserve additional discussion.

I feel a need to say something further about panoramas made via stitching multiple images together. Such imagery can be spectacular, and I’ve encountered some that are truly wonderful. However, I’ve seen far too many that have been done simply because they can be done: imagery in which a single exposure within the group actually is a better image than the full, stitched panorama. For example, I’ve seen images of the entire eastern wall of the Sierra Nevada—a spectacular crescendo of nature—that looks like a long strip of glowing red low hills because of the photographer’s desire to get the entire mountain front into a single image. I have felt that any one of the component images, vividly showing the enormous granite walls and pinnacles rising more than 10,000 feet from its base, would have had vastly more power. Sometimes what isn’t shown says more than showing everything. Picasso once said, “Art is the elimination of the unnecessary.” It’s a comment worth remembering. By contrast, in the late 1990s, one of my workshop students showed me a panorama made in the badlands of South Dakota—I can’t remember if it was a stitched image or simply a long, narrow crop, but I suspect the latter, since it was early in the evolution of digital imagery, and likely prior to the advent of stitching. It was an astoundingly spectacular image. The student, however was despondent because the image looked like that of reticulated film, meaning that it had rough and bumpy texture, utterly lacking in the tonal smoothness seen in a good print from a traditional black-and-white 4×5 film negative. Instead it looked like a 35mm negative blown up to 5 feet wide. I loved the image, and I loved the way it had its own unique rough-hewn quality. But I noted that the image became significantly lighter toward one side, a defect the student had overlooked. Two months after the workshop ended, I received a large package with his print enclosed, with the light side burned down to be more compatible with the tonalities in the rest of the panorama . . . and it remains in my collection of treasured photographs by other photographers. It was a case of letting early digital be digital, and not trying to emulate the traditional silver-gelatin prints of Ansel Adams, Edward or Brett Weston, or even my own. It has its own character, and the image itself is fabulous.

Figure 11-4: Boy on Tricycle, Moho, Peru
In the town square, just north of Lake Titicaca, I saw the Mondrianesque geometry and colors of the buildings, with the boy on the vendor’s tricycle adding the extra touch to make the photograph sing. I quickly made the digital exposure as I stepped off our workshop transportation bus before the boy went on his way.

===== FILE 19/28: Text%2fchapter12.xhtml =====

Figure 12-1: Rothenberg Building Abstract
In ACR I used Curves (including the overall and three individual channels), slightly altered both the Temperature and Tint defaults, and altered both Vibrance and Saturation, all to bring a bit more color saturation and interest to a geometrically compelling and intentionally confusing image. No further color or contrast alterations were added in Photoshop.

CHAPTER 12
Image Adjustments—Using the Digital Tools

IN MY INTERACTIONS WITH STUDENTS WORKING DIGITALLY, I have found that a lot of users are unfamiliar with many of the basic technical tools of Adobe Camera RAW (ACR), which are similar to those of the development module in Lightroom and Photoshop. I have also found that among the professionals and the most advanced amateurs using digital methods, every one has different approaches to the many options available as they go from the RAW file to the final image. So, with no attempt to begin ranking the various approaches (the statistical possibilities would be nearly infinite) and without trying to cover every available tool and menu option, it seems worthwhile to review the tools that I use, which I find many others also use, for successful post-processing of digital imagery.

The digital technical tools discussed in this chapter are far more than just “basic tools.” These should be all you need to yield wonderfully expressive final images. If you’re new or relatively new to ACR and Photoshop, the following discussion can be extremely useful. Even if you’re a long-time user, you may find new information. If you’re already familiar with earlier versions of ACR and Photoshop, you’ll see that there have been a few changes, but nothing so radical as to be confusing. I had been using Photoshop CS4 (along with its version of ACR, similar to the Develop module of Lightroom 2), and have smoothly transitioned to the Creative Cloud version of both. Finally, please recognize that since this is a book geared toward expressive photographic art, not an encyclopedia of “how to” methods, I do not pretend to include everything about digital tools here, but to give you, the reader, a solid grounding in the use of digital tools to serve your expressive purposes.

I began using digital means for my photography quite late in my own career, and relatively late in the digital “revolution.” Throughout the 1990s and early 2000s, I watched as digital processes expanded from their infancy, continually yielding utterly unacceptable results, at least to my eye. I then began observing changes that rapidly—or perhaps gradually, depending on your time frame of reference—began turning digital imagery into an art form with quite nice results. It was only at that point that I began to embrace digital means. At the same time, in the 1990s, traditional black-and-white photography itself went through something of a revolution. Variable contrast papers of the highest quality came on the market, allowing me to print every image I had previously printed on graded paper (i.e., fixed contrast-level papers) with equal or superior results. Beyond that, it opened the way to successfully print negatives that were previously extremely difficult or impossible to print on graded papers. That revolution improved the quality and expanded the opportunities for traditional darkroom silver-gelatin prints so effectively that today’s traditional black-and-white imagery still stands as the gold standard of quality. Beyond that, I love the traditional process of hands-on printing in my darkroom, which is my sanctuary. In many ways, it serves as my spiritual center. For these reasons, I have seen no reason to switch to digital means for my black-and-white work.

 Your prime question and concern at all times should be “Am I, the photographer, using a tool to help convey my thoughts most effectively, or am I using it simply because it’s there to be used?”

Color is different. Since I am a working photographer, where I try to view my work as art (with the hope others will also view it as art), I would be shortchanging myself if I didn’t employ the methodology that yields the finest images. I see no value in working with any process that ultimately yields inferior results, even if I love the process involved in doing it. Hence, I have fully switched to digital means for all my color photography, and I recommend it for all color photographers. But I still do all of my black-and-white work traditionally—with the notable exception of making digital files of black-and-white images for book reproduction.

With that quick explanation of my thoughts and approach, let’s move toward a better understanding of the digital post-processing tools I have found most valuable. There are numerous approaches and applications for refining imagery, but the discussion that follows will be based exclusively on use of Adobe Camera Raw (ACR) and Photoshop, both of which are widely used and generally understood by most digital users. My RAW files are first opened in ACR, which is virtually identical to the Develop module in Light-room. So, Lightroom users can take the following ACR tools and methods and apply them with little variation.

My approach is to do as much as I can using the tools of ACR to mold the RAW file to my vision of the final image, and then I work in Photoshop on the finishing touches that are either beyond the capabilities of ACR, or ones that I simply find easier to use in Photoshop. I have found that some people do as little in ACR as necessary, leaving the bulk of the work for Photoshop. I strongly recommend against that approach because I feel that it’s best to start any project off with a strong foundation, rather than leaving a lot of “fix-its” for later. The more problems you can solve early on, the better chance you have of getting things right at the end. Conversely, the more you leave for later, the fewer chances you have for correcting them all (figure 12-1).

Finally, let me note that in the ensuing discussion I consistently relate the technical use of any image adjustment tool to other tools and to the overriding importance of the artistic value of employing those tools sensibly and effectively. Your prime question and concern at all times should be “Am I, the photographer, using a tool to help convey my thoughts most effectively, or am I using it simply because it’s there to be used?” I find that all too often photographers lose sight of their overall expressive goals in their efforts to maximize every pixel within the image area. Use the digital technical tools discussed next to advance your compositional and interpretive goals, not to subvert them.

The ACR Tool Chest

Since ACR is the first step of my two-step workflow, let’s review ACR tools first. While the writing may indicate a specific order in which I use the basic tools, I don’t follow any specific order. Instead, it depends on what strikes me as needing immediate attention, and which tools are needed in whatever order after that. Often, I’ll circle back to make further adjustments, sometimes even negating the initial adjustment. So, any of the following tools may be employed in any order; I always work in a visual manner (because photography is a visual medium), using the appropriate tools in an appropriate order as needed alterations appear to me. Each image requires its own approach.

It is also extremely valuable to know that while you’re working on any image in ACR, you can toggle back and forth to and from your starting point (i.e., the untouched RAW file) by hitting the P key on your keyboard (P for “preview”). Once you hit the Done button, or the Open Image button (each of which saves all the ACR adjustments you’ve made), the toggle no longer works.

Temperature and Tint Tools

Initially, I tend to deal with the major overall sliders in ACR already fully discussed in chapter 11. Those six basic controls give me a good overall feel for how the image should look. After those, I tend to go to the Temperature and Tint controls at the top of the Basic panel to be sure that the colors look and feel right to my eye. I feel strongly that the more abstract an image, the more I can diverge from realistic colors; the more recognizable and realistic the image, the more I must stay within constraints imposed by reality. On that basis, a landscape needs green trees and grasses and blue skies (except at sunrise and sunset), and portraits need recognizable skin tones. But if your subject matter is a pile of metal objects dumped into a junkyard bin or a macro photograph of unrecognizable objects, it allows you to turn greens into pinks, oranges into blues, or any other colors you want to use for your final abstract image. Anything is acceptable in an image like that. Work the Temperature and Tint controls carefully to get the right color balance for your goals.

Tone Curve Tool

The Tone Curve tool (second from the left in the gray rectangle below the histogram) tends to be my next choice, and often my first choice because it is such a powerful tool. Click on Tone Curve and it opens a histogram of the image and a 45° default line from black (lower left) to white (upper right). The histogram will tell you if any amount of the image is clipped (the gray area will go up to the right edge of the graph) or unexposed (the gray area will go up to the left edge of the graph). Over time it has become my most relied-upon tool. Whether I go it first, second, third, or at some other point, I always go to the Curve tool. Even if the image looks perfect on my computer monitor, I want to check the overall histogram, and the three channels individually to see that they look reasonable. It’s an invaluable check to see that everything is as good as it appears to be. Sometimes I use this tool to alter the basic tonal values throughout the image.

I find it frustrating that I cannot assess the tonal value of any specific point with a readout of numbers from 0 (total black) to 255 (blank white) within the image, which is possible when using Lightroom, and also using Curves in Photoshop, to be discussed later). So the ACR Tone Curve tool is slightly limited—but only slightly—and is nevertheless extremely useful. Because Photoshop allows me to make a full number assessment of any point within the image—overall or channel by channel—I always put the image into Curves in Photoshop, either as a final check, or to make further adjustments. In ACR Tone Curves is such an important and powerful a tool that I use it on every image. (I must admit to wondering if such limitations in ACR is a subtle way of Adobe trying to force users to purchase Lightroom, but of course, that would be hard to imagine.)

The default mode for Tone Curves in the CC version of ACR is Point (found just above the histogram), which can be toggled to Parametric. In Point mode you can grab the curve at any location—including the end points—to move that location of the curve up or down, left or right. This way you can shape the curve exactly as you see fit, and you can observe the effects on the image in real time as you alter the curve. In the CC version of Photoshop, you can also go to any of the three separate color channels—red, green or blue—to alter them individually to suit your wishes. Often, major contrast increases are accompanied by major color shifts, so use of the separate RGB curves can be instrumental in bringing back the color saturation that was altered along with contrast. Also, be aware that if major contrast increases entail major color shifts, it can be concluded that minor contrast increases include minor color shifts that may not be easily noticed, but it’s worth taking the time to see if subtle changes have occurred that you should correct. Because of the immense control offered by Tone Curves, not only overall but also in the three color channels, it can serve as a far more precise tool than simply pushing the overall Contrast slider from the Basic panel.

If a RAW image is simply way too flat, I invariably go straight to the Tone Curves tool to dramatically increase contrast as needed. In the sand dune image under overcast skies (see figure 6-15a) the histogram was merely a sharp spike, which I placed about ¾ or 4/5 of the way up the scale (i.e., placing the histogram to the right of center for increased digital information and overall smoothness of tone). Then I turned to the Tone Curves tool to create a nearly vertical S-curve cutting through the histogram. The resulting radical contrast increase also caused a dramatic increase in color saturation, forcing me to reduce both Vibrance and Saturation quite significantly to achieve a sensible, realistic look for the image (see figure 6-15b). I will get back to the Vibrance and Saturation tools of the Basic panel later.

For more typical images (i.e., ones not requiring such dramatic changes), once the basic overall adjustments are done (together with the color balance adjustments of Temperature and Tint), the refinements afforded by the Tone Curves tool and the Contrast slider from the Basic panel can get things really looking good. Use them in combination or separately as you see fit. Also note that this overlap of tool usage is common throughout the use of ACR (or the Light-room Develop module) and Photoshop. These applications allow many routes to the same end, so the choice of controls is very much in your hands (and of course, this is the reason each user has his/her own approach). The options are enormous. Use them as you see fit, but use them sensibly.

Let me caution that although moving the white end point down with the Tone Curves tool may eliminate clipped endpoints, it may simply substitute meaningless light gray for blank white. Be aware of this, and be careful because losing a bright white may be counterproductive. A featureless light gray rarely confers an advantage over a blank white, and may result in saddling the image with an overall dull, lifeless feel. The same thing is true at the dark end of the tonal range: raising the black point may eliminate the deepest black, only to replace it with a flat dark gray, often dulling the image. Also, beware of moving the white endpoint to the left too far, as it could lead to clipping. Similarly, moving the black endpoint to the right too far could yield undesirable, featureless blacks with no detail. Yes, the endpoints can be moved advantageously, but they can also be moved destructively. Be fully cognizant of the effects your adjustments have on your image.

In Parametric mode you can move the Highlights, Lights, Darks, and Shadows sliders to the left and right while watching the effects on the image in real time, but you cannot move the end points. As a result of this lack of complete control, I recommend using the Tone Curve in the default Point mode exclusively.

In older versions of ACR, Parametric was the default Tone Curve mode, and it’s nice to see that Adobe has recognized the superiority of Point over Parametric as the default mode.

Consider the fact that there is a lot of overlap between the adjustments you can make using the Exposure and Contrast tools on the Basic panel and the possibilities offered by altering the curves on the Tone Curve tool. I tend to use the Exposure control for basic overall adjustment of the RAW exposure (i.e., the exposure in the camera, which should be pushed as far to the right as possible—short of clipping—for smoothest results in the final image). Whenever possible, start with a camera exposure pushed as far to the right as possible, which looks overexposed and “washed out” on your camera monitor, but is packed with useful information, then start your post-processing adjustments. So, you can often start with an Exposure adjustment—almost always downward—which gets the image to look a lot better, and no longer washed out. Alternatively, you may want to move either of the sliders that affect only the brighter tones—Highlights or Whites—while leaving the mid-tones and darker tones intact. You will see, on an image-by-image basis, which approach works best for any specific image, keeping in mind that the same approach will not be the best approach for all images. Of course, if you have properly pushed the histogram to the right, it’s likely that reducing overall exposure will be the best choice to pull everything back to more palatable tones—but with more information preserved—rather than bunching up highlight tones while leaving mid-tones and shadows too light. On the other hand, if the histogram is already pushing both ends of the scale, reducing Highlights or Whites would surely be the better choice, rather than risk pushing the left end of the histogram into featureless blacks via use of the Exposure slider.

Straighten and Crop Tools

For a moment let’s move to the tools shown in the upper-left panel of the ACR window. Sometimes I must rotate the image 90° to the left or right—sometimes even 180°—especially if my RAW file happens to be a macro shot looking straight down, or at some extreme angle (and the resulting image displays an orientation that I simply don’t like). As a result, one of the two rotation tools (one for rotating the image clockwise and the other for rotating counterclockwise) may be the first tool I turn to when the default orientation simply irritates me, and I can’t even work on the image until I get it oriented properly to my eye. The two rotation tools at the right end of that panel will rotate the image in 90° increments in the direction you desire. For finer adjustments, go the Straighten tool (the fifth one to the right of the Hand tool). Place your cursor at the left edge of your image, click on it and while holding the mouse down, drag it across to the right edge of the image at the level you deem best to be your horizontal line, then release the mouse. The dotted line will be your new horizontal line, and the largest possible cropping of the image area with the new horizontal line will be outlined. You can then crop further to alter the shape of the image, and you can even grab the corners with the curved tool to rotate it a bit farther clockwise or counterclockwise for more perfect alignment. After you get the proper alignment and cropping you want, click on the Hand tool, and the cropped, rotated image will now fill your screen. You can further use the Crop tool (the fourth tool to the right of the Hand tool) to then crop smaller, narrower, or square. If there is no need to change the horizontal line on the RAW image, just go directly to the Crop tool to crop the image as you please. You can even crop a horizontal image to a vertical or vice versa. (I never hesitate to crop if I see a stronger image within the RAW image . . . and I have always done the same with my black-and-white negatives when making prints. The downside to cropping: if you crop too much, you may end up with too small an image area, necessitating extreme enlargements that can then introduce excessive pixilation or grain, and which can prove unacceptable. So there’s a limit to cropping, and you have to define that limit on a case-by-case basis.)

 Whenever possible, start with a camera exposure pushed as far to the right as possible, which looks overexposed and “washed out” on your camera monitor, but is packed with useful information; then start your post-processing adjustments.

Figure 12-2: My Backyard Conifer Forest
The lush conifer forest is on my 20-acre property in the North Cascade Mountains of Washington. The original RAW file was not perfectly aligned vertically, being off by merely 1°, or perhaps a bit more. I used the straighten tool vertically, simply going right down the edge of one of the trees to be sure the final image has the trees at a true vertical. (Of course, not all conifers stand exactly 90° to the ground, but on balance, if most seem to be leaning to one side, everything seems wrong.)

The Straighten tool can alternatively be used to create a perfect vertical. Instead of drawing the line from left to right to create a true horizontal, you can start at the top and draw a line to the bottom (or vice versa) to properly align true verticals, such as for architectural purposes, or in a conifer forest (figure 12-2).

Clarity Tool

From the Basic Panel, the Clarity slider tends to be another prime tool of choice. By pushing the slider to the right or left, it increases or decreases local midtone contrasts. I generally tend to move it from the neutral position to the right, thereby increasing midtone contrast, which also tends to give the image a higher degree of apparent sharpness (essentially due to the increased contrast). The most striking effect of pushing the Clarity slider to the right is an apparent increase in brilliance and “snap” throughout the image, and for this reason I tend to slide it to the right much of the time, but not too far. I rarely push the Clarity slider above 30, for it can introduce unwanted effects of thin black lines at the edges of abrupt tonal changes, such as the edge of a building against a bright sky. At times, the slider should be pushed to the left, to subtly blur out tonal differences and to help create a more ethereal feel. At other times, it may be useful apply the Clarity slider to only select parts of the image and push it to the left to subtly blur those parts while leaving everything else sharper and more vivid.

With every editing tool, it’s best to work with each image independently of other images and to choose the most appropriate adjustments and the degree to which you want to push the effect for your purposes. When working with quiet, soft-toned images, moving the Clarity slider to the left can help soften the overall feel even more.

Graduated Filter Tools

An often-used tool located in the upper-left panel is the Graduated filter tool. I have often found this tool to be invaluable when I want to darken an image toward an edge or corner. Clicking on the Graduated filter tool, opens a dialog box with a set of new controls at the far right of your screen under the histogram. Suppose it’s the lower-left corner you wish to darken. Place the cursor at the corner, press the mouse down, and drag upward to the right. A small green circle opens where you first clicked on the mouse, and a black-and-white dotted line follows your cursor with a red circle as you drag the cursor up and in from the corner. Then a second dotted red-and-white line at 90° to the direction of the black-and-white dotted line will appear from the point of your cursor. Once you release the mouse, you have defined the area where the effect will be applied. Then go to the dialog box and move the Exposure slider to the left. You’ll see the corner will become dark and will fade inward and upward toward the ending line, where nothing darkens . . . and nothing is affected beyond that line. You can push the exposure slider as far as necessary to darken that corner in a tapered manner. You can do the same with any of the other controls (sliders) on that panel, for example, Contrast. You can even change the color balance using the Temperature and Tint controls, or you can fine tune that selection with the Highlights, Shadows, Whites and Blacks sliders. Conversely, you can lighten toward that corner in a tapered manner, just as easily by moving the Exposure slider to the right.

Figure 12-3: Litle Molle, Clearing Storm
Litle Molle is one of Norway’s Lofoten Islands. This view from the island of Skrova shows clouds rapidly flowing over the island’s hidden summits, as a storm departs. Almost a black-and-white image, nothing was done to alter color saturation, but the foreground reflective water was greatly toned down using the linear gradient tool, as the sunlit reflections were almost blinding. Interestingly that foreground, appearing to be a shallow ocean inlet, is actually the wet asphalt apron of the airport, with the photograph made through the terminal window while I waited to board my flight.

If you were to do exactly the same thing starting in the middle of any edge (left, right, top, or bottom) of the image (rather than coming in from a corner), and hold the mouse down as you move the cursor toward the center of the image, you can taper down the tonality toward that entire edge in the same manner (figures 12-3 and 12-4). Again, you can also lighten it toward that edge. Beyond that you can use any of the other controls to alter the image as you see fit within that selected area. And, of course, starting from any edge, you can move diagonally into the image when desired; you don’t always have move perpendicularly into the image from any edge. If you hold down the Shift key while defining the area to be darkened from an edge, the area will end parallel to the edge.

Figure 12-4: Rockies and Rangeland Sunrise
Photographed from the rolling rangelands east of Glacier National Park, the tones required post-processing rebalancing. A graduated filter was used to darken the sky, clouds, and distant mountains, and another was used to lighten the foreground up the sunlit trees across the center of the image.

I should caution that overuse of some of the controls could create strange, undesirable effects. I recommend extreme caution with using controls like Clarity or Sharpness in just a portion of any image without including the full image. Always consider the cumulative effect on the full image when you invoke any of the controls on a portion of the image, whether it’s from a corner or an edge or any other portion of the image.

Now consider the vast possibilities this tool offers. Suppose you taper down the tonality of the image toward the lower-left corner. (In traditional darkroom terms, you’re burning—or darkening—the image down to the corner.) Then suppose you also taper down the image along the bottom edge. At that point you may have overly darkened that lower left corner, because you’ve darkened it twice. But then you can come back with a third Graduated filter gradient adjustment upward and inward from that lower-left corner to lighten the new selection, thereby negating the excessive darkening you’ve created by the overlap of the two previous tapered burns. Obviously, that third adjustment can come up from that same corner, or near that corner, and it can go into the image as little or as far as you wish, and the degree of lightening can be adjusted to suit you. So now, with three Graduated filter gradients applied to your image—two darkening and one lightening—you’ve darkened the image toward the corner and toward the entire bottom, but you haven’t overly darkened that corner.

You can come into the image from any point at any edge or corner, move into the image in any direction, and stop the tapered adjustment at any point. If your next starting point is on, or very close to, any of your previous starting points, and the previous choice is inadvertently activated again, just click the mouse anywhere outside the activated area to delete that starting point, and start again with your next Graduated filter choice.

In the CC version of ACR, there is also a Radial filter tool that allows you to taper out to all edges and corners simultaneously. It works in a somewhat different way from that of the Graduated filter tool. With the Radial filter tool you can start from the center of the image, click the mouse down and move it toward a corner. When you release the mouse you will see an oval dotted line centered at your starting point with the oval going through your end point. You can then grab either of the two major axis points or the minor axis points of that oval (e.g., the left, right, top or bottom points of the oval) and move it, thereby changing the shape and size of the full oval. You can place your mouse on the starting (central) point of the oval, and move it in any direction, thereby moving the entire oval with it. With the Radial filter tool, the dotted line indicates where the tapering begins inward toward the center. Everything outside the oval will be altered to the full extent you designate; it will taper down to no change from that dotted oval inward 50% of the way to the center of the oval (your starting point). Thus, if you start your oval in the exact center and then have the oval’s dotted line touching the four center edges, if you then darken the Exposure slider the image will darken to that full extent outside of the oval, and will taper back to nothing inside the oval from the oval halfway back to the center of the oval. Again, you can use any of the other controls to alter the image inside and outside the oval in the same manner.

As you create the oval, you can reshape it as you please as long as you’re holding the mouse down. You can shape it to a long, narrow horizontal oval or a long, narrow vertical oval, or to a perfect circle. Once the mouse is released, the shape is set. You can still reshape it as you please by grabbing any of the four “handles” (i.e., left, right, top, or bottom of the oval) by the edge of the cursor. (Note: If the oval goes beyond the picture area, reduce the size of the image until the oval fully shows, and reshape it.)

You can even re-orient the oval’s axis clockwise or counterclockwise via a curved icon with arrowheads at each end, and then rotate the entire oval to the angle that best suits your needs. Simply place your cursor near one of the four “grab points” moving it slowly around until the curved double-arrow appears, and then pull the point up, down, left, or right to re-orient the oval. Thus, you’re not confined to an oval that’s oriented left/right or top/bottom. You can orient it to any angle you want. This is a wonderful, simple-to-use, control that gives you additional options for image adjustment.

This, too, is a valuable tool, and can be moved around to darken or lighten, or alter in any other way, just one corner, two corners, three corners or an oval along one or two edges, or even three edges, depending on how you shape and locate the oval.

Keep in mind that you don’t have to always work from the center outward. You can, for example, start the Radial filter at any point within the image and have the curve end anywhere. For example, on occasion you may see a need to darken, or lighten, or alter the color balance in a curve along the left and bottom edges simultaneously. In this instance you can center the curve at the upper right—or even beyond the image area—and bring the circle or oval as far toward the lower left as you wish. When employed with careful planning, this tool can be immensely valuable.

You can reverse the effect by pressing the Inside button below the sliders. So, if you want to darken the inside of the oval you’ve created rather than the outside, pressing the Inside button does it. This is handy anywhere, but I have found it particularly useful along the edges of an image, where I have wanted to burn (darken) or dodge (lighten) an edge, but not as much toward the corners. With the Inside button activated, the greatest effect will occur at the center of the oval, and will diminish to zero at the oval’s boundary.

You can even reshape the oval asymmetrically if you hold down the Alt key as you grab any one of the oval’s four handles, moving only that side of the oval. This allows for more flexibility in reshaping the original oval. (I should note that I have encountered inconsistencies with this method, in which some images refused to work in this manner. Although frustrating, it represents no serious problem. You can overcome this failure by reshaping the oval symmetrically, and then grabbing the center point to move it one way or the other. Thus, instead of accomplishing the asymmetric reshaping in one move, you have to resort to two moves to accomplish the desired reshaping.)

On occasion I have encountered unexpected color distortions toward a corner or edge of an image. Either the Graduated filter tool or the Radial filter tool can be effectively employed with the appropriate color balance controls to neutralize such discolorations.

Figure 12-5: Sunbeams, Owens Valley and Sierra
A difficult image to deal with due to the tonal range from the brightness at the top to the shaded brush in the lower half. By employing the HSL tool and then turning to the Targeted Adjustment tool, I was able to click on the upper edge of one of the bushes and increase both its luminosity (to a moderate extent) and saturation (very slightly), which added light and life to the foreground, turning it from a dull base to an actively interesting foreground, and creating greater depth between the foreground and the summits, 10 miles away.

Adjustment Brush Tool

I think the Adjustment Brush tool should be renamed the “Burning and Dodging” tool, because it serves that purpose (as an approximate equivalent to the traditional darkroom). Choose the “brush” size you need, and a considerable additional amount of “feather” where your burning or dodging smoothly blends into its surroundings. The solid black inner circle shows the extent of the full adjustment, the black-and-white barred outer circle shows the extent of the feathering to the surroundings.

Below the numerous adjustment sliders, and at the very bottom of the screen, you’ll see boxes labeled Overlay and Mask, with a third unlabeled box to the right of Mask. These are important to understand. Click on the Overlay button, and the starting point of every complete brushstroke you’ve made shows up on the image. When you choose any brushstroke, or as you’re starting any brushstroke, if you click Mask, it will show you the full extent, including the feathering, of the adjustment area. The third box (the unlabeled one to the right of the word “Mask”) can be adjusted to the color of the mask. The mask color can be changed if, for example you’ve been using a red color to show the adjusted area, and now you’re working to change the tonality of a red fire engine and you can’t see the chosen area because the red mask can’t be distinguished on the red fire engine. Click on that unnamed rectangle and change the indicator color to green or yellow or blue, or whatever color you choose to clearly show the extent of the adjusted area. This can be quite helpful. I tend to click the Mask box “on” when I’m initially painting on the area to be adjusted in order to be sure I’m covering the full area I want to adjust, then I click it off to see the actual adjustments as I’m making them.

If you decide you’re unhappy with the adjustments you’ve just made, you can click on the Clear All box at the lower right to erase all adjustments and start over. That’s extreme. You’ve made some really poor choices if you have to negate them all! But joking aside, there are times when you start off on the wrong path without realizing it, and continue on that path for some time before recognizing you’re headed in a wrong direction, so the Clear All button puts you back to “go,” allowing you to start again. Of course, alternatively you can click on the Overlay button, choose the individual adjustments you want to eliminate, and then start each one of those again.

Immediately below the adjustment sliders you’ll find another box labeled “Auto Mask.” When clicked on, it will confine the feathering to a hard edge. So, if you want to lighten to the edge of building, but not overlap the adjacent sky, you can click on Auto Mask while you paint on the area to be altered with the Adjustment Brush tool without worrying that you’ll feather out into the sky . . . as long as the center of your brush stays within the confines of the building.

Use of Auto Mask may introduce unwanted problems, specifically a sharp line introduced at the edge of a tonal break. After defining the mask and making your adjustment (such as darkening the masked area), it’s wise to greatly enlarge the image to see if such undesirable effects have been introduced at the edge of the mask. If so, try cutting back on the amount of alteration (e.g., reduce the amount you’ve darkened the masked area) until the effect is negated. Sometimes you may have to abandon the Auto Mask feature entirely, and simply work on the greatly enlarged image with a small paintbrush as carefully as possible.

If, on the other hand, you’re painting a mask on a different object with a hard edge, say one rock within a pile of rocks, but a portion of an adjacent rock is identical or quite similar in tonality, you might overlap that hard edge. In that case, go to the very top, above the sliders, and click on Erase, adjust the brush size, and use the brush as an eraser to remove the overlay of the mask that intrudes onto the unwanted rock.

So, with that overview of how to go about controlling the tool, how do you use it?

You can use the Adjustment Brush tool to neutralize unwanted color distortions, as suggested at the close of the previous section. While the Graduated filter tool or the Radial filter tool can be used easily at an edge or corner, the Adjustment Brush tool can be used anywhere in the image.

You can isolate any portion of an image by painting it with the Adjustment Brush tool and then go to the sliders to lighten or darken the tonality; increase or decrease the contrast; adjust the highlights shadows, whites or blacks; alter color balance; or apply any of the other adjustables, as you see fit. If, for example, you darkened an area of foliage via this method, you can then enlarge the image, make the brush smaller, and bring back a solitary branch within that foliage to a brighter tonality. So you have extraordinary control.

As with all the digital controls, the real problem is controlling yourself from the lure of overusing and abusing the controls. Lightening that solitary branch, for example, may cause it to stand too much and may pull the viewer’s eye away from more important things you really want the viewer to concentrate on. Always keep the total goal in mind when you’re working on image adjustments. Don’t get so wrapped up in the minutiae that you lose sight of the total picture (literally and figuratively). This, of course, is an oft-repeated warning in this book, but my workshop experience tells me that can’t be repeated too often.

 As with all the digital controls, the real problem is controlling yourself from the lure of overusing and abusing the controls.

I also want to single out one adjustment slider that can prove problematic: the Clarity slider. As noted above, pushing the Clarity slider too far to the right may introduce unwanted thin lines into the image at abrupt tonal changes, similar to oversharpening the image. So, if you slide Clarity to the right on the overall image, and then you slide it to the right when using the Adjustment Brush tool, the combination may push the image over the brink. So, always keep in mind the cumulative effects of using sliders. I tend to avoid the Clarity slider when using any specific adjustment—the Graduated filter or the Radial filter being other prime examples—but I generally employ it for the overall image, only. There are exceptions. (Always remember James Thurber’s observation that “There’s no exception to the rule that every rule has an exception.”) Suppose, for example, you have some nearby objects you want to bring attention to, with some distant objects partially obscured by clouds and fog. In this case, you may want to isolate the near objects and increase their clarity while leaving the rest untouched, or even push the Clarity slider to the left for those distant areas. Too often, those distant objects are increased in contrast and sharpness, which tends to counteract the appearance of distance and atmosphere between the foreground and those objects.

Hue, Saturation, Luminance, Grayscale, and the Targeted Adjustment Tools

These are very powerful and extraordinarily dangerous tools. The power comes from the ability to target specific colors within the image and altering any or all of the three stated properties (hue, saturation, or luminance). The danger comes from the lure to go overboard by pushing each and every one of these adjustments too far. Throughout my 40 years of teaching workshops—starting well before digital photography was even a thought—I have fought the tendency of photographers “going too far.” Too often traditional black-and-white printers were printing their images with contrast that vastly exceeded the desired mood of the image. They were regularly equating high contrast with high drama, with the goal of garnering instant attraction to the image. The problem was the excess contrast generally equated to excess contrast, and nothing more. Furthermore, many of the images were intended to convey a quieter, softer, more relaxed mood, yet the high contrast clashed with the intended mood. Color photographers were too often putting too much contrast and/or color saturation into their images. Again, either one was excessive, often violating the desired mood. The problem with digital imagery is that the same mistakes can be made even more easily: all you have to do is push a slider to the right . . . and keep pushing it farther to the right.

HSL/Grayscale is the fourth tool from the left in the upper-right Basic panel. Click on it and it launches a set of eight sliders of the colors of the rainbow—i.e., the full color spectrum of white light. You can use any one, two or three of the color adjustments (hue, saturation or luminance) to alter specific colors within the image. These sliders are referred to as “filters,” and you can see how great an effect any one has on the image by sliding it from side to side. Some will have a profound effect, while others will be minimal or even non-existent. I recommend trying each of the sliders to see what affect it has, and then use it with carefully considered restraint to help achieve the image you want.

As an alternative, once you activate the HSL tool, and choose any of the three adjustments (let’s choose Saturation), you can then go to the Targeted Adjustment tool (fifth from the left in the top left toolbar). This tool allows you to place your cursor on any spot in the image, press the mouse down, and while holding it down move the mouse up or down. Your chosen color will increase or decrease in saturation with the mouse movement, and it will bring other colors within the image along with it in proportion to their degree of saturation. (Moving the mouse to the right or left will produce the same effect.) This combination of tools allows you to precisely choose the color you want to change . . . but always be aware of other parts of the image changing along with it (figure 12-5). (You can, of course, do the same maneuvers using the Hue or Luminosity adjustments.)

Beware of unexpected changes. For example, if you choose Luminosity as the adjustment you wish to make, place your cursor on a very dark area, and then move your mouse upward, everything in the image may get lighter and completely washed out. So, using these two tools in combination require some time getting used to them, but once understood, they can be quite helpful.

Also, consider using the Targeted Adjustment tool without pairing it with the HSL tool, but just with the Basic panel. Choosing a spot on your image, pressing the mouse down and raising or lowering the cursor can brighten or darken all similar areas within the image. It can be quite useful. (This also points to the potential options available by trying any tool in conjunction with others or alone. If you simply experiment with the possibilities, you may discover more hidden options available to you than anyone could reasonably put into an encyclopedia.)

Conversion to Black-and-White

The HSL/Grayscale tool is also the tool to use if you want to convert your RAW color image to black-and-white in ACR. Upon opening this tool, you’ll find a button in the center at the top labeled “Convert to Grayscale.” Click that button, and the image is immediately rendered in black-and-white. However, under the surface it is still a full RGB image (the button is a toggle between color and black-and-white; click it again to prove that). In chapter 11, it was already strongly recommended not to quickly convert your RAW file to grayscale immediately. That approach will yield inferior results. We will explore a different way that opens up wider options to you and can lead to better results.

Figure 12-6: Home Conifer Forest—Black-and-White
Converting figure 12-2 to black-and-white entailed just a few alterations using the filter sliders, moving the orange slider to the left, the green slider to the right, and then employing the linear gradient tool to reduce the bright glare of the leaves in the lower-left corner of the image. It’s best to always do the black-and-white conversion via the HSL tool, and the “Convert to Grayscale” button, where the underlying image retains all color data.

You can, of course, start by manipulating the sliders below that button (figure 12-6), which I did in converting figure 12-2 to black-and-white. To achieve the tonal characteristics I desired, I first pushed the green slider to the right, thus brightening all the foliage within the image, and then I pushed the orange slider to the left to darken the tree trunks. The deciduous foliage on the lower left was then too bright, pulling my eye toward that corner, so I applied a gradient filter at a 45° angle from the lower-left corner upward and to the right to taper the brightness down in that corner of the image.

Sometimes, an alternate approach for a black-and-white conversion is in order. Once you’re in grayscale viewing mode, you can start by going to any of the ACR tools: Exposure, Contrast, Highlights, Shadows, Blacks, Whites and Clarity, just as you would work with a color image. You can even work with the Temperature and Tint sliders to see what affect they have on the total image, now being viewed as a black-and-white. For black-and-white, the Vibrance and Saturation are both fixed at the far left side, because in the black-and-white image view those controls have no meaning. You can enable the Crop or Straighten tools, the Graduated filter or the Radial filter, the Adjustment brush, etc., from the upper-left toolbar or from the Basic panel to the right, where you can apply the Tone Curve tool or work with any of the sliders below the upper set of tools.

If you start by using those tools first, edging the newly converted black-and-white image toward the final finished file you want, you can later employ the color filters as needed.

Keep in mind that at any point in this process, you can click the “Convert to Grayscale” button to again view the image in full color, which may be particularly helpful at this stage to get a renewed view of the actual colors in the image—now altered from the original RAW image by the adjustments you’ve already made. (Note: You can then press the P key on your keyboard—again, P for “preview”—to view the untouched original RAW image, as well.) A look back at the full color view may help you choose which filters to use for further adjustments. Alternatively, you can ignore the color view, continue viewing the image as a black-and-white, and simply play with the sliders to see what effects they produce. Some users like to toggle back and forth to see what they like best; some find toggling back to color to be a major distraction. You’ll quickly discover which approach works best for you.

You can alter filters to any degree you wish while watching their effect on the black-and-white image. It is my observation as a lifelong traditional black-and-white film and filter user that the degree of image alteration using the digital filters vastly exceeds that of any filter used in traditional photography, which tells me that gross overuse of digital filtration is a real lure and threat. Overuse of filters can be ridiculous, so my greatest caution is to use them to slightly and sensibly modify the image; not to transform it into a cartoon. A small push of a slider to the left or right can have a huge effect, so caution is in order. However, if your intent is to blow off reality, then no holds are barred, and you can apply the filters to any degree you wish. As I have repeatedly stated, if you keep your basic goals in mind at all times, you’ll end up with the statement you want to make.

To my eye and mind, the filter siders do not emulate filtration in traditional black-and-white imagery. For example, I have found that moving the aqua filter slider may have virtually no effect, but moving the blue or green could have a profound effect (or vice versa). But these “filters” represent colors that are relatively close to one another on the visual spectrum, making it baffling to me why one would have a profound effect and a neighboring color filter would exhibit none. Over time you’ll simply have to ignore the alleged “color” of the filter, move the sliders to see exactly what effect it has on the image, and simply use the ones that help you achieve your goals. The important thing here is to keep those filters active by maintaining the underlying image in full RGB. The moment the underlying color image is removed, you lose those controls. Keep the controls alive, and work the image as carefully in black-and-white viewing mode as you would with any color image.

Many of the best practitioners converting from a color RAW file to black-and-white agree that while wonderful things can be done in ACR and Photoshop, the finest results are achieved through third-party software. At the time of writing, one that gets particularly high marks is Silver Effex Pro 2 (a Google product, now downloadable for free). In addition, there are many books and video tutorials available to help walk you through some of these rather complicated processes. Are they worth the time and trouble? The answer should be apparent: if you want to produce the finest imagery, you have to put in the effort. This is true of any field of endeavor, so it’s true of both traditional and digital approaches to photography, as well.

Vibrance and Saturation Tools

Two tools I sometimes use in ACR are the Vibrance and Saturation tools. I say “sometimes use” because I rarely employ them, and when I do, it’s often to reduce the color saturation rather than raise it, because the original RAW colors have a lot of brilliance at the start, or because other post-processing alterations—most often a large contrast increase—pushed color saturation levels to unacceptable levels, as in figure 6-15b. Furthermore, before coming to the Vibrance and Saturation controls, I may have already altered colors to my satisfaction the with the color balance controls (Temperature and Tint) and further modified them with Clarity or the Curve tool—and certainly if I’ve used any of the three primary color curves—or other controls already discussed.

Throughout my life I have heard the phrase “The ways of God are unknown.” I think that phrase applies equally well to the Vibrance and Saturation tools. If I move either one to the extreme left, I end up with a grayscale image—no color, effectively a black-and-white image, although I have encountered some images with a semblance of color remaining with only the Vibrance control pushed all the way to the left. Moving either one all the way to the right creates unbearably garish colors. This tells you that, in general, these sliders must be used minimally, and with care.

Over time I have found that Vibrance seems to affect blues and closely related colors to a greatest extent, whereas Saturation seems to work most strongly in reds, oranges, and related colors. Beyond that, the two seem to work in ways that I cannot predict in advance, so I have learned to play with the sliders to see how the image responds, and then use them individually or in tandem to achieve the desired results. In all cases, color saturation is increased when pushed to the right (but not in exactly the same way), and decreased when pushed to the left (again, somewhat differently from one another). So, just as with the recommendation given in chapter 11 for using the four basic controls (Highlights, Whites, Shadows and Blacks) in the Basic panel, I recommend working the sliders independently to see what they do on each individual image. I further recommend using the two in tandem, pushing either one as little as possible to achieve your color saturation goals. Pushed too far to the right, each one will turn the image into a garish, glowing, neon atrocity. Don’t go there! Pushed too far to the left, each will change the color to be drab and uninteresting. Don’t go there, either!

It has been my experience that the greater problem is too much saturation, not too little. The best photographs are attractive because of their insight, their enlightening compositions, and their surprising revelations, not their garish colors. Color—in particular, its degree of saturation—is a critical component in a color image, and it should be used to create emotion, not to overwhelm the viewer. Always keep that in mind during post-processing.

Healing Brush and Clone Tools

The final two tools I use in ACR are the Healing Brush and Clone Stamp tools. Let me bypass a discussion of these very useful tools for now, and I will pick them up just below in my discussion of the Clone Stamp tool in Photoshop.

ACR Summary

These are the tools I employ in the first stage of my postprocessing of any RAW image. There are others but I don’t work with them. I’m sure other practitioners will explain why I’m missing the boat, but as I stated at the start, everyone has his or her own workflow. This is mine.

I do not employ the tools in any specific order. Upon opening an image, I first jump to the tool that appears most necessary. Sometimes it’s the Graduated filter, sometimes it’s the Temperature and Tint controls, sometimes it’s the Tone Curve, sometimes it’s the Crop tool, and sometimes it’s something else. I look for needed adjustments from the RAW file in whatever order my whim strikes me with each individual image. This is art; this is not a construction job in which you have to do things in a specific order to get the job done properly. Besides all that, I want to be loose and have fun with the image. I often go back and forth between tools, because sometimes a change in one requires a further change in another that I’d already adjusted. It’s an iterative process, and I approach it that way with each image. I recommend you approach this equally loosely. Don’t create a list of tool that must be used in any specific order. That’s a surefire means of pushing you off track more often than it will keep you on track.

Once I’ve completed this post-processing in ACR, I can click on “Done” to save it as modified for further work at a later date (either in ACR or in Photoshop), or I can open it in Photoshop by clicking on “Open Image.” So let’s proceed into Photoshop, with the understanding that much of the postprocessing of the RAW file has already been accomplished.

The Photoshop Tool Chest

Upon opening an image in Photoshop, I first go to the Window menu to be sure the following palettes are visible on the monitor at the right: Adjustments, History, Info, and Layers. (The icons shown in the Adjustments box are exactly the same as you’ll find in the drop-down Layer menu at the top, when you go down to New Adjustment Layer and click on it. At that point, you’ll see the same potential adjustments.) So you can open up any new adjustment layer (e.g., Curves; Hue, Saturation, Lightness; Levels, etc.) or by going to New Adjustment Layer from the drop-down Layers menu.

It’s best to do all adjustments in Layers—in fact, it should be your only approach to adjustments in Photoshop—because any layer can be altered or thrown out if you simply don’t like the adjustments made. To throw one out, grab the layer icon and drag it to the trash can in the lower right of the Layers palette. Then start again with a new layer.

The Clone Stamp Tool

I love the Clone Stamp tool! This is the tool I wish existed in traditional photography, where the only way to eliminate a black dot in a light sky is to etch it off with an X-ACTO knife (or some similar instrument). The Clone Stamp tool allows you to eliminate an unwanted spot or any other type of blemish without any damage to the emulsion.

Go to Layer > New Layer and name your layer “Clone Layer 1,” or whatever you wish to name it. Then click on the Clone Stamp tool. Be sure when attempting to use the Clone Stamp tool that on the top gray bar above the image the Mode is Normal, Opacity is 100% and Flow is 100%, and that down on the toolbar along the left edge the Set Foreground Color is black. It’s generally best to open the Brush Preset picker found on the left side of the top gray bar and set the brush hardness to something significantly less than 100% to best feather the cloning action with its surroundings.

The way the Clone Stamp tool works is interesting. Assume you have a black spot in a light sky. You want to remove that black spot. Let’s call the location of that black spot “location 2.” First, find a patch of sky with precisely the same tonality as the sky surrounding the black spot, but one without any spot within it. Let’s call that unblemished portion of sky “location 1.” Select a size for the stamp you’re about to employ using the bracket keys: ] to increase its size or [ to decrease it. While holding down the Option key place the cursor over the unblemished section of sky (location 1) and click on it. That creates the choice that will replace the defective area containing the spot. Then move the cursor directly over the spot (location 2) and click again. The contents of location 1 (the unblemished sky) immediately replaces the contents of location 2 (with the spot). Voilà! The spot is gone.

But that action does more. It establishes a vector (to use the correct mathematical term): a fixed distance and direction from location 2 back to location 1. After that, if you then click on any other portion of the image, let’s say a second blemish in a different portion of the sky, which immediately is the new location 2, the Clone Stamp tool is activated again, applies the same vector to choose location 1, and places new location 1’s contents into location 2. You can continue to effectively click on various portions of the image, and the same vector will be applied each time. You can change the size of the selection from one click to the next, but the same vector will be applied to take contents from location 1 to location 2. To change that vector, hold the Option key down once again as you click the mouse to get a new “location 1,” release the Option key, and move the mouse to a new “location 2” and click. That replaces the contents of the newly chosen location 2 with the contents of “new location 1,” and establishes a new vector, which will be adhered to until you change it again.

Now, let’s do something seemingly more complicated. Suppose you’ve photographed a forest, with intersecting branches up into the sky. But there is one small section of bright open sky that is eye-catching and irritating. Choose a size of the Clone Stamp tool that covers the size of open sky, and with the Option key down, place the cursor over a segment of foliage and branches elsewhere in the image, and click on it. That’s a new “location 1.” Release the Option key and move the cursor over the blank sky (i.e., location 2) and click again. The foliage from location 1 now replaces the blank sky in location 2. If you’ve carefully chosen the area of foliage (i.e., an appropriately chosen location 1) it may replace the blank sky so seamlessly that it may be impossible to see anything amiss. It blends perfectly. In the same way, you can remove a blemish from someone’s face in a portrait.

Furthermore, if you hold the mouse down when you’re at location 2 and move it around, it will continue to replace the contents from location 1 via the same vector. You may be able to use this procedure (when very careful selections are made) to remove a scar on a person’s face, or any other linear blemish on any object. When this is done correctly, it’s almost like magic.

The Clone Stamp tool is fabulous; it’s my favorite of all digital tools.

The Healing Brush Tool in ACR

ACR has a tool called the Healing Brush, which also contains a Clone Stamp tool as an option. But these two tools work in ways that are different from the Photoshop Clone Stamp tool. In ACR, go to the Spot Removal Tool (the middle tool in the upper-left array of tools) and click on it. A dialog box opens in the upper right, with the type of tool either the Healing Brush or the Clone Stamp. You can adjust the size, degree of feathering, and opacity below the type of tool you’ve chosen. With either the Healing Brush or the Clone Stamp tool you place your cursor on the object you want to remove and press the mouse down. ACR creates a circle around the point where you clicked the mouse—which you can enlarge or contract using the bracket keys: ] or [. It then automatically grabs a section of the image to replace the unwanted distraction. While holding the mouse down, if you move the cursor, it will create any shape you chose to clone or heal (not just a circle.) The original circle containing the distraction is shown as a dotted red line; the choice ACR picks to replace it is a dotted green circle, with a dotted green line connecting the two. (Of course, if you move the mouse while pressing down the original shape of the red area to be altered will be replicated by a similar shape chosen elsewhere.) The choice ACR makes seems strangely arbitrary . . . so the start of this process is distinctly weird. (If there is a non-random method behind its choice, I have been unable to determine what its algorithm is.) But, there is a way to get around this weirdness. You can place your cursor within the green circle (or odd shape), and move the circle to a new location of your choice to replace the unwanted distraction. (Note: Placing your cursor at the edge of the green circle yields a different icon—a two-sided arrow—that allows you to enlarge or reduce the size of both the red and green circles simultaneously. You can move or enlarge the original circle in the same way.)

Once you tune in to that flexibility, the Healing Brush/Clone Stamp tool becomes much more useful, as I learned. In fact, you can place the original circle anywhere in the image (then watch as ACR makes its arbitrary choice of a replacement), and then ignoring both, move the original circle to where you want to place it, and then move the ACR replacement choice to wherever you want to place it. You’re done! Before recognizing that flexibility, I used the Clone Stamp or Healing Brush in ACR only when a distraction was so bothersome to me that I needed to get it out of my field of vision. But once I realized how to take control of these two tools, I have largely transferred its use from a Photoshop tool to an ACR tool. However, I must admit that the way it’s done in Photoshop, without the distracting circles on the image for both the starting and ending points, is far “cleaner” and therefore easier to follow. My preference would be for Adobe to simply transfer the Clone Stamp tool from Photoshop to ACR.

Curves

The Curves adjustment used to be my most relied-upon image adjustment in Photoshop, but now I do most of it in ACR, and I strongly recommend that practice to all digital users. After all, why wait until the end to make needed adjustments at the beginning that are totally nondestructive (i.e., nothing of the original RAW file is ever lost in ACR)? Some practitioners say that they can do everything needed using Curves, which, if not the truth, is close to the truth. Still, doing it in ACR gives you the same control, but earlier in the process.

Before I learned that the Tone Curve tool in ACR had the Point option (which was an optional mode in older versions of ACR, but is now the default mode in the CC version of ACR, as it should be), I relied on Curves in Photoshop for more than 90 percent of my post-processing adjustments. No longer. With ACR obviously giving equal control of the overall tonal curve from the RAW file, including the ability to move the ends points of the initial 45° default line, plus further control in each of the three color channels, you can do it in ACR rather than wait until you get into Photoshop. At the risk of unnecessary repetition, I recommend trying to do as much initial processing as possible in ACR, so that you can leave more sophisticated refinements at the end to Photoshop. Often, the work done in ACR is enough. No further work is required in Photoshop (except for saving it as a TIFF or PSD finished file). But if more is needed, Curves still accounts for the vast bulk of my processing.

Indeed, more is always needed even when I apparently accomplish all necessary adjustments via the Tone Curve tool in ACR, I still go to Curves in Photoshop because it allows me to measure the tonal value of any point in the image with the eyedropper, which ACR fails to provide (though Lightroom allows such measurement). So, while things may look perfect to my eye, in Photoshop Curves I can actually measure any point to make the final tonal or color adjustments. For this reason, I invariably open the Curves tool in Photoshop for every image. It provides excellent insurance, and I strongly recommend all users doing the same. (More thoughts on the difference between eyeballing it and measuring it at the end of this chapter.)

While working in Curves you can click on the hand icon in the upper left of the adjustment box, activating the eye-dropper, and then place the eyedropper at any point in the image, which will give you an immediate reading of the density at that point. Its point on the curve is also shown. You can click your mouse on the image at that point, thus locking a point onto the curve, and then move the cursor up or down to alter the density of that point—along with other parts of the image—as the curve changes with the up or down move of the cursor. You can do the same with the red, green, and blue components individually. This gives you great control of the image. (This cannot be done in ACR, but it can be done in Lightroom.)

Curves can be applied globally or it can be localized to color regions that need special attention. Let’s first deal with the global application of Curves, then discuss methods of applying Curves in a more targeted manner.

In the Adjustments window, click on the Curves icon. That creates a layer, which you can name as you please. The histogram of the full image will appear with the typical straight line default “curve” from the lower left (black) to the upper right (white). Altering that 45° straight line lightens or darkens the image: pushing it to the left or upward lightens tones; pushing it to the right or downward darkens tones. Where you grab the curve and pull it left or right will determine which portions of the image are most affected. In Photoshop, the ends of the default curve can be moved just as any other portion of the default line, as you can using the Point option in ACR. Furthermore, you can grab the default curve at any point from black to white and move it up or down, or left or right, as little or far as you want. With this, fine alterations are possible. Also, once you click on any portion of the default curve, you can move it by grabbing it with the mouse or using the keyboard arrows to move that section of the curve, one space at a time, in any of the directions.

At the top of the Curves dialog box, you can change the overall tonal curve to work specifically on any of the primary color channels: red, green, or blue (just as you can in ACR Curves). This affords even more refined alterations. If, for example, you detect a slight red/magenta tinge in a light sky, you can go the red curve, and bring the upper part of the curve down just a bit . . . and perhaps employ a further adjustment of the green and blue channels, as well. If it’s a deeper blue sky, you can alter the middle or darker portion of the curve to deal with just that tonality, and bring it back to the default in other portions of the default curve.

If you click on the hand with the pointing finger in the Curves dialog box, you’ll get the eyedropper, which, when you move it across any part of your image, will show exactly what tonality on the overall curve it corresponds to, and gives you a number from 0 (total black) to 255 (pure white). If you click the mouse over any portion of the image you get a “grab point” on the curve, which you can keep fixed, or you can move the curve as you see fit with the mouse or by using the directional arrows on the keyboard. You can use this eyedropper tool with the full gray tonal scale, or with the red, green, or blue channels individually.

It has been my experience that careful alterations of the overall curve, with perhaps some additional tweaks of the three primary channels, generally satisfies my vision of the final image 90 to 95 percent of the time. With the initial changes I’ve made in ACR, I can generally use Curves in Photoshop to accomplish the rest.

Refining Curves to Selected Areas

But then there are the remaining 5 to 10 percent of images that need further processing. Most of those images can be satisfactorily processed with more specific targeting of Curves. There are two ways this can be accomplished: the quick and dirty way or the more complicated, refined method. Let’s go for the quick and dirty first, which really isn’t dirty at all, but it is quick and very effective.

Create another Curves layer (either from the menu bar at the top, where you select Layer > New Adjustment Layer > Curves (or simply go back to the Adjustments window to click on the Curves icon, thus opening a new Curves layer).

Before proceeding with any adjustments, go back up to the menu bar and select Select > Color Range. An eyedropper appears, and when you click it on any portion of the image—let’s say that magenta-tinged section of sky, it will select just those portions of the image with that color and tone. You can then widen or narrow the variation of tone and color from your initial point by changing the amount of Fuzziness in the dialog box. In the dialog box, you’ll see what portions of the image will be altered—they are shown in white—and everything else in black. This will guide you to determine the degree of Fuzziness you want. Then, when you begin to alter the newly created Curves layer, it will affect only those portions of the image shown in white in the dialog box. Now, with only the magenta-tinged portion of the sky selected, you can add some green there to neutralize the magenta. Therefore, using the Select > Color Range option, you’ve confined the alteration to the area needed.

By contrast, it may have been that when you tried to remove the sky’s magenta cast using an overall Curves adjustment, the increased green component altered other portions of the image in undesirable ways, perhaps turning another portion of the image too green. Thus, trying to make this desired change in the sky using the overall Curves adjustments proved unacceptable.

It’s a quick, simple, and very effective procedure, which I have used often. This is also an option unavailable in ACR.

Further Refining of Curves

Sometimes, even that refinement isn’t quite enough. Let’s suppose you have three areas within an image with a pronounced reddish color and you want to either increase or decrease the intensity, or alter the color somewhat in just one of those areas while leaving the remaining two unaltered. If you click on any one of them using the color range idea, all three are selected. So, let’s see how to selectively work with just one of the three areas.

Here are the steps required to do it:

From the Select menu, go to Color Range (Select > Color Range). In the dialog box click on Localized Color Clusters, and then choose a Fuzziness setting so there will not be an abrupt edge to the selection.
Then go to the image and click on the color/tone that you wish to alter. You can further hold the Shift key down while clicking on adjacent areas to enlarge your selection.
Once the complete selection is chosen, do a copy and paste (Command-C, Command-V), which saves that selection into a new layer. At this point you have made your full selection. Going along with the three reddish sections of the image in this hypothetical example, all three are now selected (even if you chose just one of them at the start, because they are so similar in color and tone).
Click off the eyeball on the background layer and all other layers, and activate (i.e., click on the eyeball adjacent to) the newly created selection layer. You will see a light gray dotted pattern, with the areas selected in darker gray.
From the left-side tool palette, choose the eraser, and set the flow and opacity at 100%. You can then adjust the Hardness or Fuzziness of the eraser to suit your needs. Proceed to erase the selections you do not want altered.

At this point, you have eliminated both red areas you wish to remain unaltered, and have only the one area remaining that you want altered.

Go to the Image menu, and scroll down to Adjustments . . . then you can choose any of the options best suited to alter the tone/color you have planned to alter. I tend to choose Curves most of the time, and on rare occasions I may chose Saturation. Needless to say, any of the other options are also available.

Done!

This method of carefully targeting a segment of the image for adjustment can be immensely useful . . . but can be badly abused when it is allowed to go too far. So many users wax eloquent about the fabulous controls you have over an image, while often losing sight of the overall message they want an image to convey. I urge all users to fully understand the range of tools available to accomplish your goals, but never to lose sight of the goal itself. As I have stated repeatedly, too often photographers get so caught up with the many adjustments they can make to any image that any intended meaning behind the image gets subverted to these innumerable adjustment options. Ansel Adams’s wise counsel that “There’s nothing as useless as a sharp photograph of a fuzzy concept” should always be at the forefront of your thinking. It’s not just edge sharpness that Ansel Adams was referring to, but the basic underlying message that has to come through clearly. If you have something to say, say it . . . and use the tools wisely to say it effectively. If you really have nothing to say, no amount of tool usage will prove to be of value.

Technical vs. Artistic Concerns

Let’s use a specific example to further discuss this issue of refining Curves adjustments (or any other image adjustment) from both a technical and expressive point of view. The images of the Peru Outdoor Goods Stand (Figures 12-7a and 12-7b) exhibit the difference between a finished image with and without the selective process just detailed. Note the rather dull green sweater worn by the woman on the left in figure 12-7a. If I had tried to intensify the sweater without any specific selection, everything in the scene containing a green component in it would be pushed to greater intensity. That would have been unacceptable. If I had resorted to the “quick and dirty” selection detailed above, I could have clicked on a portion of the sweater (and even added to it by doing one or more Shift-clicks on other parts of the sweater to include all lighter and darker parts of it), but when I tried that, the distant mountains were also selected because they were close enough in color and tonality. Hence, any change I made to the sweater would also have changed those distant green slopes. To me, that was also unacceptable. Finally I resorted to the refined selection method detailed above, and was able to erase away the similar colors of the distant slopes, thus confining the alteration to the sweater alone. At that point, I chose a Curves layer, went to the green channel, and pulled the curve to the left, thus brightening and saturating the green of the sweater (figure 12-7b).

My goal in this image is to draw primary attention to the stand and the two women who are selling the goods, and secondarily to the remarkable location, with the deep valley and huge mountains in the background. With those goals in mind, let’s compare the image with the untouched sweater to that of the enhanced version. Most of the materials for sale on the tables are brightly colored, which draws attention to them immediately. The two women are also immediately noticed because we always notice people in a photograph. Beyond that, it’s hard not to notice the setting, with the canyon and mountains. The untouched sweater does not draw attention to itself, but the enhanced sweater does, taking attention away from the colorful goods on the stands, and even from the women, especially the woman wearing the sweater. To my mind the enhancement is either undesirable or undesirably intense. Perhaps a slight enhancement of the sweater’s color could improve the image, but the degree of enhancement shown goes way too far.

Figures 12-7a and 12-7b: Outdoor Goods Stand, Peru
Many tools in ACR and Photoshop were employed to obtain figure 12-7a. An additional selection of just the vendor’s sweater on the left resulted in the alteration seen in figure 12-7b. Which version comes closer to your concept of how the image should be presented?

Thinking about the options from a purely technical point of view, it is useful to know that this refined method of selection is extremely valuable. From an aesthetic and artistic point of view, the degree to which the enhancement is applied—if it is to be applied at all—becomes an aesthetic decision as well as an expressive decision. Now that you know the method that was used to select the sweater, would you apply it at all, would you apply it to a very mild extent, or would you apply it to the extent shown in figure 12-7b? My choice is to make no enhancement of the sweater, whatsoever, allowing the rest of the image to draw the viewer’s attention in line with my goals. These are the expressive decisions you have to make. It’s one thing to learn the tools, and how they can be applied; it’s quite another to make the correct artistic decisions and to apply them appropriately as a means of serving your expressive purposes as an artist. (Chapter 13 contains further thoughts on this.)

Magic Wand

The steps just detailed for isolating a tone/color for specific modification can also be accomplished by employing the Magic Wand tool. (As a necessary aside, before proceeding with discussion of this tool, I must say that the choice of the name Magic Wand is about as idiotic a name as any that could have been chosen. It gives you no clue about the potential use of the tool. It could be called the “Tone Selector” tool or any other sensible name to indicate what it does, rather than have a name and an icon drawn from Peter Pan, with no intuitive indication attached to it. Adobe could do a better job.)

The Magic Wand will choose a tone/color area, or several closely related tone/color areas (depending on the degree of fuzziness you choose), and you can further choose to isolate just one choice by selecting the Contiguous choice in the dialog box. Of course, you can choose the Non-Contiguous choice if you wish to incorporate more than one isolated selection.

Similar to the steps detailed above, choose the Magic Wand tool, then copy and paste (i.e., Command-C, Command -V) to create a new layer. De-activate all other layers (i.e., click off the eyeball next to that layer), and use the Eraser tool to eliminate all selected areas you do not wish to alter, and proceed just as in the steps above for refining Curves.

As an alternative, you can click on the Quick Mask icon (lower left on the toolbar), which will put a red overlay (very much like a transparent red cellophane) over all parts of the image that will not be affected by any alterations you make, leaving the parts to be altered as you would view them without the cellophane. Then you can use the eraser to remove parts of the mask, or click X to toggle the eraser to transform it into an “add tool”, which you can add to the mask. Then proceed with the changes you want to make in the unmasked portions, employing such tools as Curves, Saturation, or any other alteration desired.

Gradient Burn

You’re now in Photoshop (not ACR or Lightroom) and you notice your image needs to be darkened (or even lightened) toward a corner or an edge . . . or maybe toward all edges and corners. Perhaps you hadn’t noticed this while in ACR, where the moves are much easier and direct. So, let’s go over one method of accomplishing this in Photoshop (there may be others, and perhaps others that are more direct and less convoluted).

Here are the steps to follow:

Click on the Quickmask icon (next to the bottom icon on the left-side toolbar . . . or simply hit Q).
Move up the left-side toolbar to the Gradient Tool icon (just below the Eraser icon), and click on it. (Make sure you’re on the Gradient Tool, not the Paint Bucket or other tool hidden underneath.)
Go to the top bar and click on the type of tool you want. (Note: The only ones I’ve ever used are the first two on the left, the Linear Gradient or Radial Gradient, while the others seem to me to be specialized beyond my desire to ever use them.)
Now is when it starts getting complicated. Suppose you want to darken—and perhaps increase contrast—toward the lower-left corner of the image. Place your cursor in the image as far up and to the right of that lower corner as you want to darken, click the mouse down and run it to the corner, and then release it. You will see a red, translucent “mask” covering the rest of the image—like overlaying the image with a piece of red cellophane—which tapers down to nothing from where you first placed your cursor to the lower-left corner. That area covered in red, which is the mask, will not be affected by the darkening you are about to do; only the unmasked portion will be affected.
Click off the Quickmask Icon (i.e., click on it again . . . or simply hit Q again). The red mask disappears and you will see the marching ants at the corner you had chosen. The diagonal line of marching ants depicts the line at which the darkening (or lightening, or whatever alteration you are about to make) will be at 50% of its full effect. (It will be at 100% at the corner, and 0% where you first placed your cursor and clicked down the mouse.)
Make a copy and save (i.e., Command-C/Command V), which creates a new layer for you.
Go to Image Menu > Adjustments > Curves (or Exposure or whatever choice is appropriate) and make the desired change. (Note: If your adjustment choice is Exposure, a dialog box opens with several sliders, which you can push to the right or left to alter the unmasked portion of the image. In that dialog box Gamma is equivalent to Contrast.)

That’s it. You’ve done the tapered burn (or whatever alteration was needed in that corner).

The potential confusion at step 4 is that if you forget to set your cursor in the image and take it to the corner, but instead you start at the corner and then move up and in to the image, the portion you need to work on is now the masked portion, and whatever you do will take place on the rest of the image. Should you make that mistake, you can choose Select Menu > Inverse and this will, indeed, invert your misguided selection to what you wanted.

The further confusion is that if you had done this in ACR, you would click on ACR’s Linear Gradient tool, start at the corner, and move the cursor in and up to the endpoint of where you wanted to darken things. In Photoshop that movement is reversed. You have to keep in mind that while in Photoshop, you’re making a mask, not going directly to the gradient tool. It’s my view that the programmers at Adobe who came up with this unique set of opposites for ACR and Photoshop deserve a real commendation for inventiveness (to say nothing of intentional confusion).

I advise you to test how the Radial Gradient, rather than the Linear Gradient, works so that you understand it, as well.

Image Rotation

This is not truly a tool, but it is an important enough adjustment to briefly review. Even though there is the option of creating a horizontal line (or a vertical line) for your image in ACR, discussed earlier, you may have different ideas of how to present the image once you’re in Photoshop. One such change could be a new vision of exactly how the image should be oriented. Here’s how to reorient it.

Go to the Image menu and drop down to Image Rotation. You can immediately rotate your image 90° clockwise or counterclockwise or 180° clockwise or counterclockwise. That’s obvious and easy. But if you click on Arbitrary, a dialog box opens up, allowing you to rotate the image any degree you type in clockwise or counterclockwise. This is a very useful, quick way to perfect the orientation of any image, especially if the “horizon” truly needs to be horizontal, such as a view over a lake or the ocean (after all, you probably don’t want the water to run out one side or the other if the horizon is tilted).

Crop Tool

You may have already cropped the RAW image in ACR—and this is a smart thing to do since you can undo the crop at any time—but you may need more cropping in Photoshop. First, you may just decide that a bit more cropping is required now that you’ve worked your way through a number of image refinements. The crop tool along the left side allows you to do that at this point. After you make the basic crop, you can refine it by grabbing the handles at the corners or midway along any of the the four borders, pushing it in or out as you see fit. But, keep in mind that once you crop in Photoshop, you’ve lost the cropped portion of the image forever.

However, Photoshop allows a variation of cropping that can be extremely useful: the Perspective Crop. Once you engage the Crop tool, you can place your cursor at the upper left of the image, click on your mouse, and hold it down as you drag toward the lower right. A dotted crop line in a rectangle from the start to the location of the cursor will follow you as you drag, until you stop and release the mouse . . . and just above the image you’ll see a blue square with the word “Perspective” next to it. If it’s checked, you can then grab any of the corner handles, and move it to the left or right, up or down, in order to crop a side at an angle, rather than as a 90° typical crop. Then click on the check box way farther over to the right, and the crop is completed.

You may want to do this on more than one side, but I strongly recommend doing just one angled crop at a time, because I’ve found that doing both a left and right side angled crop simultaneously often ends up with a badly distorted image. I avoid more than one angled crop at a time, so I recommend you do the same.

The Perspective Crop is extremely valuable if you have an architectural subject and the buildings near the edge are obviously converging or diverging—leaning either inward or outward. This can be easily corrected with a large format camera, which has adjustments that give you perspective control. Some digital cameras have perspective control lenses, but most do not. So, if the RAW file shows divergence or convergence, which is a product of the camera being aimed downward or upward (and ACR has no means of correcting that problem, though Lightroom does in the Lens Corrections panel of the Develop module), the Perspective Crop in Photoshop provides the option of realigning the image and straightening everything up in a formal manner. This can also be used effectively in a forest of straight-trunk conifer trees, or any other subject matter that requires a more formal approach.

I should note in passing that there is a perspective control crop available in ACR. It is improbably hidden in the Lens Correction tool at the top of the Basic panel, where you can click on Manual. From there, choose the icon for the perspective crop you want, and then it’s a tortuous iterative process of realigning the image, and then making the vertical lines vertical. I prefer the direct simplicity of the Perspective Crop available in Photoshop.

You still have a way out of a poorly thought-out crop: simply click off the image, and click Don’t Save, at which point you go back to the previous save. You may have to start again, but you haven’t lost it all. Also, you can always start again from the ACR-manipulated image. So you always have a second chance.

Paint Brush

The Paint Brush is a tool I used to employ extensively in my early days of digital usage, but one that I resort to less and less today because of the many superior controls afforded by the tools discussed above. Yet, once in a while, I still find a use for the Paint Brush.

To use the Paint Brush, first, create a new layer, and title it as you please (i.e., “Paint Layer 1” or any specific reference you wish to make). Choose the Paint Brush tool, and then decide if you want to lighten or darken any portion of the image painting over it, using the [ key to make the brush’s diameter smaller or the ] key to make it larger.

It can be used somewhat like burning (darkening) or dodging (lightening) in traditional photography, and to a minor degree, somewhat like bleaching (lightening while increasing contrast) in the traditional darkroom. It’s worthwhile seeing what happens with an image if you select the Paint Brush and then choose to darken any portion using the “Darken” or “Linear Burn” or “Color Burn” or any of the other options (or the equivalent options to lighten any portion of the image) to see the minor but important differences each afford. Always be sure that the black/white (Set Foreground Color, at the lower end of the left-side tool-bar) matches the way you want to alter the image (putting black in front to darken the area to be painted or white in front to lighten the area). Furthermore, you don’t have to stick to either black or white for the foreground color, but you can choose any color from the full color palette for a desired color shift when either lightening or darkening the area you wish to paint. I’d recommend setting the Opacity to 100% and the Flow to a very low amount of perhaps 3% to 5%, allowing multiple strokes of the brush while holding the mouse down. Place the cursor (i.e., the paintbrush) where you want to start, click the mouse down, which activates the paintbrush, and start moving the circle (the brush) around while holding the mouse down. As you continue painting, the effect adds up. It’s wise to periodically deactivate and reactivate the layer (i.e., toggle the eyeball on and off) to see how far you’ve altered the image. If you’ve gone too far, or if the color shift is not what you wanted, you can go to the layer and alter the opacity to modify the alteration you just made. If nothing seems to help, you can trash the layer and start again.

Here’s how to choose the color you want for either burning or dodging. Once you’re in the paint layer, click on the Foreground color, which gives you an eyedropper. Click on any spot in your image, which opens a dialog box called the Color Picker (Foreground Color). It pinpoints the exact color you had chosen (in the large color square on the left and the exact tonal density by the small circle within that square). In the rainbow strip to its right, the arrows will indicate the color band for that choice. But you can then slide the arrows to any part of the rainbow strip to reset the color you want for burning or dodging, then move the small circle within the large color square to any portion of lightness or darkness, high or low saturation, that you want for the burn or dodge adjustment. Once you’ve made the color/tone selection, as you “paint” with that chosen selection, you’ll see the effect in real time on the image.

Saving Images

Once you’ve completed all your processing in ACR, and opened the image in Photoshop—whether or not there is a need for further adjustments in Photoshop—you can then save the image as a PSD file (the standard file format for a Photoshop-completed file) or a TIFF file (an industry standard image file format). Only then do you have a completed file that can be used for printing an exhibition image or one suitable for high-quality reproduction printing purposes.

If you’re working in Lightroom, you can print directly from the image you’ve created without importing the image to Photoshop, saving it as a TIFF or PSD, and then printing. This can save disc space for you.

Returning to ACR from Photoshop

Suppose you’ve completed your processing in Photoshop and you’ve saved the finished file as a TIFF or PSD. But then you decide that additional improvements are required. If you’re like me, you’ll want to make those adjustments in ACR rather than in Photoshop, because ACR is generally easier and more intuitive. Here are two ways to return to ACR from a finished TIFF or PDS file:

Method 1
Open the finished file in Photoshop.
Check the layers. Either flatten the image (if it includes layers) or go to the background layer and click on it.
From the Filter dropdown (in top menu bar) select the Camera Raw filter and your image will open as a TIFF file in ACR, where you can resume editing it.
Method 2
Open the finished file in Photoshop
Flatten the image (or save it as another name and then flatten it).
Go to Bridge (which comes with Photoshop).
Navigate to the file in Bridge and select it (click just once).
With the image file selected, go to the upper-left Bridge toolbar and click on the little shutter icon (just left of the image rotation icons). This will re-open your file as a TIFF in ACR where you can resume refining it.

This is a change from Photoshop CS6, where you were able to open your image file in Bridge, go to the File menu, and click on Open in Camera Raw. Obviously that was simpler, but all applications seem to strive for greater complexity with each newer version. Be aware of the need to have a good deal of RAM available on your computer for this to work. For me, with the help of Adobe, I raised the available RAM from 60% to 81% for the procedure above to work.

Closing Thoughts

These are the tools I use, and this is my basic workflow. I rarely use other tools. So rarely that I chose not to clutter up the chapter with additional descriptions, though I’m sure that some of them could be quite useful, and I’m sure there are plenty of other digital practitioners who use them often and effectively.

The applications keep evolving, which has resulted in my increased use of ACR tools in place of Photoshop tools. My approach amounts to the following: The more I can do in “step 1” (ACR), the less I need to adjust in “step 2” (Photoshop). I can do nearly all of my image editing in “step 1” with one exception: in order to save the file as a finished TIFF (or PSD, if you prefer) I have to bring it into Photoshop, even if there are no further image adjustments needed in Photoshop.

Figure 12-8: Lenticular Clouds over Lake Nahuel Huapi, Argentina
From my vantage point near the Bariloche Airport in Bariloche, Patagonia. In post-processing, I had to extensively remove several foreground bushes that jutted up into the lake and portions of the distant lower mountain slopes. It is my hope that everything in the image is believable, except for the unbelievable, but real, lenticular clouds that had formed over the lake.

There is a great difference, however, between knowing what can be done with each and every tool and using them effectively to enhance personal expression. I’ve seen as many examples of practitioners misusing tools as I have of practitioners using them effectively. The prime misuses are twofold: first is excess color saturation (which I’ve already flagged numerous times), and second is the tendency to go into every part of the image and increase its brilliance or contrast to the point that the entire image loses its meaning. When every part of the image is calling for your attention, nothing stands out. There is no hierarchy of importance. Restraint is necessary to produce an image that creates the hierarchy of pushing the viewer to “see” the image in the way you want it to be seen. Some images need to be subtle throughout; virtually all images require some subtle passages. When every square millimeter is brought up to the highest level of brilliance, the overall message and impact are lost. So, try to refrain from too much “micromanagement” of your images.

 If, during the exposure, the lighting is not well chosen, if the composition is poor, if the underlying feeling that needs to be there is lacking, you’ve simply created a technically appealing picture that really says nothing.

The final misuse of digital tools is not really a misuse at all, but simply the feeling that if you’ve processed the initial image to the best extent possible, you’ve created a true masterpiece. But, if during the exposure, the lighting is not well chosen, if the composition is poor, if the underlying feeling that needs to be there is lacking, you’ve simply created a technically appealing picture that really says nothing. This has been the case for over 100 years with traditional photography, and now has transitioned into the digital realm. Technically wonderful images can be produced that have little artistic merit. My advice to every reader (myself included) is to do your best with the subject you feel most strongly about, and then let the public decide the merits of the work.

In the section about use of the Curves tool in Photoshop, I brought up the issue of eyeballing an image versus measuring it. Let me expand upon that teaser here.

No painter ever “measures” the depth of blue of yellow or any other color in her painting. If it looks good, it is good. It’s what she wants. This is a visual thing; it’s not a scientifically measurable entity. Let’s try to keep it that way (figure 12-8).

There is a serious caveat when you’re doing digital photography. The image you see on your monitor is not exactly the same as the image you get in a good print or even the best book reproduction. Part of the difference is that the when you view your computer monitor you’re viewing the image with transmitted light (i.e., light coming from behind the screen, shall we say), whereas when you view a print, you’re seeing it via reflected light (i.e., light from an outside source such as daylight or room lighting, going through the ink, and reflecting back through that ink again after bouncing off the paper surface beneath). Thus, the image you “perfect” on your monitor and the final printed image are not identical. In order to get it right in the final print, you not only have to do a lot of computer monitor calibration at the start to get correct colors and tonalities on your monitor, but you have to do a lot of “profiling” to get what you want from the monitor to the final print. The image on your monitor and the printed image two different entities.

To achieve satisfactory prints, extensive measurements are necessary. So there has to be a balance here. Measurement is required to understand the differences between the image seen on your monitor and the final printed image. Unless you’re wealthy enough to make print after print before you’re satisfied with the right finished print, or make one proof print after another before settling on the final reproduction print, measurement tempered with experience is the only way to get it right. Ultimately, the “perfect” image on your computer monitor may have to be altered to something “imperfect” in order to achieve the perfect print.

Both Lightroom and Photoshop allow you to “soft-proof” an image before printing (ACR offers no such option at this point). Lightroom has a soft proof tool. In Photoshop there are proofing options in the View menu. This can and should be used before going from the final image you’ve perfected on your screen to a printed image. Then the final steps are accomplished via profiling both your computer and the printer to get them to mesh as you expect them to do.

The specifics are beyond the scope of this book because the hardware, software, and technology keeps shifting. Ultimately it’s an issue between the image on your computer monitor, and the output from the specific printer you are using. This book cannot deal with all such combinations, and it would be outdated before it went to the printer if it engaged in that level of detail for any specific combination of computer and printer. It’s best to get videos and short-term books dealing with these issues in order to get it right and to stay current with the quickly shifting technology.

Instead, let’s keep our focus on photography and on personal expression. When it comes to eyeballing or measuring your images, try to keep a proper balance between the two in mind. Always keep your overall goal in mind. If you find yourself doing more and more measurement—especially if it’s just to get every nuance of the image on your monitor tweaked to your liking—you’re probably hurting yourself. You’re into the realm of micromanagement. Step back. Take a deep breath, start again and keep assessing whether the overall image gets your point across. Keep in mind that even in Beethoven’s greatest symphonies, there are quiet passages that make the crescendos so much more exciting.

===== FILE 20/28: Text%2fchapter13.xhtml =====

Figure 13-1: Striations and Reflections
The complex interplay of striping of the near and far sandstone walls, plus the additional interplay between their reflections in the pool and the stripes of dry sand and sandstone dividing the pool into segments, creates multiple visual rhythms. There is no true center of interest, but the eye stays within the image. The rich tonalities sparkle in the traditional gelatin silver print.

CHAPTER 13
Traditional, Digital, Art and Technique

THE PREVIOUS FIVE CHAPTERS have included a rather thorough discussion about the technical means that can and should be employed to produce well-crafted photographs via traditional means and digital means. This, apparently, leads to a discussion (often a debate or argument) about “digital versus traditional.” It seems that many photographers see these two approaches as enemies of each other. They aren’t. In fact, these are two different approaches to the same end: making a photographic statement. While you may prefer one over the other, these two approaches are not enemies.

I’ve made it abundantly clear prior to this that I do all of my black-and-white photography with film and traditional darkroom techniques. I do all of my color work digitally: I shoot all color digitally, and I’ve scanned all of my transparencies accumulated over decades to digital files. Hence, I’m in both worlds.

Why? Because I employ the processes and techniques that I feel yield the best results. It’s that simple. I started in the late 1960s with traditional means in both color and black-and-white, when there was no digital on the horizon. I watched as digital was introduced in the early 1990s, and observed decidedly inferior results while hearing the early digital practitioners singing its praises. I remained unimpressed for years.

But my mind changed concerning color photography because of two obvious changes. First, digital processes improved to a level that appeared to surpass the possibilities available through traditional means, and second, traditional methods were not only static (i.e., not improving), but contracting, with fewer films available (for me, in particular, the widespread loss of color indoor transparency films, which had a significantly wider brightness range than the outdoor films, whether used indoors or outdoors), and fewer printing options available, particularly the loss of Ilfochrome—initially known as Cibachrome—allowing direct printing from transparencies to prints. So, as digital color improved and traditional color imploded, it became apparent to make the switch to digital.

 For black-and-white, I still see traditional means—film and traditional darkroom printing procedures—as yielding the finest black and white results. In fact, for those photographers who are still shooting with film, but then scanning their negatives for digital post-processing, I feel they are taking the wrong route because it’s still the traditional silver print that remains the clear champion of black-and-white imagery. I’d even go so far as to suggest that the best hybrid approach would be shooting digitally, then converting to an enlargeable silver negative—if that process exists, though I have not researched it—to make the final print in the traditional darkroom. I am now a confirmed user of traditional methods for black-and-white and of digital methods for color.

I have not changed from traditional means in black-and-white for two obvious reasons. First, I enjoy the process involved immensely, and second (and more important) I still feel it yields the finest prints. Let’s face it, as a working photographer for more than 45 years, I’d be utterly stupid if a stayed with a procedure that yielded second-rate results, no matter how much I loved the process. Today’s traditional gelatin-silver prints are still considered the gold standard of fine photography (figure 13-1). And the darkroom is my private sanctuary, where I can get lost in printing for hours at a time, totally immersed in my art.

Another aspect that appeals to me is the vast difference in longevity between a properly processed traditional silver-gelatin print and any digital inkjet print available with current technology. Even in bright sunlight, a silver-gelatin print will last forever with no visible degradation. The lifespan of inkjet prints has improved greatly over the past decade, but still falls short of that of a silver-gelatin print. How long they can last under bright light is not clear. Displayed behind appropriate glass or stored in darkness, the lifetime may be measured in decades, perhaps even longer, but only time can confirm today’s best tests. Thus, while a traditional silver-gelatin photograph is a lasting treasure, it’s still not clear how long an inkjet print can last under a variety of viewing or storage conditions.

Will I always stay with traditional black-and-white procedures? Maybe. Maybe not. But I’d only jump to digital if I saw clear benefits for image quality. Today, I do not find sufficient reason, although I certainly do see some advantages. For example, I work with a large format 4×5 camera. It’s heavy (by comparison to even the finest digital cameras, and certainly as compared to the point-and-shoot and ubiquitous iPhone cameras) and it takes time to set up. Digital is lighter (and therefore much easier to haul around) and can be much more spontaneous in response to changing situations. I recognize these advantages, and they certainly are alluring attributes. But I love the contemplative, thoughtful approach that large format necessitates. I don’t feel that art is generally created in an instant, so I value thought over speed by a wide margin. Yet I should note that I often scramble as quickly as possible to take advantage of changing, unfolding conditions even with my 4×5, where I can generally set up to shoot within a minute, while all the time observing the changing conditions and preparing for what is coming next.

But rather than get into a long, useless comparison of digital versus traditional processes, I think it’s much more important to focus the discussion on art versus technique. This is where the conversation should be focused, but it rarely is focused on this.

Art, Technique, and Their Importance

I will draw on my 45 years in photography and my 40 years of teaching workshops that have molded my thinking about this issue. My basic premise is that too many photographers are concerned with their technique and too few are concerned with their art. This has always been a problem with photographers, where so many people have often equated a sharp photograph (i.e., one with razor-edged detail everywhere and nothing out of focus) with a great photograph. That’s a false equation. Again, let’s remember Ansel Adams’s insightful comment, “There’s nothing as useless as a sharp photograph of a fuzzy concept.” That is the perfect point of departure for the following discussion.

Figure 13-2: Amazon Cayman
On a tour of the Madre del Dios River in Peru we spied this 11-foot long cayman approaching the river’s edge and climbing up on the riverbank. There he stopped momentarily, just long enough for a portrait. This could have only been done with a handheld camera, for there was no place to set up a tripod and 4×5 camera on the gently rocking boat. The digital camera proved to be the ideal vehicle to show the wicked weirdness of this wonderful ghostlike creature.

Both digital and traditional procedures are a means to an end . . . and the end should be a fine photograph that says something to the viewer. It should make a point, create a mood, force a question, spark a recognition, or add a new insight. It should be something more than just a “pretty picture” (figure 13-2). (Please refer to the title of this book.)

This has to start with the photographer actually wanting to say something. The great photographers of the past each had their own specialties, whether it was Paul Strand, Brett Weston, Imogen Cunningham, Ansel Adams, André Kertesz, Robert Mapplethorpe, Diane Arbus, Eugene Smith, August Sander, or any of a number of others you can name. This is true of today’s best photographers and will remain true for those of the future. Each has something to say and works incessantly to say it. Their primary concern is meaningful content, not high productivity.

Over the years I’ve taught hundreds workshops and I’ve worked with many thousands of people trying to improve their photography. They’re all serious about doing so. (I know this to be true because I’ve encountered almost none who have a nonchalant attitude about their own photography. This is overwhelmingly evident during student photo reviews, where it becomes abundantly clear that they’re often apprehensive and fearful of criticism, are looking for praise, and sometimes even fall apart if their work is not universally admired. This is clear proof that they’re deeply invested in, and emotionally tied to, their photography. This is as it should be.) Yet, despite their obviously strong feelings about their own work, few are interested in discussions of the “message” they’re trying to convey, and nearly all are drawn to new and better techniques to “enliven” their imagery. This tends to be the pervasive goal, even when their imagery is already too brilliant, too high in contrast, too neon, too overblown.

For years I watched 35mm film practitioners reel off one frame after another, one roll of film after another, without a lot of thought about any individual frame. Maybe they had an uncontrollable tic of the index finger. They appeared to be constantly tapping the shutter release, reeling off one shot after another. The problem was they were looking without seeing. They were shooting without thinking. They were looking and shooting, but rarely feeling. In the end, they were taking pictures simply to take pictures. And while they always liked what they were shooting, they had little insight into what they wanted to say about it.

In today’s digital world, the problem has been increased by magnitudes. In general, there is far too much shooting and far too little thinking. A digital photographer today can happily expose hundreds, perhaps even thousands of exposures in a single day, and just as happily delete ⅔ of them along the way. The phrase “pixels are free” promotes that useless shooting. The emphasis is tilted too much toward quantity, and too little toward quality or a meaningful message. (Note: “Free pixels” is a double-edged sword, offering some great benefits at times. See chapter 17 for more on this.)

But what percentage of today’s photographers have a strong understanding of light, and how different lighting can dramatically alter any scene? What percentage of today’s photographers have a strong understanding of composition, and the relationships of lines, forms, shapes, tonalities, and colors in an image? What percentage of today’s photographers have a deep understanding of their own passion and how they can express it through their photography?

It seems to me that the answer to all three questions is: a very low percentage. Instead, it’s the newest app that allows even greater micromanagement of the image, which has become the false focus of today’s photography teaching and today’s photography learning.

 Once a photographer gets past an infatuation with “this is what I can do,” and gets to the issue of “this is what I can say,” things change dramatically.

In the days when film was the prime photographic vehicle, many students read books written by technicians about negative exposure and development, and about darkroom printing, including such useless things as test strips, but rarely, if ever, did they show any of their own photographs. These were sensitometrists and technicians who knew how to use densitometers to measure the exact density of any part of a negative or print. They were not photographers. They rarely had anything of substance to say photographically, but they often had a very strong—and usually adverse—impact on students of photography who got locked into thinking about densities of negatives and prints, of the differences between developers, of the effect of toners, but rarely locked into evocative imagery.

It’s the same with digital today. There are vast numbers of books on the market by people who know every trick possible using ACR, Lightroom, Photoshop, or any of the other digital applications, and they detail how to use those tricks . . . those tools and those applications. They talk incessantly about the extreme “control” you have. They know what they’re talking about. But they’re not photographers, and they’re not teaching photography. In fact, they know very little about photography, about art, about the overriding importance of light, about composition, about real communication. Often, they know the tools and how to use them, but rarely to any meaningful end. Hence we have a common problem with digital and traditional teaching: many teachers understand the technical aspects, but lack understanding of the artistic/expressive aspects. (In my book The Essence of Photography, I further detail the emphasis on shock value and “newness” at the expense of depth and real understanding.)

Once a photographer gets past an infatuation with “this is what I can do,” and gets to the issue of “this is what I can say,” things change dramatically. When it’s no longer a question of learning yet another technique, buying or downloading yet another application, knowing how to tweak every pixel in the image, but trying to say something meaningful that is recognized as something important by a viewer, then—and only then—is that photographer starting to make real progress as an artist (figure 13-3).

So, to my mind, the debate shouldn’t be “Digital versus Traditional” but “Art versus Technique.” That said, you cannot ignore technique because poor technique destroys whatever statement is being attempted. You cannot make an important artistic statement via poor technique (for example if your prints are unsharp where they should be sharp, too high or low in contrast, too garish or too lacking in color or saturation, etc.). But when technical concerns reign supreme, with no message or emotion behind the technically perfect image, the resulting image is meaningless. If you find yourself getting caught up in every new app, every new trick you can use, calibrating and re-calibrating, taking measurements of every part of your image, STOP . . . take a deep breath . . . try to remember why you got into photography in the first place. It surely wasn’t to learn new apps. It was to make good photographs. Get back on that track.

Please reread the first sentence of this book. (So you don’t have to turn the page, it reads, “Photography is a form of nonverbal communication.”) I recommend always keeping that in mind. Along the way, learn technique. Learn whichever approach appeals to you, traditional or digital. That choice is of little consequence in the long run, because they’re both valid means to an end. The important thing is to use the tools and techniques effectively to make your statement. To do so, you need to understand your interests—deeply understand your interests—and you have to employ the basic creative/communicative tools of photography—light and composition—to make your statement.

Figure 13-3: Norway Post-Modern Abstract
Standing at the dock as the ferry boat stopped to unload passengers on the island of Skrova, I saw reflections of the sky, the building behind me, and assorted other things in the surprisingly rough, wet side of the boat. I happened to be wearing a red shirt, a fortunate choice. The reflections off the wet hull of the boat display interactions of colors, tones, lines, and textures.

Choosing Digital or Traditional

Despite being a long-time user of traditional means, I strongly recommend the digital route today for color photography. I think it has now exceeded traditional film/printing methods in its flexibility and its ability to produce fine images. I do all my color imagery now via digital means. It’s simply a better platform today.

For those interested in black-and-white imagery, the issue is more nuanced. My prime recommendation is traditional means. I still see it as the best method to achieve the finest quality. As I’ve stated several times, the traditional silver-gelatin print is still the gold standard for fine imagery.

But there are other considerations that have to be weighed. Let’s use an example. Suppose you’re a doctor and you’re on call much of the time. You may want to be doing traditional darkroom printing, but what happens if you get an emergency call while in the darkroom. You have to leave, and you have to leave quickly. You may not get back for hours, or longer. Basically, if you were called away in the middle of processing, you’d have to start from scratch. It would be even worse if you just started to develop negatives. Dedicated doctors who were also dedicated to photography did this for decades, and it wasn’t easy. That same doctor working on a digital file can simply save her work at the point she’s at when the emergency call came in, do the necessary medical work, and reopen the file when she’s back at home, and continue working from that point on. It’s little more than an interruption in the digital workflow. It keeps you in the game. And let’s face it; today’s digital output is quite wonderful. While I don’t think it equals the quality of traditional black-and-white, it is nothing to be embarrassed about.

Figure 13-4: Mushroom Array, Burg Rabenstein
Nature and landscape have been my prime photographic interest since I first picked up a camera. Although other interests have grown with me over the years, nature, from smallest items to the grand landscape, still pulls at me like a strong magnet.

Another consideration may be the weight you can carry into the field. Most digital camera equipment is lighter, quicker to use, and therefore more flexible than the 4×5 camera and its lenses that I carry around. I still carry the weight required, and enjoy doing it. You may not be able to carry it; you may not enjoy lugging it around. These are considerations you have to think about. If you’re doing street photography, this may not be a serious consideration since you’d probably be using a 35mm camera, anyway . . . and digital offers only one possible benefit, that of the “free pixels,” where nothing is lost if you make a series of useless exposures. But if you do the type of landscape/architectural work that I do, a large format camera does it better. I don’t see the time required to set up my camera and tripod as wasted time, but if you do, digital may be the better choice for you. For me, even as I’m setting up my camera on a tripod, I’m thinking through the entire process toward the final image, so it’s not wasted time. Furthermore I like the contemplative aspect of art. Sometimes I lose a scene with transient lighting, but more often I can set up to wait for the “perfect” lighting to yield the image I want.

Digital imagery has been around since about 1990. In a sense, it’s still in its formative years. I can think of no digital photographers who have made a name equal to those of Ansel Adams, Diane Arbus, Edward and Brett Weston, Paul Caponigro, and so many of the iconic film photographers who used traditional methods for the past 100 years. Some outstanding names will emerge in the future. The point I’m getting to here is not that digital has failed, but that digital has not produced a bevy of new, great, well-known photographers whose names rank with the greats of the past. While digital has many wonderful qualities, it’s not the “key” to fine photography. Today, while in its formative years, I see most users too fixated on the latest app, the latest way of manipulation, but not fixated on the basic underpinnings of photographic expression: an understanding of light and composition along with a deep understanding of what means so much to you that you want to express your thoughts about it visually (figure 13-4).

Some Closing Thoughts

Before closing this short chapter, I think it’s important to note that while digital and traditional are both means to the same basic end, they differ in several respects. The biggest reason that so many people abide by the thinking of “traditional versus digital” is they are trying to make them the same, and in doing so, they try to justify the use of their chosen approach . . . turning it into a winner-loser game. It isn’t a competition, and it shouldn’t be.

Consider this: when photography first surfaced, processes known as the daguerreotype, cyanotype, tintype, and many other variations—none similar to the others—began to co-exist under the umbrella of “photography.” None were trying to emulate the others; each had its own look and its own adherents. Eventually, the fixed, enlargeable negative emerged along with the silver print (now generally referred to as the “silver-gelatin print”—probably because someone felt an additional word gave it greater legitimacy), which came to dominate photography. It was through this process that the most famous of all photographers, from Juliet Margaret Cameron, to Edward Weston, Henri Cartier-Bresson, Paul Strand, Dorothea Lange, August Sander, Ansel Adams, André Kértez, Diane Arbus, Jan Sudek, and so many others made the silver-gelatin print virtually synonymous with photography. But nobody ever tried to make the silvergelatin print emulate a daguerreotype or any of the other early methods.

Once people realize that digital methods are not the same as traditional methods, things can calm down. People can then begin to view the two approaches for what they really are: two different approaches!

I suppose the fact that the silver-gelatin print became the gold standard for “real photography” is the motivating factor for Adobe and the smaller niche providers to try to make digital emulate that standard. To my mind, that’s fine, but largely unnecessary. I don’t care which approach is chosen—I’m happily into both of them—as long as each can produce the results I want (figure 13-5).

My advice to students in my workshops who are trying to decide whether to take the digital or traditional route today has always been: choose one. It doesn’t matter which one. Then learn the basics of your chosen medium that will allow you to create the imagery you want. If, along the way, you become disenchanted with either the process or the final product, switch to the other . . . and then do the best you can to produce the imagery you want. If neither works . . . switch to writing or something else!

Figure 13-5: Les Baux Quarry
The geometric patterns of the remains of this ancient French limestone quarry captivated me. The scale was immense—a hundred feet high, perhaps more. The surprise was the sculpted lions above the deepest reaches of the quarry, but I was unable to find any information about its history.

In order to do your best at any job you have to enjoy both the process and the final product. That’s what counts. In fact, those are the only things that matter. All the rest is posturing.

===== FILE 21/28: Text%2fchapter14.xhtml =====

Figure 14-1: Salmonberry and Corn Lily
The relationships between the jagged salmonberry leaves and the sensuous corn lily surrounding them was spectacular. In Glacier National Park on a cloudy day, I aimed my 4×5 camera almost straight down, which eliminated shadows from higher leaves breaking up the forms of the lower leaves.

Does the image break “rules of composition” You bet it does. It breaks the foolish “rule of thirds,” which tells you a good composition should have the center of interest a third of the way into (from left or right) and a third of the way up (or down) from an edge. It’s a popular camera club rule with no valid justification.

CHAPTER 14
Exploding Photographic Myths

DESPITE ALL THE PHOTOGRAPHY INSTRUCTION OUT THERE—and too often because of it—a number of patently incorrect ideas persist. These photographic myths must be laid to rest. They push photographers in the wrong direction. Let’s reveal the invalidity of these commonly held beliefs.

Some myths have already been dealt with in this book. By approaching them in a somewhat different manner, and perhaps by imparting a different emphasis to them, this chapter may serve as worthwhile reinforcement. Several of the myth-breakers I will discuss are primarily geared toward traditional black-and-white photography, yet many of the concepts are extremely valuable to both traditional and digital photographers.

Myth #1: For digital photography, a well-contained histogram indicates a photograph with little or no need for post-processing. For traditional photography, the zone system gives you a negative that yields a straight print of exactly what you saw in the field, with no burning or dodging required.

This simply isn’t true, but it’s the most widespread misconception about digital exposures or the traditional zone system. It’s wrong because of the following fact: the light rarely hits everything in any scene in exactly the way you want your photograph to look.

As you look at a scene, your eyes scan it randomly, jumping from important area to important area, seeing only small bits of the scene sharply at any moment. As your eyes jump from dark areas to bright areas, the irises open to let in more light when you look the dark areas or close down to prevent the full dose when you look at brighter areas. The brain, working in concert with the eyes, further opens up things in dark areas and closes down things in bright areas. In other words, you view every scene at multiple apertures. Without these automatic mechanisms, it could be very painful indeed to look at a bright spot after looking at a dark spot. Think of what it’s like to come out of a darkened restaurant or afternoon movie into the bright sun!

The camera sees the entire scene at one aperture, the aperture you’ve chosen for the image. It cannot change the aperture to accommodate different parts of a scene. Thus, the camera does not allow the film or sensor to see what you see when you look at a scene. A camera is a mechanical/electronic device lacking the automatic features that allow your eyes to open up or close down. No matter how many remarkable features your camera may have, it still can’t do this!

Since the camera can’t see the way you see, you must learn to see the way the camera sees. You must learn when the brightness range is excessive, when it’s just right, and when it’s too low. You also have to determine how you want your picture to look.

Digitally, the best exposures push the histogram far to the right (without clipping), so the best exposure tends to look overexposed and washed out on your camera monitor. But that’s the exposure you want to work with in post-processing.

With film, you have to expose the negative to get ample density and tonal detail in all areas where you want detail in your final print. With film, the zone system (especially the extended zone system—see chapter 9 and Myth #3 below) is extremely good at yielding the proper exposure to get everything on the negative with usable densities. If you’re shooting digital and the range of light exceeds the sensor’s capability, follow the histogram and make several exposures at various settings, which can later be merged into a single image with an extended dynamic range. Let’s assume you’ve exposed the negative correctly to obtain ample negative density and/or tonal detail throughout. If the brightness range is excessive (i.e., if it’s greater than you want it to be for the print you wish to make), cut back on your negative development to reduce the inherent contrast from that of the scene to that which you want to have on your negative. This is known as “minus development.” If the brightness range is approximately what you want it to be in your final print, give the negative “normal development,” which preserves the brightness (or contrast) range of the scene. If the brightness range is less than you want it to be, give the negative “plus development” to expand the contrast range of the scene. The amount of minus or plus development varies depending on how excessively contrasty or excessively flat the scene is compared to your vision of the final print. These are artistic decisions, not decisions based on replicating the scene.

I have consistently stated that it’s necessary to develop the negative for the contrast range you want to have compared to the inherent contrast range of the scene. If a scene is high in contrast and you want even more contrast for your interpretive purposes, give the negative plus development. If a scene is relatively low in contrast and you want to soften it further, give the negative minus development. You’re allowed to do it. It’s legal! It’s even artistically acceptable. (Digitally, of course, you alter contrast in post-processing.)

Figures 14-2a, b and c: Creiglingen Reflections
Figure 14–2a shows the RAW file directly from the camera, somewhat overexposed and washed out in appearance, but not clipped, as seen in its histogram in figure 14–2b, which shows a nearly perfect histogram, looking much like a bell curve (except for two tops rather than one smooth one). Obviously the exceptionally good histogram fails to indicate a fine photograph with extensive post-processing work, which was all accomplished in ACR.

After cropping out the lower portion, the major change was making a sharp S-curve in the Tone Curve tool, which dramatically increased contrast while darkening the image significantly, and also increased color saturation. Vibrance was then reduced to –7 and saturation was reduced to –6.

What are we looking at? Two reflections: one in a storefront plate-glass window, plus another from wavy, reflective Mylar behind the window. It’s a straight image from a single exposure, but confusing and highly abstract. Experimental? Yes. Successful? Judge for yourself.

Figure 14-2b

On the other hand, if you always give normal development to a negative when the range of the scene is about 5 zones, if you always give plus development when the range is lower than 5 zones, or if you always give minus development if the range is greater than 5 zones, you’re doing “formula photography” and you’ll always end up with predictable, boring images. You’ll rarely express yourself in a meaningful way. Your prints may be technically perfect with good blacks and good whites and all sorts of tones in between (see Myth #7), but they’ll generally fall flat emotionally. You’ll produce technical gems that say nothing.

Even if you’ve done everything right with your negative exposure and development, it is obvious that the zone system can’t be expected to yield a straight print without manipulation. In my lifetime, I’ve produced between 300 and 400 photographs that I would be proud to exhibit. Of those, only two are straight prints with no burning, dodging, or bleaching. Those two prints make me nervous. The next time I print either one of them, I’ll dodge the upper-right corner, then burn it back, just so I feel like I’m doing something useful in the darkroom! The same is true digitally: I can’t easily remember a single important digital image that required absolutely no post-processing. It seems they all need some refining. (Perhaps if I did a systematic review, I’d find one or two, but the percentage would be so low as to be insignificant.)

 Most of the darkroom manipulation I perform, and most digital postprocessing, is not to alter the print away from the scene I encountered, but to bring it back to the way I saw it.

I approach every image with the thought that manipulation will be required. Most of the darkroom manipulation I perform, and most digital post-processing, is not to alter the print away from the scene I encountered, but to bring it back to the way I saw it, which is absolutely true in the case of the example shown here (figures 14-2a, b, and c).

Figure 14-3: Silver Strands
The image has a metallic look to it. With that, it appears that a viscous fluid, perhaps oil, covers everything, and appears to be running down in several streams. In fact it is an emerald green, moss-covered wall alongside a trail in the Canadian Rockies. Long strands of mosses hang down freely from the wall, with water running down those strands.

Did it look like this? Perhaps, but everything was so green in reality that it immediately struck me that photographing it in black-and-white—already one step away from reality and into abstraction—would turn it into something distinctly different, potentially a wonderful abstraction of nature.

When I first peruse a scene, my eye/brain combination does much of the burning and dodging for me by adjusting the light intake via my eye’s iris (or aperture). This occurs automatically and extremely smoothly. I expect to be doing in the darkroom or on the computer what my eyes already do for me at the scene (and perhaps a little bit more). Neither the zone system nor a histogram can do that for me, but it can give me a starting point with solid information throughout and ample density separations so that I can perform the needed manipulations and then I can create an emotionally charged image.

However, there are times when my manipulations are not intended to re-create the way my eyes saw the scene, but rather to alter it—and sometimes to alter it greatly. This requires a vision in the field beyond the scene I encounter. It requires me not only to recognize a good scene, but also to recognize a scene that has the potential for personal interpretation and creativity. There is no requirement in fine art to be true to the scene, but only to be true to your artistic instincts and desires (figure 14-3). The zone system can be used to make radical departures from reality. The same is true of digital processes. If I want to make a deep, dark forest scene glow in a dreamlike manner with high key tones (i.e., light gray and white tones throughout the image), I can use the zone system or histogram as a creative tool and expose the scene higher up on the zone scale, or farther to the right, digitally, than would be realistic. In a situation like this, either system can be used specifically for an effect that is decidedly unrealistic, but one that may be extremely evocative and expressive. The zone system is a tool for creative expression just as much as it is for making straight prints. Obviously, digital processes can be employed for the same goals. Creativity should be sought in whichever process you employ.

I use the zone system for every one of my exposures, but I never expect a straight print to result from its use. That’s where the darkroom comes in. The darkroom is a tool used to mold light passing through the negative, much as a sculptor molds clay, to form the image you want. Digitally, as well, my RAW file is simply a starting point for my desired adjustments. If you expect to make a straight print, why have a darkroom or computer? Just send it to a lab and let them do it. They’re just as good as you at making straight prints, but they’ll never be as good as you at molding the light to make the statement you want to make. If your desired statement is exactly what you saw, but the camera simply can’t see it the way you saw it, you may have to manipulate it back to the way you saw it!

Myth #2: There are 10 zones in the zone system.

Photographic papers yield 10 zones, or doublings, of exposure from black to white. Negatives record far more than 10 zones, exceeding digital sensors in this respect (which is why digital photography may require multiple exposures to encompass the remarkable range of a single film exposure). Almost all panchromatic films cover 16–18 zones of brightness starting from threshold, i.e., the amount of light required to hit the negative material for it to be recorded.

Since enlarging papers yield only 10 zones of detail, most photographers think that exposing the negative beyond Zone 9 or 10 is useless. This is the heart of the myth. Since the negative accepts density increases for about 8 more zones above this false ceiling, higher zones can be brought into play whenever necessary. In fact, many people already use these zones without knowing it.

For example, suppose you have a photograph of a landscape with a big, billowing cumulous cloud. When you make a straight print, the cloud may appear as a featureless white blob. That’s because the density of the cloud on your negative is above Zone 9 or 10. So what do you do? You burn the sky and cloud, and soon the cloud begins to show good detail. You’re actually using the portion of the negative exposed above Zone 9 or 10. You’ve probably done this many times without giving any thought to it and without even being scared.

Furthermore, suppose the landscape has large areas that go completely black in your print but have detail on the negative. You can dodge those areas during the darkroom exposure, allowing you to see the detail in those dark portions of the image. Thus, by dodging the dark portions of the print (i.e., the thinner portions of the negative) and burning the bright portions of the print (i.e., the denser portions of the negative), you obtain visible detail from a negative that has a substantial number of zones.

Take another example: Suppose you walk into an old, abandoned mining shack with great wood textures and shapes inside. There’s a window that opens to a sunlit landscape. You expose the negative to get ample density for the interior, but the exterior is extremely dense. So you burn the hell out of the window, which gives you detail on the landscape beyond. Of course, you may get a black halo on the window frame if the burning overlaps it, or a white halo at the edge of the window if the burning doesn’t go right up to it. You can avoid this by reducing contrast in negative development. The point in this example is that by burning the window area, you add detail by using a portion of the negative with a density above Zone 9 or 10! And it didn’t even faze you!

Figure 14-4: Central Arches, Wells Cathedral
When I encountered the Central Arches in Wells Cathedral in 1980, I was so overwhelmed that my project of photographing English cathedrals began instantly. Known variously as the “inverted arches” or “scissors arches,” this structure was created between 1335 and 1338 as a retrofit to prevent the cathedral’s central tower from collapsing. It has stood since then.

The distant window is an extreme highlight. The upper-left corner, lit from an unseen window, is a secondary highlight. Distant arches in the lower right are in the deepest shadows. The contrast range exceeded 10 zones, and a 15-minute exposure increased the contrast.

I exposed the highlights in the mid-teens, and then drastically reduced contrast with compensating development to bring the negative into a printable range. The left-side column and lower arch and the upper-left corner (including the stone circle) required significant burning, and the distant window required still more burning to a lower contrast, bringing everything into full visibility. It required some work, but it’s all there on the negative.

So, negatives contain very useful information above Zone 9 or 10. You may need some burning to access it, but you can get it! If you can print negatives with densities above Zone 9 or 10, why shy away from purposely exposing negatives to those higher densities? I’ve been doing it for more than four decades.

In my photographs of the English cathedrals, I wanted to convey a feeling of their presence. I wanted you to see everything that I saw when I stood there. The range of brightness in many of those images exceeded 8 zones, sometimes up to 10 zones. Yet I wanted detail everywhere. I knew that if I exposed the negative at Zone 2½ or lower, I would be on the toe of the exposure/density curve—stuck with low-density separations and a very flat print (tonally flat, and dimensionally flat, as well). So I generally exposed the low values at Zone 4 or Zone 5, knowing that I would reduce the contrast during negative development by giving the negative minus development. The exposed Zone 4 would develop to a lower density, perhaps Zone 3¾ or so. The exposed Zone 5 would also develop to a lower density, perhaps Zone 4½, dropping a bit more than the exposed Zone 4 during the shortened development time. But the high zones would drop dramatically in the minus development, dropping many zones below its exposed value.

So, if I exposed the darkest areas where I wanted detail in Zone 4, the brightest areas would be exposed in Zone 12, maybe even Zone 13 or Zone 14. But that’s OK. After all, the negative goes all the way up to about Zone 17. Minus development following exposure in the low teens can bring the developed density down to Zone 10 or so, making it easily accessible through burning in the final print.

I don’t want to expose important detail on the toe of the curve, which is generally below Zone 2½, or above the shoulder of the curve, which is above Zone 15 or 15½ (chapter 9, diagram 9.3). Those portions of the curve flatten out and yield very poor tonal separations in the final print. But between the toe and the shoulder, i.e., on the straight-line portion of the curve, the negative still gives me 13 zones of excellent separations (figure 14-4).

Since 1980, I’ve exposed hundreds of negatives in the slit canyons of Arizona and Utah. I regularly expose the highlights in the lower teens (i.e., Zone 13, 14, or 15), enabling me to get the maximum amount of detail onto my negatives below those bright highlights. Of course I reduce the development severely, reducing the highest densities of the developed negative. This allows the negative to be printable—usually with extra highlight burning, but printable nonetheless. It’s very difficult to print detail from negative densities that are up in the teens, but it’s perfectly fine to expose negatives that high on the scale, then reduce those placements to printable densities during development. I simply use compensating development on negatives exposed that high on the scale, usually with the two-solution compensating development detailed in chapter 9. Had I followed the misguided advice of some to expose highlights no higher than Zone 8, I could not have made many of my images in the cathedrals or the canyons (figures 1-6, 1-7, 2-7, 3-6, etc.), which are among my most cherished and popular.

The middle of the straight-line portion of the exposure/ density curve is Zone 8 or 9. Most photographers avoid these zones, yet the middle of the curve is where the separations are best! I regularly expose negatives above Zone 9 or Zone 10, but I generally give “minus development” to such negatives to avoid excessive negative densities and printing times under the enlarger.

Many instructors are unaware of the remarkable range of negatives and are afraid of exposing them into the double-digit zones. Most students are afraid of such exposures because they’ve been taught by people who are unaware of the negative’s true range. If you’re avoiding higher zones (i.e. above Zone 9), you’re throwing away opportunities to photograph in places that may yield exceptional images. Don’t be so narrow-minded. Break through the barrier of higher zones in your exposures. The negative has that range. Use it! When using high zones, reduce development to control them for later printing (figure 14-5).

Figure 14-5: Mt. Williamson, Clearing Storm
There was a huge tonal range from the lower, forested, shadowed slopes to the sunlit clouds streaming over the higher ridges, and the distant sunlit clouds. I placed the lower shadows just above Zone 4 to ensure good shadow separations, placing the sunlit clouds at and above Zone 10. The negative was developed to reduced contrast. Subsequent burning of the upper portions of the image brings everything into view, as I intended.

Why does the negative have such a long range when the paper doesn’t? Interestingly, it turns out that the paper emulsion has virtually the same range! The difference is simply how you view the two items. You view a negative by transmitted light. You place a negative on a light box, and light comes through the emulsion so you can see it. When you look at a print, however, the light source is in front of it (and generally, behind you). It goes through the emulsion once on its way to the paper backing, then reflects off the backing and goes through the emulsion a second time before coming to your eye.

Instead of looking at a print with reflected light, try holding it up to a powerful light from behind the print (e.g., a 500-watt floodlight). You’ll see detail in the deepest blacks that will astound you. Now you’re seeing the paper emulsion via transmitted light, the same way you view a negative. In fact, next time you’re printing in the darkroom, inspect your print under white light after you get it into the fixing tray. Look at the deep rich blacks in the print, then hold the wet print up to a bright light (with the light shining through the back of the print from behind). You’ll be amazed at the range of detail within areas you thought were solid black. The paper emulsion equals the range of the negative emulsion (or, at least, comes impressively close to it), but because you see a print with reflected light rather than transmitted light, its range is severely reduced. Therefore, you must develop your negative to a low-contrast range to encompass the paper’s limitations.

Figure 14-6: Burnt Oak Silhouettes
Photographed in dense fog just weeks after the massive 1978 Agoura-Malibu fire, contrast was raised in negative development. Textural detail on the nearest burnt tree and bushes was eliminated: the fog itself, eliminated detail on the more distant trees, creating a fascinating design—almost like tonal cutouts—unencumbered by textural detail.

This is a challenge, but it’s not a problem. When the image is printed well, it looks extremely brilliant with deep blacks, glowing whites, and rich gray tones in between. You can get just what you want in a silver print from a properly exposed and developed negative. And you can do it in an extremely wide range of situations if you initially take advantage of the extraordinary range of contrast that a negative is able to handle. Don’t hesitate to expose negatives into the double-digit zones.

Most photographers proceed with the certainty that if they expose negatives above Zone 7, they’re getting into rough waters, and if they go above Zone 8, well, lord help them! Above Zone 9, forget it—everything is lost! This is patently absurd. Much of the effort I put into explaining the zone system involves getting students to unlearn the myths that are locked into their thinking. As baseball legend Satchel Paige said, “It ain’t the things you don’t know that hurt you; it’s the things you know that just ain’t so!”

There have been (and still are) well-known teachers who tell students never to expose above Zone 8. Further, they tell people only to develop “normally.” They say that minus development leads to flat prints. They’re wrong. Theirs is a perfectly good approach in open, relatively even lighting situations. But it fails miserably when you get into unusual situations, such as those with extremely high or low contrast. It’s an approach that limits your options. Virtually all of my photographs in the cathedrals or the canyons were exposed with highlights well into the double-digit zones, and nearly all were given minus development . . . often compensating development! The prints aren’t flat. They have a rich tonal palette. I’ve also made prints in low-contrast situations, such as in fog, that also have a rich tonal palette (figure 14-6).

My approach is to expand options, not limit them. Using the full range of the negative expands options. Placing unnecessary limits on the range of the negative restricts the locations and/or lighting situations in which you can photograph.

As a final important aside, some people have the strange notion that if there are 10 zones, there must be 10 gray values. Not true. Going from one zone to the next higher zone involves a doubling of exposure (i.e., a full stop of additional exposure). But you can open up a half stop, a third of a stop, a quarter of a stop, etc., to increase exposure only slightly. Each of these choices represents a slightly different gray value. In fact, there are an infinite number of gray values, some so minutely different from the next that the eye cannot differentiate them. That’s why black-and-white prints can be so rich. The tonal scale is a smooth continuum, not a set of quantum jumps.

Myth #3: Shadows should be placed at Zone 3 in the zone system.

This is an idea about using the zone system that comes from the creator of the zone system himself. Ansel Adams urged photographers to place shadows in Zone 3, but I doubt that he used Zone 3 placement himself. His prints exhibit too much brilliance and illusion of spatial depth to have been given such low placement of shadows in his own negatives.

Let’s look closely at the exposure/density curve (diagram 9.5) to see why Zone 3 placement is too low and why Zone 4 placement turns out to be much better. The toe of the curve is the initial, lower portion of the curve that is rather flat. This part of the curve yields very low-density separations on the negative and consequently very low tonal variations on the print. So you don’t want anything important on that part of the curve. (Note the emphasis on “important.”)

The major part of the curve, the so-called “straight-line” portion, is not flat. It rises at a steeper angle, indicating that for equal increases in exposure of the negative you get greater density separations in the developed negative than you get in the toe of the curve. Let’s keep that in mind and consider what it means for a print.

Texture in any photograph is made up of small tonal variations in immediately adjacent tones. When you talk about Zone 3 texture or Zone 4 texture, you’re not just talking about a Zone 3 tonality or a Zone 4 tonality; you’re talking about small variations in tonality around that zone that comprise texture.

If you expose a shadow area at Zone 3, some of the densities on your negative are lower than Zone 3 and some are higher, yielding texture. They average to Zone 3. But if some of that texture is at Zone 2½ or less, it’s on the toe of the curve where density separations are lower. Therefore tonal separations in the print are lowered, and the print begins to look flat. The word “flat” perfectly describes the unsatisfactory print you get. The print has the following two main flaws:

It is tonally flat, lacking in the good tonal separations that give it snap.
It is dimensionally or spatially flat because nearly identical tonalities yield prints that lack the appearance of spatial depth.

To avoid the unsatisfactory look and feel of flatness, expose the negative higher on the scale at Zone 4. With higher placement, those portions of the negative higher and lower than Zone 4 are still on the straight-line portion of the curve, yielding far better tonal separations in the print.

You may object that the shadow is then too light in tone. Of course it is, but you solve that problem by printing it darker—down to your desired Zone 3—when you enlarge it. When you do that, you’ll get a print with far richer tonal separations, one that exhibits far greater spatial depth. In other words, you expose and develop the negative so that the shadow densities are in the Zone 4 range, but you print it down to the Zone 3 range under the enlarger. It’s that simple.

David Vestal, an excellent photographer and recognized sage about technical issues wrote, “For detailed black stuff, I expose only one stop less than indicated.” Thus, he found that he got better results when he placed shadow details in Zone 4 rather than Zone 3. Vestal also mentioned that Ansel Adams recommended Zone 3, but he himself found that “the resulting negatives are too thin.” Vestal is worth reading; he had a lot of worthwhile things to say.

You may inquire, why are we always taught to place the shadows in Zone 3? Because most teachers and most magazine or book writers are sensitometrists, not photographers. They spend too much time testing materials and graphing them and too little time making photographs. When they look at Zone 3, they look at an exact Zone 3 tonality, not at a textured range that averages out to Zone 3. There is an immense difference between studying an exact Zone 3 tonality (lacking texture), and a Zone 3 made up of texture. The photographer’s world is made of textures; the sensitometrist’s world is made of tonalities. The difference is like day and night. The digital equivalent is the technician who knows every tool in the digital toolbox, but is not a photographer, and has little insight in how to use the tools for meaningful personal expression.

Sensitometrists pull out their trusty densitometers and get the perfect Zone 3 by exposing a gray card at that zone. All appears to be well and good. But when they expose a real scene with real tonal variations and real texture, their exposed Zone 3 yields closer tonal separations because the textures are made up of tones both above and below Zone 3. Some of the tones below Zone 3 dip into the toe of the curve. With a Zone 4 exposure, nothing dips into the toe of the curve, so the separations are greater. When you take a negative with Zone 4 texture and print it darker (back down to Zone 3 tonalities), you retain greater tonal separations in your print. Look again at figure 7-2b and specifically at the hill and rock area in the center, directly below the snow-covered mountain. That area was placed just above Zone 4 during negative exposure to retain maximum separations in those shadow areas, but printed significantly darker than Zone 4 to give the photograph the snap I sought. Had I placed those areas at Zone 3, I could not have maintained either the richness of tone or the feeling of depth that the image conveys.

Sensitometrists who work with step wedges and exact tones are like people who study a single musical note. Melodies, however, are made up of many notes creating a musical texture. You can’t get the feel of a melody by examining a single note. Similarly, you can’t get the feel of texture in a photograph by examining a single visual tonality. Sensitometrists are like piano tuners who make sure that each individual key sounds exactly right. You need them to keep the piano tuned, but you need a composer to write music and a pianist to play it or teach it. Photographers are both composers and pianists. It’s wise not to learn how to play the piano from a piano tuner. It’s equally wise not to learn about zone placements from a sensitometrist. I see too many sensitometric curves in photography magazines. The digital equivalent, as I’ve stated in chapter 12, is to avoid learning from technicians who teach and write books about digital photography, but rather to learn from the photographers themselves.

Photographs are not step wedges; they can be real art. They are meant to be personally expressive. They are meant to be seen by others and to move others emotionally. They are meant to communicate a thought, a mood, an experience, a moment in time, a fantasy, or any of dozens of other ideas from the artist to the viewer. They should be imbued with light and life. Exact curves and exact enlarging times won’t get you there. You’ve got to deviate from the densitometer readings and use different approaches from one print to the next if you want to say something.

I don’t own a densitometer—never have, never will. It gives me no useful information. All I need to do is expose and develop a few negatives to tell me everything I need to know about how a film responds to light and how a developer works with that film. I know that however little or much I develop a negative—minus development, normal development, or plus development—the lowest zones look just about the same because they develop quickly and hardly get any denser after the first couple of minutes of development. The low zones tell me the speed of the film and also whether I exposed it properly. Then I look at the high zones to see how much density they have, which tells me whether I developed the negative properly. If I’m off by a little, I adjust my development procedure. Any such readjustment won’t materially affect the low zones because they develop so quickly and so fully. Looking and adjusting is far better than testing.

In order to ensure that I’m solidly above Zone 3 when exposing my negatives (i.e., above the toe of the curve), I generally set my film ASA considerably lower than the recommended value. For example, I shoot Kodak Tri-X rated at ASA 320, but for my purposes I rate it at 160 (a full stop lower than Kodak’s recommendation). When I shoot Ilford HP5+ rated at ASA 400, I shoot it at ASA 300, a half stop lower than Ilford recommends. I do roughly the same for other films I use as well.

Even after lowering the ASA of the film, I still place my shadows in Zone 4. This makes my shadow placement closer to Ilford’s or Kodak’s (or your) Zone 4½ or Zone 5. It gives me a denser negative, but it still gives me 10 zones of good negative separations above that level before I run into the shoulder of the density curve. So I’m not losing any options. Of course, if I run into a scene with high contrast, I’ll give the negative plenty of minus development to make the highlight densities printable.

In several articles written by David Vestal, he also pointed out that he often places highlights in Zone 9 (“I expose four stops more than the meter says for the bright tone”). That’s perfectly fine, but it’s also fine to place highlights even higher—way higher if necessary! I’ve done it for years with excellent, printable results.

My negatives have good, solid densities. They may require longer exposures or a more open aperture for enlargement, but when I place my shadows sufficiently high and develop appropriately for the highlights, I get all the separations and snap I want in the shadows. My prints are neither tonally nor spatially flat. The extra time under the enlarger does not materially shorten my life. It’s not a problem.

Students should not be taught to keep their negatives thin. Negatives should be stout in order to yield good tonal separations from the blacks to the whites. It may be easier to focus a thinner negative, and thin negatives show lower grain—but what’s more important, a negative with lower grain that is a bit easier to focus, or a print that’s alive?

It turns out that Ansel Adams did photography an immense service by creating the zone system and an immense disservice by saddling people with the dictum, “Place your shadows in Zone 3.” It’s wrong. I doubt that he followed his own dictum. I place my shadows in Zone 4 or a bit higher. So did David Vestal, and I recommend that you do the same. You’ll get better results. (And the sensitometrist’s exposure/ density curve explains exactly why . . . when you shoot in the real, textured world!)

Myth #4: Negative densities should be within a fixed density range, and negatives that don’t fit into that range are useless. Histograms should be spread through the range, but short of clipping.

The previous two myths deal exclusively with film issues. But here again, both traditional and digital are included. It may seem like I’m fixated on the zone system or even the histogram, but I don’t really think about it much in my own work because it’s part of me. Just as you drive without thinking about driving, you can afford the luxury of not thinking a lot about the either the zone system or the histogram once you learn it well. To use it properly, you’ve got to understand it so thoroughly that using it becomes instinctive.

Let’s concentrate on film first (though I urge digital users to read the following examples and understand them fully, for they shed light on digital processes, as well), then see it’s application to digital. I’ve already pointed out that I use the full range of the negative. I don’t expect all of my negatives to have the same density range, and they don’t! Some people would say, “They’re all over the board!” That’s absolutely correct. Let’s clarify this with a few examples.

Examples #1 and #2

Suppose I enter an old-growth forest on a typically cloudy day in the Pacific Northwest rainforest. I can do an average reading on the forest and give it normal development, getting a range of tonalities from Zone 4 to Zone 8. (Remember, we’re going higher on the scale for better shadow separations than the usual Zone 3–7 spread.) Let’s forget about exposing this negative from Zone 3 to Zone 7, even if those are the tones desired in the final print (Myth #3). So, this negative now has a standard density range of Zone 4 to Zone 8, which I plan to print with zones ranging from Zone 3 to Zone 7. We’ll call this example #1.

Suppose I have a different idea for this scene: I want it to look light and ethereal. The contrast range is the same, so suppose I expose this negative with a spread from Zone 8 to Zone 12. Then I give that negative extreme minus development, or even compensating development, to radically reduce the high densities. The exposed Zone 12 drops down to about Zone 8½ or 9, while the darkest part of the scene drops from Zone 8 to about Zone 5½ or 6. (I’m just using educated guesses here. But then, I’m never exact! I fully expect to manipulate the print by dodging, burning, bleaching, etc., in the darkroom anyway, so exactness doesn’t matter.)

Now I have a contrast spread of a little less than three zones, from about Zone 6–9 instead of Zone 8–12. If I print those values just a half zone lower, I’ll end up with a high key, dreamy scene where the tones range from something lighter than a gray card all the way up to near-whites. Can you envision this hypothetical print? The negative that produces it is vastly different from the Zone 4–8 spread of the previous example. We’ll call this example #2.

Example #1 is pure realism. Example #2 is pure fantasy. Both are legitimate. Both express a feeling about the place, but example #2 almost creates a new world out of the one I encountered. Its negative densities are all quite high, starting from an initial exposure that is substantially higher.

Example #3

I’m photographing in one of the English cathedrals. A distant stained glass window is eight zones brighter than a dark alcove off to the side. The rest of the cathedral is much darker than the window but brighter than the alcove. The distant window, along with others, is the source of the interior light. My goal is to render everything visible, with detail from the stained glass window to the dark alcove. If I place the alcove at Zone 4½, the window falls at Zone 12½. The rest of the interior architecture lies between Zone 5½ and 7½. Because the cathedral is rather dark, and I’ve closed my aperture for maximum depth of field, I need a long exposure. Then reciprocity failure forces even higher contrast (see chapter 9).

The highlight is so sensitized to light during the exposure that I give the negative compensating development, as in figure 14-4. This brings the window down in density from the exposed Zone 14 to perhaps Zone 10 in the developed negative. The alcove, too, drops in value to Zone 3½ or so, while the rest of the interior ends up around Zone 4 to Zone 6. This negative is moderately thin to average, except for the very dense window area.

Example #4

I find a flat rock with fascinating patterns that speaks volumes to me. Contrast is very low—perhaps just one zone of difference between the darkest and brightest portion of the rock—so I want to increase the inherent contrast as much as possible (figure 14-7). If I underexpose and overdevelop, I can’t increase contrast much because the low zones don’t expand during extended development. So I expose normally and then overdevelop, an approach that I find far more effective than underexposing before overdeveloping.

If I place the average tones of the image around Zone 5 and give the negative maximum development to increase contrast, the average zone will end up around Zone 7 or 7½ with highlights near or above Zone 9. There may be a spread of 2 to 3 zones from the densest to the thinnest portions of the negative. This means that the negative may have values of roughly Zone 6 to Zone 9. This negative is considerably denser on average than one that received compensating development.

Figure 14-7: South Desert Mosaic
Nearly direct sunlight was hitting this exquisite piece of natural mosaic in Capitol Reef National Park, giving it very little contrast. Greatly expanding the contrast in the darkroom at both the negative and printing stages turned a dull image into one with real life and rhythm. Both the traditional and digital processes offer options far beyond the limited scene in front of you. Imagination along with understanding the technical possibilities can expand your creative reach tremendously.

These two negatives have very different average densities and ranges. I can print example #3 by exposing the negative under the enlarger for the interior architecture and then burning the window, which otherwise would be blank white. For example #4, I’d print the average tonalities farther down on the tonal scale but use the highest contrast enlarging filter to further increase the contrast on the rock—contrast that I already expanded as much as possible via extended negative development. Ultimately, the two prints will each have light and life throughout.

All four of these examples are good negatives, and all vary greatly from one another in density. Each one is designed to express my point of view about the world I’ve seen or the world I’m creating. Creating something different from reality is not only perfectly valid, but also wonderfully desirable. I couldn’t make the photographs I want to make if all of my negatives had to be within a standard range.

Negative densities should be whatever they have to be. They should allow you to say what you want to say. Obviously, if you want to do a realistic version of a wintry snow scene in bright sunlight, you’ll end up with a denser negative than if you want a realistic version of an open pit coal mine on a cloudy day. Those two perfectly realistic photographs will have to come from negatives that are quite different in average density. So, even within the realm of pure realism, there is no reason to expect all negatives to land within a fixed range of densities.

I have made negatives in the slit canyons of Arizona with exposures up to three and a half hours. Despite the long exposures, some portions of those negatives have no density whatsoever, indicating that areas of those canyons were so dark that no amount of exposure would have reached threshold. Yet the highlights are so bright that they have high densities even with compensating development. Some of these negatives end up way, way outside the realm of standard negative densities. Yet they produce some of my favorite, and most popular, prints.

You’ve got to get away from the thinking that everything has to fit inside a box. My negatives vary all over the board. Some are dense. Some are thin. Some are unnecessarily dense because I made a serious mistake somewhere along the line. But I don’t throw away those negatives. Some of them give me prints that I love. They’re usable negatives, even if they’re not perfect. I make no attempt to keep them within the boundaries prescribed by others. And I often expose my highlights above Zone 10 . . . intentionally!

As I pointed out in Myth #3 above, underexposure yields flat prints and ruins the possibility of making a good print. Overexposure, on the other hand, gives you a denser negative that requires a longer enlarging exposure, but the print will be just fine. In any reasonably standard situation (not cathedrals or canyons), you’d have to overexpose by 5, 6, or 7 stops to push the negative up to Zone 15 and beyond (where the negative flattens out on the shoulder of the exposure/ density curve). But, if you underexpose by just ½ or 1 stop, you’re below Zone 3 where the negative flattens out on the toe. As long as you’re between those spots, you’re OK.

The greatest sin in black-and-white photography is underexposure. If you overexpose, you get a denser negative, requiring a longer exposure under the enlarger when printing. The negative will also have a bit more grain. Other than that, you rarely lose a thing. The moral of the story: when in doubt, overexpose!

Loosen up! You don’t have to be exact. In fact, being exact is a formula for disaster—or, at the very least, it’s a formula for very predictable and very boring results. There’s nothing about photography that’s exact! Make sure you have enough exposure so you’re on the straight-line portion of the exposure/density curve. If you’re a little too high, don’t worry about it. You’ll still have a perfectly workable negative. It may require a little longer enlarging exposure, but who cares? You’ll have to manipulate the print anyway with some burning and dodging, just to make it look like the scene as you saw it—or as you envisioned it differently—when you stood behind the camera (please reread Myth #1). What can possibly be exact about a process like this?

Photography is an art. It is based on the sciences of light, optics, chemistry, computerization, etc., but if you get too hung up on the science, you lose the art. Understand the scientific basis, but don’t worry about getting an exact Zone 5 to the fourth decimal place! After all, how many painters measure the hue of blue or red on some decimal scale? None of them! They look to see if it’s the color they want. Then they work with it. Photographers should approach photography in a similar manner.

Not every negative has to fit a predetermined density range. Not every print has to have a black, a white, and all the tones in between. Some prints don’t even want a black or anything near a black. (See Myth #7, below.) You can have a high-key (i.e., light-toned) print without any blacks or dark grays. You can have a deep, moody, low-key print with no whites or light grays. You can have a print with anything you want, as long as it effectively conveys the mood or feeling you want to convey. You can’t convey your thoughts if you’re restricted to printing by the rules. And you can’t convey your thoughts effectively if you try to start with negatives that all have the same density range. It doesn’t work. It can’t work. You’ve got to have the flexibility and creativity to say something important, and you can’t be creative if you’re limited by arbitrary, restrictive rules. Throw them out, have fun, and open up to real creativity!

How does all of this apply to digital approaches? To be brief: in exactly the same way. In example #1 of the rainforest, you expose the histogram off toward the right edge, and in post-processing you push it back down toward the densities you want to realistically depict that forest. In example #2, with the ethereal, dreamlike forest tones, you’ll probably want to keep the tonalities much like they are in the RAW exposure, though you’d probably want to fiddle around with the Tone Curve to better adjust the image to your liking. Ultimately, however, you’ll want to retain those bright tonalities, or you may want to keep nearly everything high key, except for some deeper shadows, which can be kept quite dark for an interesting graphic effect. That can be accomplished by either dropping the left edge of to Tone Curve way down to make the shadow, alone, very dark, or you can use the Paint Brush to very carefully to paint those shadows darker.

Example #3, in the English Cathedral, you may have to go to an HDR approach with two or more exposures by exposing the windows, along with some brighter areas in one exposure, and exposing the remainder of the cathedral interior in another. Of course, it’s best if you use a tripod to get exact alignment of the two exposures, though Photoshop is excellent at aligning two exposures that are not exact. From that point, you can reach the tones you want to have for your final file.

Example #4 would require the same type of dramatic contrast increase that I detailed for figures 6-15a and b, where a narrow spike of a histogram (i.e., one showing very little tonal variation in the scene) can be dramatically expanded via the Tone Curve tool. It’s likely you will then want to push both the Vibrance and Saturations sliders at the bottom of basic ACR’s Basic panel quite far to the left to negate the dramatic color saturation increase that accompanies the contrast increase. Furthermore, you may need to alter the Temperature and Tint siders at the top of the Basic panel to fully re-adjust the colors to your liking. The histograms for the several examples are very different—and example #3 requires two separate histograms for the two exposures. Who cares? Not all histograms have to look alike, or even similar. There can be wide variations. It’s not something worth worrying about.

My educational background is not in the arts, but in the sciences. I have a bachelor’s and a master’s degree in mathematics from UCLA. I understand graphs. I can read an exposure/density curve, which tells me not to expose shadows in Zone 3. I can understand that a histogram (which is a graph) clearly tells me to move it to the right to gain more information, and therefore smoother results. But I also think that following densitometry curves to determine exposures is absurd, as is remaining within strict limits in negative density range. You’ll miss opportunities at every turn. It’s the same with the histogram short of clipping, at which point you simply lose all information in the clipped areas. You’ll restrict yourself to a limited range of possibilities. It’s bad enough when someone else imposes restrictions on any aspect of your life, so why impose restrictions on yourself? Break out of the box. Use the full range of the negative, and use the histogram to your advantage. Don’t be cowed by histograms that fail to fall within the “ideal” limitations. Allow yourself the flexibility of negatives that vary in density, of histograms that vary widely. Don’t feel guilty about such variation. Be proud of it. You’re simply giving yourself artistic freedom. You got a problem with that?

Myth #5: All contact proof prints of negatives should be made at the same exposure.

Digitally, the RAW file is, effectively, your contact proof, your starting point. So, simply take it from there. With film, as we just learned, negatives should not have a standard range of densities. Once you accept this truth, and once you start creating negatives that vary in density from one to another to best suit your expressive purposes, you will almost immediately discover that all contact proof prints should not be made at the same exposure. They can’t be. If they were all made at the same exposure, you’d get very dark, unreadable contact proofs from thinner negatives and very light, unreadable contact proofs from denser negatives. In either case, you wouldn’t obtain the information you need to decide how to print that negative. You might ignore a negative that is perfectly printable—perhaps a negative that is capable of yielding one of your finest prints. At worst, you might even throw away a potentially excellent photograph.

I vary my exposure for contact proofs to accommodate the wide range of densities I have on my negatives. However, I do keep one thing standard: the contrast level of my contact proofs. I make all of them at a fixed, low-contrast level. This gives them a somewhat dull, perhaps even a slightly “muddy” look, but they give me an immense amount of information about the image.

That explodes the myth, but let’s go farther. Let’s look into the contrast level needed for useful contact proofs, then discuss how best to expose them. If I made my contact proofs at a medium contrast level, I might lose detail in either the highlights or the shadows on high contrast negatives, giving me little direction on how to print them. I’m looking for information, not excitement, in my contact proofs. The final print is where I want emotion; the contact proof is where I want information.

I lower the contrast level by dialing in 60 units of yellow filtration on my dichroic head enlarger. Let me explain this. On a dichroic head (i.e., a three-color enlarging light source), you have white light as your source when no filtration is dialed in. The contrast level is about the same as normal contrast grade, or about Grade 2 on the graded papers. As you increase the magenta filtration, contrast progressively increases above the Grade 2 level. As you increase the yellow filtration (starting from white light), contrast progressively decreases below the Grade 2 level. So, with the yellow filter dialed to 60 units of filtration, I expose the proof and develop it solely in Kodak’s Dektol developer. This yields a low-contrast contact proof, giving me a huge amount of information of what I can get out of that negative.

It turns out that a contact proof of a negative exhibits about the same contrast as the enlarged image at the same level of filtration. (This is true of diffusion light sources but not condenser light sources. Most enlargers made today feature diffusion light sources and built-in variable contrast filters. I will assume that most readers are using a diffusion light source on your enlarger.) Over time you can correlate the low contrast contact proof with the amount of contrast filtration you think you’ll need for the final, enlarged print. If you like the contact proof’s contrast level, dial in the appropriate filter setting that yields the same contrast for the enlarged print as you see on your contact print. If the contact proof looks low in contrast, dial in a higher contrast level (i.e., either reduce the yellow filtration level or increase the magenta contrast level). If the contact proof looks very low in contrast and muddy, dial in quite a bit of magenta filtration, say 50 to 75 units. If it really looks muddy, go all the way up to the maximum magenta your enlarger achieves.

On the other hand, if the contrast level of the proof looks too high, I begin printing by dialing in more than 60 units of yellow filtration. The more contrast that the proof appears to have, the greater the amount of yellow filtration I dial in to lower it.

Low-contrast contact proofs give me a great deal of information about how to approach printing my negatives. I recommend you adopt this procedure. If I varied the contrast level from negative to negative when making proof prints, I’d never know which ones were made at high contrast and which were made at low contrast, and I’d have no stable starting point. A fixed contrast level gives me a solid foundation for analyzing my negatives.

My Method of Making Contact Proofs

Let’s now turn to my method of exposing the negatives to make usable contact proofs. I place two sheets of 8×10 enlarging paper atop a thick foam pad under my enlarger and four 4×5 negatives on each sheet of paper. I cover the entire setup with a ¼" sheet of glass, heavy enough to press the negatives into direct contact with the enlarging paper.

The eight negatives normally vary in density. Often there are considerable density differences among them. So I expose them all to the amount of exposure needed to get a good proof of the thinnest negative. Of course, there may be other negatives in the group that have the same relatively low density. After making that exposure, I place 4×5 sheets of cardboard atop the glass over each of those negatives, preventing any further exposure. (I use the cardboard sheets that come with the 4×5 film for this purpose.) Then I give additional exposure to the next densest negative in the group and cover that negative with cardboard. I continue giving additional exposure to successively denser negatives until I expose the densest one fully. Then I develop both sheets of paper to yield eight proof prints.

Of course, I don’t always guess the perfect exposure for all eight negatives, but time and experience make my guesses reasonably good. If any of the eight are much too light or much too dark to yield useful information, I simply expose them again in the next group of eight negatives. If I still get it wrong, I do it a third time, or as many times as needed until I get a useful contact proof print. Once I get a usable proof, I’m finished with that negative, as far as proofing is concerned. After drying the sheets, I cut them into individual proofs, throwing away the bad exposures.

If I’m proofing roll film, I place a full roll (cut into strips) on each 8×10 sheet of paper and do the same procedure as outlined above: exposing for the thinnest negative(s), covering them, and then exposing successively denser negatives on the roll until all are fully exposed. Hopefully I get useful information on all of them. If too many fail to give me usable information, I’ll do the entire roll again. I do not cut roll film proofs into individual negatives because the individual proofs would be too cumbersome or get lost.

I always study a contact proof extensively before enlarging it. Why? Because it tells me how I should approach printing the negative to obtain the image I want. Remember, I was behind the camera when the scene was exposed, so I know how I felt about it at the time. I made a series of decisions in the field to put me on the right path toward my statement. Now that I’ve developed the negative, I study the contact proof to see how I can carry that vision into my final print. If I don’t study that contact print thoroughly, I’d be starting my printing from scratch, as if I were starting with someone else’s negative. Yet I always allow myself the option of seeing the image anew and going in a vastly different direction. I try not to be dogmatic or rigid. A new vision may be more worthwhile than carrying through the thoughts I had while in the field.

Darkroom work is a continuation of the work that started in the field. Printing a negative is not a separate act of photographic creativity; it’s the next step on a continuum. For example, I have often developed a negative to higher contrast in an already contrasty scene. I realized while I was behind the camera that I could use the darkroom to burn down the brightest areas, but that the higher contrast negative would give me better local contrasts within the scene. Thus, I was thinking about how I would print the negative even before I exposed it (figure 7-1). Seeing the process all the way through is known as “previsualization.” It’s part of knowing what you want, learning the zone system, understanding the full capabilities of the negative, and recognizing the options in the darkroom to help get you there.

 Darkroom work is a continuation of the work that started in the field. Printing a negative is not a separate act of photographic creativity; it’s the next step on a continuum.

A writer has a good outline of a book before starting the story. A composer has a concept of an entire piece of music before composing. A painter has an idea of a painting before committing to the canvas. (There are exceptions, of course, but this is usually the case.) Similarly, photographers should have a clear outline and path for a final photograph while standing behind the camera. But you’ll get there only part of the time if you restrict yourself to negatives of a standard density, proofed at a standard time. Why restrict yourself; why not expand your options?

Now that we’ve made good contact proofs, let’s increase our efficiency in making a final print. This is integrally tied up with Myth #6.

Myth #6: The best landscape photographs are made within an hour and a half of sunrise or sunset.

Confining yourself exclusively to early and late hour photography does not guarantee the making of a great photograph. Some people may extend the stated time frame for good outdoor photographs to two hours, and a few real liberals may even go further. I take the radical route and say that you can photograph landscapes throughout the day, from the first light of morning to the very last photon of evening, with the possibility of great results at any time. The only concession I make to timing is that you need some light; you simply can’t make photographs in total darkness! Other than the need for some amount of light, there’s no reason to put your camera away at any time of the day.

This doesn’t necessarily mean that you can make a great photograph in every location at any time of day, certainly no more so than confining yourself to early and late hour photography could guarantee the making of a great photograph. The making of a great landscape photograph requires a number of convergent conditions, among them: your goals; special lighting and/or atmospheric conditions; special relationships of lines, forms, or tonalities; the equipment and materials you have available; your insight, intuition, and creativity; and any number of other fortuitous conditions.

Some of Edward Weston’s most celebrated landscapes were made at noon, like the eroded patterns at Zabriskie Point in Death Valley. Some of his famous images of nudes on sand dunes were made at midday with axis light. Weston used midday light with confidence, and there is no reason you can’t do so as well. I’ve photographed on the sand dunes in Death Valley at Stove Pipe Wells, and have made photographs at all times of the day that I love, including those midday hours or axis lighting (i.e., the sun directly behind me) that so many photographers avoid, such as figure 3-16, made in the mid-afternoon with axis lighting; figure 5-2, made in the mid-morning with axis lighting; figure 5-5, made at noon with cross lighting; and figure 14-8, made in the mid-afternoon under cross-lighting. Examples abound in this book and throughout the history of photography.

Throughout my career, I’ve successfully photographed at all times of the day (and even at night). It’s true that the early and late minutes after sunrise or before sunset are quite special, especially for the warm colors at those times. But review the many color images in this book made throughout the day, including ones near noon. Particularly in wide-open landscapes, the low angle of the sun in early and late minutes rakes across the landscape, yielding remarkable intersections of light and shadow that exist only during those fleeting moments. Contours of the land stand out that may be invisible at midday when the sun hits at angles approaching 90 degrees. But consider this: not all landscapes are wide-open landscapes. Furthermore, not all wonderful relationships of lines or forms take place only under a low angle of light. Your insight, intuition, and creativity do not mysteriously disappear at midday, nor does your equipment, nor your materials.

Figure 14-8: Elegant Dune
Photographed at about 2:30 p.m., this image serves as a perfect counterexample to the myth that good landscapes can only be made near sunrise and sunset. The slope of the land rose gently to the left, or west, and the negative was in November, when the sun is relatively low in the sky. Everything came together perfectly for a strong, open midday landscape.

Figure 14-9: Surf, Olympic Peninsula, Washington
This seascape was made at about 1:00 p.m. while crashing surf pounded the shore between huge tree-covered sea stacks.

Restricting your photography to the hours near sunrise or sunset limits your exploration to the times that low light exists. That cramps your options. Low light is fine, but it’s not the only good light. Suppose you wake up on a foggy, rainy, or cloudy day, and that light remains constant. One of my most noteworthy photographs (figure 3-7, Fallen Sequoias) was made under wonderfully foggy conditions at about 11:30 a.m. The fog had several benefits: it softened the light in the forest, it evened out the light (i.e., it removed bright splotches and dark shadows), and it simplified the background by eliminating it! Trees were visible for only a short distance before disappearing into the fog. I couldn’t have made that photograph at noon on a sunny day, nor could I have made it near sunrise or sunset; alternating bright sunlight and deep shade on the trees would have transformed the image into a confusing mess of light and dark spots. Fog at noon was perfect.

But the deep forest was an enclosed situation. The question arises: can you make midday photographs in an open landscape? Of course you can—remember, Weston did! It may not be easy, but it can be done. In December 2000, I went to the Olympic Peninsula on a wild, windy, rainy day. Wave upon wave pounded in, with spindrift flying off each one as it rolled toward the beach. It would have made no difference if the time were sunrise, midday, or sunset. Conditions were exceptional. There was no reason to put down my camera simply because it was 1:00 p.m. (figure 14-9).

I could cite dozens of examples of slit canyon photographs I made in the midday hours. It’s simply too dark to see them earlier and later. These photographs constitute my largest single body of images. While I recognize that they are not exactly landscapes in the usual sense of the word, they still are photographs of landforms.

Examples of successful midday landscape photographs abound. The bottom line here is simple: Don’t shut down when the sun gets high in the sky. You’re shortchanging yourself if you do so. There’s even more potential than I’ve discussed up to now. What about small details? Few photographers would suggest putting your camera away at midday if you’re interested in the small details within the landscape: flowers, mosses, rocks, bark, ice, ripples on a pond . . . you name it! These offer wonderful possibilities—don’t ignore them. Details can work for you at any time of the day.

Keep in mind that when you’re looking at a landscape, you’re not just looking at the land. You’re looking at light. You’re looking at lines and forms. You’re looking at relationships among lines and forms. You’re putting your creativity to work to find the compelling visual relationships that transform a wonderful scene—or even an ordinary scene—into a wonderful photograph, one that communicates your worldview to others. Those situations occur throughout the day. Limiting yourself to the early and late hours limits your options.

Myth #7: All black-and-white photographs need a good black, a good white, and tones in between.

This statement is the equivalent of saying that all good color photographs (or paintings, for that matter) need a primary blue, a primary red, a primary yellow, and all colors in between. Nobody would take that remark seriously, so why should anyone take this myth about black-and-white photography seriously? Beats me.

Of course, there’s nothing wrong with a photograph that fulfills the stated mandate, as long as such tones are appropriate for the desired mood. Similarly, there is no objection to a color photograph that includes the full color spectrum, if that, too, remains consistent with your goals. My objection is to the dictate that all images require a full range of tonalities. They don’t!

The purpose of a photograph is to make a visual statement, not to adhere to some arbitrary rule about tonal range and gradations. A photograph is supposed to be a communication between the photographer and the viewers. It’s supposed to draw viewers in and hold them there until they get the message and feel the emotional impact. If every one of your photographs adheres to the stated mandate, then you’re doing formula photography. There’s a “sameness” to your images, and that uniformity soon bores your viewers.

 When you’re looking at a landscape, you’re not just looking at the land. You’re looking at light. You’re looking at lines and forms. You’re looking at relationships among lines and forms.

The emotional content of subject matter coupled with tonality and line structure is the heart of expressive photography. Sometimes you want to express a mood that’s depressing, sometimes uplifting, sometimes dreamlike and airy. A pure black or a pure white tonality could be inappropriate for the mood of your image. Don’t worry about that mandate regarding tonalities. Just print the image in the way that enhances the mood you want to project (figure 14-10).

The way to do this successfully is to understand human visual language. There is a universal visual language that pervades all cultures on our planet. It’s inherent in our being. An image dominated by dark tones doesn’t have the same feeling as one dominated by light tones. There is a mood associated with a set of tonalities. A photograph dominated by midtones doesn’t have the dramatic impact of one replete with brilliant whites and deep blacks. This visual language extends beyond tonalities to lines and forms. Soft, flowing lines and gently rounded forms project a very different mood from straight lines, tightly curved lines, jagged lines, or sharp-edged forms.

When you combine flowing lines and rounded forms in a photograph with midtones or light tones, you get a very quiet, relaxing mood, rarely one of high excitement. If, on the other hand, you combine sharp-edged, broken forms and jagged or tightly curved lines with high contrast, you get an active, exciting image that may even border on the frenetic or angry. It won’t convey a quiet, relaxed feeling. It can’t, with those lines, forms, and high contrasts. These are strong aspects of our visual language. Employ them sensibly and appropriately to make an image that projects the mood you wish to convey.

Since 1975, in workshops I have taught, I have repeatedly seen photographs that blatantly ignore our visual language. A pastoral landscape is often rendered with striking contrasts capped by glowing whites and deep, penetrating blacks. Yet the image cries out for softer tones to convey the inherent sense of peace and serenity. I believe that the reason for the disparity between printed tonalities and appropriate tonalities is that most beginners—and many more advanced photographers—seek high drama in virtually every image. They are either reluctant or scared to convey a quiet mood with mellowed gray tonalities. I also find that those doing digital imagery often fall victim to this syndrome, especially with the advent of HDR, putting the most brilliant aspects of every exposure into the final image. But there is no hierarchy of tonalities when everything is equally brilliant. Viewing an image like that is the equivalent of listening to a symphony in which every phrase is a crescendo; it becomes tedious very quickly. There is no sense of reality or logical light or a quieter mood.

What about color photography? The same concepts apply for line and form structures and for the brightness/darkness of any photograph, either color or black-and-white. But what about color itself? Again, the same concepts apply. Light, pastel colors convey a different mood than deep, rich colors. Saturated primary colors placed next to each other have the same high activity as high-contrast tones placed next to each other in a black-and-white image. So, soft, curved lines and light pastel colors impart a far quieter and more relaxed mood than sharp, jagged lines and saturated primary colors. Yet in today’s world, color photographs often take on a cartoonish air with the highest possible contrast and the most deeply saturated colors. There is no restraint and no reality.

I have seen high dynamic range (HDR) devotees photograph the equivalent of an asphalt road and turn it into a rainbow, claiming, “The colors were actually there!” Yeah, right! Too often the wrong set of colors and/or lines detracts from the appropriate mood of the image. It makes me think that the current fad in color photography (particularly in digital imagery) is based on the idea that every color photograph must indeed have a primary red, a primary yellow, and a primary blue, with all the other colors in between! We seem to have lost all sense of subtlety in the race for high impact and shock value.

I recommend that you look at books of paintings (and if possible, at the actual paintings in museums) to see their use of colors and relationships. You will see how painters use intensely rich colors to convey different moods. For example, Van Gogh often used primary colors and wildly curved or broken lines to create bold, frenetic effects; yet he also used a far more subdued palette to convey an entirely different mood. Andrew and Jamie Wyeth also used subtle colors, tones, and structures to convey wonderful moods.

Figure 14-10: Stairway, Wells Cathedral
The English cathedrals struck me overwhelmingly as examples of what humanity can produce at its best. This image is an attempt at an ethereal “stairway to heaven” with no blacks or dark grays.

So, going back to black-and-white, why would anyone implore you to have a white, a black, and tones in-between for every image? It would be like forcing the same emotion in each image. Such an admonition flies in the face of common sense. It damages the central reasons for creating any work of art: making a statement and eliciting an emotional response.

This understanding separates the top photographers from the also-rans. Photography should not become a mere technical exercise. It’s the feeling that counts, not the technical expertise. I don’t make photographs to solve technical problems. If I did, I would be a “tester,” not a photographer. Sometimes I have to solve technical problems to make successful photographs, and I fully recognize the importance of solving those problems. If you don’t solve technical problems, your message may become so compromised that it’s lost.

All great art conveys emotion. This is true of music, literature, sculpture, painting, and dance as well as photography. The greatest, most time-honored works in any field have tremendous emotional impact; that’s why they’re considered great!

So keep this in mind: The message is the important thing. The mood is the important thing. The technique is merely support for communication between the photographer and the viewer. If your photographs are technical tour-de-forces that say nothing, then you’ve produced little of value. Ansel Adams, forcefully supporting this idea, said, “There’s nothing as useless as a sharp photograph of a fuzzy concept.” A good lens can produce a sharp image but nothing more. It’s the photographer with something to say—not the sharp lens—that produces important photographs. Ignore this myth; make good photographs.

Myth #8: Buying, learning, and using the latest app will make me a great photographer.

Image-editing tools such as Lightroom, ACR, and Photoshop give so much control that the issue is controlling your instincts and desires to abuse these tools. There is no new app that is going to make a significant difference to your digital photography. Yes, it’s possible that some new app may make a marginal or discernible difference somewhere—specifically a better-looking print—but it’s not going to produce great photography by its presence on the market.

The only thing that will make you a significantly better photographer is to understand and employ the basics: light, composition, and a keen passion for what you want to tell the world via your photography. A new app will not vault you into greatness, although it may indeed give an already good image the added spark. (Remember Ansel Adams’ comment that “there is often a small difference between a print that’s acceptable and one that’s exceptional.”) But keep in mind that if you start without a firm understanding of good light, good compositional relationships, and a strong sense of what is truly important to you, it will just be “garbage in; garbage out,” and a new app will not turn garbage into art.

Myth #9: The center of interest should be one-third of the way up and one-third of the way into the photograph.

I have heard several conflicting stories about where the “rule of thirds” originated. I don’t know which is correct. My favorite of the stories is that it stems from a flawed study in the 1850s by a statistics professor who decided to learn what makes great paintings great. He worked with several art critics and art historians who chose 250 of the finest paintings. (Consider this: A statistician with no real art background was working with people involved in the arts who had no understanding of statistics. So, this whole “study” started with a communication disconnect.)

Figure 14-11: Horseshoe Bend of the Colorado River
The unimaginable symmetry of nature on a grand scale drew me to make this photograph. To accentuate that symmetry, I photographed directly toward the cliffs across the 180-degree turn, placing the center of interest directly in the center of the image. I can’t imagine a better placement for it.

One question he wanted to resolve was where the center of interest should lie. Realizing that the center of interest could be placed in any one of four quadrants, and that it would end up at the exact center on average, the statistician rotated the center of interest from wherever it was found around the center of the painting to the lower-right quadrant. Then he applied his statistical analysis, apparently thinking he had produced a valid analysis. He hadn’t.

Consider the imaginary line that goes from the extreme corner to the center. Obviously there would be as many points above the line as below the line, in roughly equal distances from the line. So the statistical average was certain to be on that line. No center of interest is found in the exact corner of a painting, so there is no contribution from the corner, but there could be contributions from the exact center. In other words, the center of interest would be along the line and would be weighted toward the center.

Not surprisingly, the statistician found that the average center of interest was two-thirds of the way along the line. His analysis forced that conclusion. In other words, it was a predetermined result! Without his quadrant rotation, the analysis would have yielded the exact center as the best place to locate a center of interest.

Of course, two-thirds of the way up that line is—ta-da!—exactly one-third of the way up and one-third of the way into the painting from the corner. The result goes beyond useless because it was a meaningless question to begin with. Amazingly, that flawed analysis of a meaningless question is the basis of this baseless compositional rule.

Sometimes you may want to place an object directly in the center of a photograph for stability, strength, balance, symmetry, or any number of other reasons as I did with Salmonberry and Corn Lily (figure 14-1), and with Horseshoe Bend of the Colorado River (figure 14-11). Sometimes you may want a center of interest (if there is one) near the edge or corner, perhaps to create an intentional imbalance or to balance a greater mass nearer the center on the other side (the old teeter-totter balancing act).

The rule of thirds is a cornerstone for much useless teaching about composition—sinking to its lowest ebb in camera club and professional photographic competitions, where it’s considered the epitome of fine composition. It’s an idea that best belongs in the trashcan.

Myth #10: The horizon line should never divide a photograph in half.

Why not? There is simply no logical or visual reason for such a silly compositional rule. It may be that dividing the image space in half horizontally (or vertically) creates the strongest possible composition for a specific image (figure 14-12). Every image must be approached on its own merits. It makes no sense to rule out a valid compositional approach before you begin composing. Rules, assuming there are any, have to be bent and often broken to help make a point.

Yet there are photographers who purposely move the horizon line above or below center for no apparent reason other than to adhere to this so called “rule.” That’s just pure foolishness. Don’t ever be swayed by this senseless rule. Figure 10-9 breaks this silly rule twice: first dividing the top and bottom in half with a horizontal line, then dividing the bottom in half with a vertical line.

This silly myth and the previous one are two absurd rules of composition that are regularly bandied about as meaningful. There are other rules based on things like the “Golden Mean,” made by people who have no idea about the purely mathematical basis of that ratio as the answer to a question posed by Euclid 2,300 years ago. The Golden Mean has no artistic ramifications whatsoever. In fact, none of these purely mathematical considerations have compositional validity.

The golden mean is the point (b) somewhere on the line a–c, that divides the line such that the ratio of the full line (ac) to the longer segment (ab) is the same ratio as the longer segment (ab) is to the shorter segment (bc). So, for example if you had an 8" line (ac), and placed a point on that line at the 5" point (b), then the ratio of ab to ac is ⅝ or .625. The ratio of bc (the shorter 3" segment) to ac (the longer 5" segment) is ⅗ or .600. Close, but no cigar. It turns out that the actual “golden mean” point cannot be expressed as a fraction, or even as a simple decimal. This confounded Greek mathematicians, who thought such a simple question should be solved with a simple answer. But note this: There is absolutely no aesthetic aspect to the basic question. Some people think it has meaningful aesthetic qualities. I see no validity to that.

Figure 14-12: Morning, Great Western Divide, Sierra Nevada Mountains
Dividing the image in half—with the deep blues of the sky on top and the perfect lake reflection below—the mountains and trees are like an embroidered belt on a fine dress. This composition imparts tremendous strength to the quiet, yet bold image. As Edward Weston stated, “Good composition is the strongest way of seeing.”

Every image must be dealt with on its own merits. Each one requires its own set of rules, which rarely apply to the next image. Some people think it’s useful to know the rules so they know when to break them. I disagree. Since rules are inherently useless, knowing them simply constrains you to follow them or consciously break them. Why put something in your mind to worry about if it’s inherently useless from the start? It’s like putting an obstacle in your path for no reason whatsoever.

My approach can best be summed up as, “There are no rules!”

===== FILE 22/28: Text%2fchapter15.xhtml =====

Figure 15-1: Gothic Fall, 40-Mile Canyon
40-Mile Canyon is one of the many side canyons of the Escalante River in Southern Utah, itself a tributary of the Colorado River. Midway down the dry, wide canyon, the trail suddenly drops via several switchbacks into a narrow cleft with running water. A waterfall, seemingly coming out of nowhere, feeds the lower canyon. I named it Gothic Fall because of the pointed arches enclosing the waterfall, reminding me of the Gothic arches of English cathedrals.

For any image to attract the viewer it must be well composed, well exposed, well printed, and well presented. Previous chapters dealt with the first three issues; this chapter deals with the fourth.

CHAPTER 15
Presentation

A FINE PHOTOGRAPH DESERVES AN APPROPRIATE PRESENTATION. The presentation should enhance the photograph without overwhelming or detracting from it. The frame or method of displaying the photograph should not draw attention to itself. The best presentation is understated, simple, and conservative. Showy presentations detract from the image and are needed only if the photograph is inherently weak. I feel that a fine photograph looks best when dry mounted. A dry mounted print has the structural support of the mount board, it lies perfectly flat, and it appears to have been given greater care than an unmounted print. (Dry mounting is a procedure of gluing the photograph to the base mount board with a heatsensitive glue that looks like wax paper in a heated press. The photograph is then perfectly flat and permanently adhered to the mount board.)

Corner-mounted, overmatted prints have always enjoyed a degree of popularity, but I am somewhat ambivalent to them. Such prints can be made to lay reasonably flat with only a small bow or ripple, and if the mount board is damaged, the print can be easily removed and remounted on a new board. This has obvious advantages, yet I still prefer the look of a smooth, dry mounted print.

Research by the Center for Creative Photography at the University of Arizona shows that all dry mount tissue ever produced in the United States, and all dry mount tissue ever produced anywhere (with the exception of one produced for about 18 months in the 1920s in Czechoslovakia), has a neutral pH, meaning that none of these can harm the life of the print. Furthermore, the research determined that dry mount tissue forms an impervious barrier between the mount board and the print, which means that dry mounting actually improves the life of any print mounted on a board that is not of archival quality. The hinge-mounted or corner-mounted print would be in direct contact with the inferior board, placing it in jeopardy of degeneration.

On the other hand, suppose a print is dry mounted and stored under somewhat humid conditions, allowing mold to grow on the board. Then you’re stuck! The board is irreparably damaged, and the print is permanently dry mounted to it. Some dry mount tissue claims to be removable when reinserted into the press at a high temperature. I’m skeptical about such claims on two grounds. First, I’ve never met anyone who has successfully dismounted and remounted a print; second, I wonder if the print emulsion would be damaged if the temperature were too high (though I’ve never found studies indicating that this is a problem).

Many digital papers lie quite flat and can be corner mounted and overmatted successfully, especially with computer-driven mat cutters (very expensive, but programmable to within one millimeter). Digital matte papers tend to lie flatter than gloss or semigloss papers, making them the prime candidates for this type of overmatting. I suggest that you research the various options before deciding which way to go with your own work, recognizing that you don’t have to employ the same approach for every photograph. I still dry mount all of my work, for I feel that it finishes the photograph in the best way possible. I discuss my methods fully in the next few pages, but you may settle on a different approach.

To avoid contamination problems, it makes sense to use the finest quality museum mount boards made to archivally permanent standards, and to store them under conditions that won’t allow mold to grow. Most mount boards of this quality are made of cotton fiber (so-called “rag board”) and are manufactured by processes that do not utilize acids. Several manufacturers produce mount board of archival permanence from wood pulp, which is available in white and a multitude of colors. Often the stark white border of archival rag board is incompatible with the color tint of a warm-toned black-and-white photograph, or may be too harsh for a color photograph. Wood pulp products may help alleviate these problems.

For color photographs, matching the color of the mount board to a specific color in the print is virtually impossible, as well as undesirable. It’s preferable to choose a color that is compatible, though not necessarily identical, to colors in the photograph. In general, the mount board’s color should be somewhat muted so as to support, but not dominate, the image. There are exceptions to this rule (as there always are!), but they must be employed with a keen sense of overall design and visual impact. I prefer off-white, such as antique white, as the color for the mount or overmat of my color images. The softer white does not call attention to itself, and it’s more compatible with the softer white of the color print papers (which are invariably softer than those brilliant whites of black-and-white papers).

For black-and-white photographs, white mount boards are universally accepted for fine art prints by galleries, museums, and collectors—virtually to the exclusion of any other color. This is a carryover from historical precedence in which the only archival mount board was the cotton fiber in pure white. Today, however, colored boards—particularly neutral gray—can be especially attractive because the brightest white of the print will not compete with the white of the mount board. The biggest stumbling block I have encountered with colored boards is lack of acceptance by galleries, museums, and collectors who are reluctant to break with tradition. I think this is shortsighted and unfortunate, because some images simply look better on colored or gray mounts. In any case, I continue to mount on traditional white board because I would rather have viewers look at my images rather than question my choice of board. Perhaps greater flexibility will gain acceptance in time.

I feel that the presentation looks best if the texture of the mount board is compatible with the print surface. Because I prefer an air-dried gloss surface, I also prefer a smooth surface mount board—but not one with an obvious sheen, for reflectivity makes the board too glaringly bright and detracts from the image.

The size of the mount board compared to the print is also a subjective decision. A border that is too narrow is nothing more than a bothersome stripe around the print, and one that is too wide diminishes the importance of the print. I mount 16" × 20" prints on 22" × 28" board, though I prefer 24" × 28". Many galleries demand specific standard sizes for framing and display, and I am somewhat constrained by those demands. For the same reason, I mount 11" × 14" prints on 16" × 20" board, though I much prefer the proportions of 17" × 20". I mount 8" × 10" prints on 14" × 17" board (which I like very much), and all prints significantly smaller than 8" × 10" are mounted on 11" × 14" board. You may want to experiment with other sizes to suit your taste. Edward Weston used to mount his 8" × 10" contact prints on 13⅓" × 16" board—the size dictated by the fact that six such mounts could be cut with no waste from one 32" × 40" board!

Generally, the format of the print—whether horizontal or vertical—goes best with a board of similar format. Once in a while there may be a reason to mount a vertical print on a horizontal board or vice versa, but these instances are rare. In addition to compatible formats, all successful mounts I have ever seen are pleasingly centered left to right, with the print raised slightly above center. Anytime I’ve seen an off-center mount (usually with the print off in one corner), it has an affected, “cute” look. The emphasis should be on the photograph, and everything should be done to enhance it without calling attention to the mount or any other aspect of the presentation. When the presentation calls attention to itself, it detracts from the statement of the photograph.

Dry Mounting Prints

Dry mounting is a method of adhering the photographic print to a mount board for permanent display. It is done using a material known as dry mount tissue, a heat-sensitive glue that looks like waxed paper. When a sandwich of the print, the dry mount tissue below it, and the mount board below that are placed in a dry mount press (a large, flat press with heating elements), the dry mount tissue partially melts and glues the print to the board permanently.

 The size of the mount board compared to the print is also a subjective decision. A border that is too narrow is nothing more than a bothersome stripe around the print, and one that is too wide diminishes the importance of the print.

The first step in mounting a print is to make the mount tissue adhere to the back. To do this properly, always preheat the print prior to tacking the dry mount tissue. This is true of all fiber-based papers for black-and-white and for digital printing papers, as well. Fiber-based traditional papers are not dimensionally stable; they expand when wet and contract when dried. As a result, such prints shrink slightly when heated because the heat drives out the moisture in the emulsion and paper base. If the print is not preheated before trimming, it will shrink during mounting; however, the dry mount tissue will not shrink, and a distracting, shiny line of mount tissue will be visible all around the print. It’s important to note that all fiber-based prints are wavy and stiff if not heated prior to mounting, so preheating makes them more pliable and easier to work with. It appears that digital papers are dimensionally stable, and can be dry mounted without preheating, but I recommend testing that with any digital paper you use.

Prior to tacking the dry mount tissue to the preheated print for trimming, carefully wipe the back of the print to remove any grit that may cause a bump in the mounted print. I do this with my hand rather than a brush because a brush often passes over a small impurity without budging it, while my hand will feel the bump, and I can then dislodge it. Then use a single stroke of the tacking iron in the center of the print, about two to three inches in length, to tack the tissue to the print. The traditional method of tacking—a large X on the back of the print—may cause ripples in the tissue at the junction of the X and result in an imperfect mount.

Once the dry mount tissue is tacked to the print, the two should be trimmed together. Trimming itself is extremely important, for this is your last chance to do any cropping of the image. Before trimming—and then again after trimming—check for minor edge distractions or intrusions that can be eliminated with another cut 1/32 or 1/64 of an inch in length. (Ansel Adams once remarked with his teeth clenched in mock anger, “I’d like to get my hands on the guy who invented 1/64 of an inch!”) This is also the time to perform any more significant surgery, such as cropping. After all, it may be a stronger image at 15" × 20" than 16" × 20", or at 11" × 13" rather than 11" × 14". Don’t become wedded to the exact format of the purchased paper. You may even go to extremely long and narrow formats or square formats to achieve your strongest image. Don’t hesitate to crop. Although I feel it’s important to attempt to use the maximum area of your negative, I always advise cropping if it improves the image.

When the print is trimmed, it’s ready for positioning on the mount board. Before placing the print on the board, wipe the surface free of any grit to eliminate any maddening bumps. Again, this should be done by hand, not with a brush.

Making Positioning Guides for Print Placement

To help position my print properly on the mount board, I have cut a number of positioning guides from scrap board. I have them for horizontal and vertical 16" × 20" prints, horizontal and vertical 11" × 14" prints, and so on. Sometimes I print an image slightly smaller than full frame for subtle variation of effect, as with a 14½" × 18" print that is mounted on 22" × 28" board. When I do this, I use my guide for a “narrow” 16" × 20" print.

Making the guide is a bit laborious, but using it saves enormous amounts of time. Here is my procedure for making one: the width is chosen as the distance from the top of the mount board to the top of the print, while the length is the width of the mount board. My guide for a horizontal 16" × 20" print mounted on 22" × 28" board is 28" long and 31/16" wide, while the guide for a vertical 11" × 14" print mounted on 16" × 20" board is 16" long and 2¾" wide).

When cutting the guide, I must be certain that its width is uniform across its entire length, in order to ensure that the print is positioned parallel to the top edge of the mount. I place the guide atop the mount board and push both of them against a straight edge to ensure that the guide is parallel with the board. Then I position the first print against the new guide and measure carefully to make sure the sides of the print are parallel to the edges of the board. If they are, then I know the guide is properly made, and I have no reason to measure subsequent prints for parallelism. I then slide the top edge of the print along the guide until the sides of the print are equidistant from the edges of the mount board.

The print is now positioned for tacking. While holding the print in place (with the top edge firmly against the guide), I lift each lower corner of the print and tack it to the mount board with a short stroke of the tacking iron toward the corner. The first print to use the new guide for positioning is now ready for mounting, but to complete the guide, I make marks on it at the edges of the positioned print. Those two points are equidistant from the edge of the guide. I label those two points as the “0 point” (zero point) and mark off 1/16" intervals on both sides of those points. Each subsequent print is then placed against the guide, positioned equally from the 0 point, and immediately tacked. Positioning is a matter of seconds (diagram 12.1).

Prior to inserting the print into the mount press, inspect the surface for any grit, dust, dirt, or hair that may have fallen on the surface during the positioning process and remove it. To mount the print, place the board and its tacked print into the press and follow the instructions that come with the tissue. I use four-ply mount board as a cover sheet between the print and the upper heat platen of the press. If the pressure of your dry mount press is uniform and sufficient, and if your temperature is uniform over the surface, you should get a perfect mount within 90 seconds to two minutes.

Spotting, Etching, and Correction of Defects

The mounted print must be devoid of any surface defects, including scratches, abrasions, creases, bumps (generally caused by grit particles embedded between the print and the mount board), or small craters on the surface (caused by grit particles pressed into the emulsion when the print was placed in the mount press). Such defects are extremely distracting on the otherwise smooth, flat surface. Galleries and collectors will balk at accepting prints with such defects, but more important, they should be unacceptable to you, the photographer.

If you work digitally, all spots on the print can and should be removed prior to printing. The most commonly used tools are the ACR Healing or Clone brush and the Photoshop Clone Stamp tool, which allows you to place a nearby section of the print on top of any defect—e.g., a defect caused by dust on the camera sensor—thus removing it cleanly and completely. This is a photographic godsend that has no equal in traditional photography. But be careful: Unless the replaced area is truly identical in color and/or tone to the area with the defect, it can be disturbingly apparent. The final print should be devoid of any distracting defects.

Diagram 12.1: Positioning guide for mounting photographs

Sometimes the problems of bumps and craters can be corrected. For bumps, I have found that the gently rounded cap of a Bic ballpoint pen can be used to gently tap or press the grit particle down and into the mount board. I stress the word gently because if you push too hard, you’ll create a wide crater that will never come out. Also, this procedure will rarely work if the embedded particle is between the print and the dry mount tissue, though it may work well if the particle is between the dry mount tissue and the mount board.

For craters, first place a drop of water (with a touch of Photo-Flo in it to break surface tension) on and around the crater, and let it fully absorb into the emulsion. Spread the droplet to a size of ¼" in diameter or more. This will swell the emulsion. Then, as the emulsion begins to dry and contract, repeatedly dab a tiny droplet of water only on the crater. This will keep it swollen as the emulsion around it contracts. Finally, let the original crater dry and contract. Unless the crater is too large or too deep, this may pull the emulsion flat and eliminate the crater. Several applications of the entire procedure may be needed if the crater is large, but it will eliminate all but the largest craters and greatly reduce the size of the largest ones as well.

There is no cure for creases in the print except to inspect the print carefully before mounting. If it’s creased, tear it up, throw it away, and mount another one. Remember, you are your only quality control supervisor, and if you are satisfied showing defective prints, it’s your choice!

Spotting is the method of removing white specks or spots on the print caused either by scratches on the negative or by dust and dirt during enlargement. I used, and still use, Spotone as a basic spotting dye, diluted slightly with water to control its depth of tone. Spotone may be available at some photography stores, though it’s now out of business; Marshall also has spotting dyes that I’m sure are just as good.

By carefully mixing several colors, you can obtain a color very close to that of your print. Use an eyedropper to measure the amounts of each color, and make notes of the good combinations for future reference. The mix of colors depends on the paper you use and the way you tone your print, so no formula can be given. To mix the proper color, choose an unmounted print with a white border and attempt to extend a middle gray tonal area at the edge of the print into the border area. I generally start with a #3 gray, then add other colors as necessary to achieve the exact color of my print. I always mix and apply spotting dye under tungsten light rather than fluorescent because fluorescent has a discontinuous spectrum that yields incorrect color much of the time. If I can’t get an exact color mix, I edge the color over to the desired color with a drop or two from another color spotting kit.

When I achieve the proper color, I apply the spotting dye with a No. 0 brush, a relatively narrow brush that comes to a very fine point. There are narrower brushes, but they don’t hold enough liquid to apply for very long. Wider brushes are unsuitable for intricate work. Depending on the size of the spot, I either brush on the spotting dye gently or stipple it lightly by dabbing it onto the print with the tip of the brush. I gradually build up density to the adjacent densities surrounding the spot.

The instructions warn you not to use Spotone in conjunction with Photo-Flo. I recommend the opposite. I always put a drop or two of water with a small amount of Photo-Flo into the mixture to break surface tension and allow the liquid to absorb into the emulsion more thoroughly. If the liquid doesn’t absorb into the emulsion, it dries on the surface and leaves a spot of excess sheen, which can be removed by light swabbing with a moistened cotton swab. This may remove some of the spotting dye, and an additional application may be needed.

Until recently, I did spotting or etching after the print was mounted so that I could work on a print that was stabilized and immovable. A print that is not mounted has a tendency to flex and pop as moisture changes, and even just breathing on the emulsion is sufficient to flex it. Inevitably, just when I hunch over the print to apply some spotting color, I exhale and the print jumps up ⅛"! This can easily create a black mark on the print.

Another tip I’d like to offer is that for small white lines or small spots (usually caused by dust or hairs on either the negative or the enlarging paper), a standard #2 or #3 pencil can be very useful for spotting. Sharpen the pencil, and then rub its graphite edge on a piece of scrap paper until the point is a truly very sharp. Then use the pencil for spotting—not with the sharp tip, but with the edge of the graphite tip gently touching the print surface. If you press too hard or use the sharp point, you can indent the print surface. Then gently rub the pencil marks with either a cotton swab or the tip of your finger (make sure it’s a clean swab or finger!) to smooth out the tonality. This method works amazingly well, and I use it often, especially in very light gray areas that require spotting.

Etching is used when a black dot or line mars the image. This is most often caused by a pinhole or a particle of dust or grit that was on the negative at the time of exposure, resulting in a clear area that prints as black. I use an X-ACTO knife to gently—very gently—scrape at the surface of the print and wear away the emulsion (and the silver embedded in it) until the black line is reduced in density to mesh with the surroundings. I apply no pressure to the X-ACTO knife, letting its own weight be the only pressure, but simply guide the blade in a series of short, gentle scrapes. Avoid trying to dig out the black mark and gouging the print in the process.

If the black mark is excessively large, I may attempt to retouch the negative with Kodak’s Opaque—a claylike substance that can be diluted with water and painted directly onto the clear area of the negative emulsion, rendering it opaque. When the negative is printed, the opaque area will print as a white spot that can be retouched with spotting dye without damaging the emulsion. What makes Opaque so attractive is that if you fail to put it on satisfactorily, you can wipe it off completely with a water-moistened cotton swab, allow the negative to dry, and try it again. You can do it incorrectly 150 times and lose nothing but time, and if you do it well the 151st time, you’re done!

Print Finishing

Once the print—black-and-white or color—is spotted, etched, or hand colored, it only needs your signature. Put it on: it’s your print! You should show it and be proud of it. But use restraint. Sign it lightly, not heavily so that it becomes a distraction. I use a No. 6 pencil, which is very hard. I recommend against using a No. 2 or No. 3 pencil, both of which leave a heavy signature that becomes a distracting graphic element.

I prefer signing a print on the mount board, just below the print on the right edge. Generally I place the date of the image below the print on the left edge. There are variations to this basic approach. Some photographers place the name and date together. Some just sign the print, ignoring the date as irrelevant. Few photographers sign the image on the print itself. If the print is not dry mounted, but hinge mounted at the corners and overmatted, it is best to sign the back of the print.

You may want to overmat and frame the print for viewing. Framed prints should be overmatted so that the emulsion of the print is separated from the glass. This is necessary, for alternating periods of humidity and dryness can cause the emulsion to stick to the glass and destroy the print. Glass offers protection from dust and grit damage; though reflections can be a nuisance, well-placed lighting can overcome this problem to a great extent.

Please do not use non-glare glass. It places a slight fog across the entire image and slightly blurs sharpness, an effect that becomes pronounced if the print is separated from the glass. Plexiglas is a fine material to use instead of glass. It is lighter in weight and virtually impervious to breakage should the frame fall.

Framing, like mounting, is best if kept simple. It strikes me that this is a consequence of photography’s inherently direct approach. Exceptions exist, of course, such as Marie Cosindas’s color prints that are tastefully presented in ornate frames. But for the most part, such presentations of photography are out of character. For black-and-white photographs, metal sectional frames in brushed or polished aluminum work well, and for color photographs, finishes such as bronze are quite attractive. Plastic or plexiglass frames with thin, black borders are equally attractive. The array of possibilities abound. Just keep it simple and clean—let the photographs do the talking.

Presentation of photographs is a highly subjective matter. Don’t feel compelled to follow my dictates as gospel. Nobody has a corner on the aesthetic market. There are innumerable variations of successful, tasteful presentations. Use the method that suits you best. My only caution is to avoid “arty” presentations that may garner attention, but are devoid of sophistication and are basically silly.

===== FILE 23/28: Text%2fchapter16.xhtml =====

Figure 16-1: Picket Fence and Window, Bodie
This is the only image from a decade of photographing Bodie (1975–1985) that I felt had real lasting value. It’s a study of balanced asymmetry and meticulous camera placement. The window is slightly left of center to balance the pickets on the right, while the bright plaster patch at the upper left of the window completes the balance. The tip of the left picket is cradled within the dark portion of the window. The rectangular window spaces vary in size and tonality. Late afternoon sun from the left gives a tangible feeling of light hitting the rail, the pickets, and the house wall.

CHAPTER 16
Photographic Realism, Abstraction, and Art

IN THE LATE 1870S, BODIE, CALIFORNIA WAS A MINING TOWN of considerable importance, producing millions of dollars in gold and silver ore at the prices of its day. It was infamous for its bitter weather, brawls, and shootings. Its fortunes declined during the early 1880s as the mines were depleted. The last occupants moved away in 1940, eight years after a devastating fire destroyed most of the town. Today, Bodie is a California State Historical Monument with a cluster of remaining buildings spread over a square mile area.

I first visited Bodie in 1975 on a field trip during a photography workshop. I was immediately drawn to the weathered wood; decaying interiors with peeling, stained cloth wallpaper; and warped windows. I returned often, each time photographing details of wood and windows, portions of interiors, and other bits of the formerly occupied houses. The photographs were well composed and nicely printed. They had wonderful textures, strong lines and forms, good balance and contrast, and rich tonalities (figure 16-1).

But over time, I lost interest in these images. I couldn’t explain it; I just knew that they no longer meant much to me.

For years I questioned why my interest in those photographs disappeared. The photographs were design-oriented, emphasizing many of the elements of composition discussed in chapter 3. They weren’t truly abstract, but they weren’t straight realism, either. They fell into a category that Ansel Adams called “extractions,” a term he used in place of “abstractions” for small bits or pieces taken from the whole. I realized that wherever they were on the reality/abstraction spectrum was of little consequence. What was lacking was something I’ve previously called “inner conviction.” I was photographing details because I liked their contrasts, textures, lines, forms, balances, etc., but not because the subjects meant very much to me. I didn’t regard them as remnants of a rich or colorful history, or as anything else that could have imparted deeper meaning to them, but solely as present-day objects with interesting compositional attributes.

Figure 16-2: Forest at Sunset
Walking in a forest near Frankfurt, Germany in the early autumn as the sun was setting, I noticed a cluster of red leaves on a bush, with hints of other red and orange leaves close by. Holding my camera for a 1-second exposure, while gently turning it upward during the exposure, created a shower-curtain effect that pleased me far more than the straight image with no movement. Somehow, it seemed to say more to me about the forest, about the mysteries of the forest, and perhaps about the mysteries of life in general. Is it realism or abstraction or neither? More importantly does it move you, or say anything to you?

Yet, my questioning led me to thoughts about realism, abstraction, and art in general, and I know that my thoughts are still evolving today, and will continue to change as time goes by. Before delving into those thoughts, I’d like to define each of the terms contained in the chapter title: realism, abstraction, and art. The act of defining these terms is not only difficult, but also fraught with controversy. Just as chapter 2 started out with a definition of “composition,” I feel this chapter requires definitions in order to make the thoughts understandable (though not necessarily noncontroversial).

Realism is defined in my dictionary as an artistic representation felt to be visually accurate. It also is defined as an inclination toward literal truth and pragmatism.

Abstraction seems a bit more difficult to define. The dictionary refers to it as the act or process of separating the inherent qualities or properties of something from the actual physical object or concept to which they belong. Furthermore, the term abstract has several definitions. One states that it is a genre of art whose content depends solely on intrinsic form. Another states that something abstract is not easily understood or recognizable.

Surely there is a clear difference between realism and abstraction that emerges from these definitions. Realism deals with concrete objects in a recognizable, straightforward manner, whereas abstraction deals with the form or qualities of the object in a manner that may not be recognizable or understood (figures 16-2 and 16-3).

My photographs from Bodie were recognizably wood, window reflections, peeling wallpaper, etc., so they couldn’t be defined as abstract. They were visually accurate representations of the subjects, so they were close to realism, but they presented only bits of the scene, so they might have been slightly separated from pure realism. I was striving for something that went beyond reality, and for a while I believed I had achieved it. Slowly I came to recognize that an extraction of reality was not an abstraction, nor was it necessarily art. (I should also mention that I disagree with Ansel’s use of the word extract in place of abstract, for every photograph is an extract. There’s always more! You choose the part you want because you feel it’s cohesive, not because it’s “complete” in any real sense.)

Figure 16-3: The Pinwheel, Spooky Gulch
Cosmologists tell us that planetary systems, such as our own solar system, are accretion disks of gases, dust, and rocks surrounding a star that coalesce over millions of years into planets and other smaller bodies that revolve around the star in fixed orbits. This photograph is my vision of a several-million-year time-lapse image as that swirling mass of unconsolidated debris becomes planets, moons, stars, and even whole galaxies.

Art is almost impossible to define, and any definition is controversial. Perhaps it’s akin to defining love. And perhaps the best thoughts about defining love (which apply equally to art) were penned by Oscar Hammerstein in the words to “Some Enchanted Evening” from the musical South Pacific:

Who can explain it?

Who can tell you why?

Fools give you reasons,

Wise men never try.

Undaunted by such sage advice, let’s try. Most definitions of art are either too broad or too narrow. Furthermore, we all have our own definitions that further complicate the process. The dictionary I consulted has a number of definitions that distill the word “art” down to the following: the conscious production of, or arrangement of, sounds, colors, forms, movements, or other elements in a manner that affects the sense of beauty. Or, alternately, the human creation of something that has form and beauty.

The dictionaries I referred to all used the word “beauty” several times in their definitions of art. I agree, for the most part, though I wonder if Picasso’s painting Guernica could be considered beautiful, though it surely is fine art to my way of thinking. I do feel that beauty is a part of art—a major part—and even Guernica has many touches of beauty, though its message is one of overwhelming terror, anguish, and pain. In contrast to Guernica, much so-called “art” produced today appears to be based purely on shock value, bearing few meaningful thoughts and fewer concessions to beauty. For me, whether a photograph I produce is realistic or abstract, I seek beauty in my images, primarily because I cannot imagine spending hours in the darkroom or computer in order to ultimately say, “Ahhh, now it finally looks like hell!”

Perhaps we could broadly call art an exploration or inquiry into our world, our emotions, and our fantasies. We could call it the creation of forms that express human feelings. Beauty is not central to these definitions, nor is it even required, but it certainly can be part of the mix . . . and I feel it’s a necessary component. These attempts at defining art allow each person to set his or her own limits.

We can begin with these definitions to see where photography fits into the world of art, and to explore some starting points for producing photographs that are worthy of the title “fine art.” Of course, the preceding chapters have all been devoted to this pursuit: We began by looking into ourselves to see what interests us and how we want to present those interests to others. Then we looked into the concept of composition, the elements of composition, and ways of composing a photograph to strengthen its message. Then we delved into the photographic controls that make compositional choices possible.

Photography as Fine Art

Had I spent more time analyzing my Bodie photographs from the perspective of the initial thoughts in the book (i.e., what they meant to me, and how I wanted to convey my thoughts), I would have had a clue to their shortcomings, for the truth was that I had little interest in Bodie beyond its superficial textures, lines, and forms. In other words, Bodie didn’t mean very much to me. I was never much interested in its tawdry history, nor did I see deep meaning in its textures and forms. Instead, I was photographing Bodie and analyzing my images purely from the compositional aspect, and they seemed pleasing from that point of view.

Alone or together, good composition and technical prowess don’t imply fine art. A great number of photographers can produce exquisite photographs that say nothing and inspire nobody. There is an abundance of photographs that are technically perfect but devoid of meaning. The painter Robert Henri said to his students, “I do not want to see how skillful you are—I am not interested in your skill. What do you get out of nature? Why did you paint this subject? What is life to you? What reasons and what principles have you found? What are your deductions? What projections have you made? What excitement, what pleasure do you get out of it? Your skill is the thing that least interests me.”

Although photography can stand on its own merits as an art form, let’s consider it not in isolation, but in relation to other arts. Each art form is unique both in the message it presents and in its manner of presentation. Each art form exerts influence on the others. In particular, photography has had an immense—almost traumatic—influence on painting, but the repercussions of this influence have also been hard on photography. These repercussions have been almost entirely overlooked or ignored by art and photography historians alike. I feel they are crucially important, and I shall delve into them.

Photography and Painting—Their Mutual Influence

Until photography came into widespread visibility in the mid-1800s, painting was largely representational—realistic, to use the definition above. Most fine paintings depicted people or scenes that were either realistic or idealistic, which means that real people were made to appear heroic for purposes of enhanced stature, or scenes were aggrandized beyond reality for much the same reason. Yet even those subjects were meant to be clearly identifiable, albeit exaggerated. Furthermore, even when subject matter was aggrandized or romanticized, the result was basically representational.

But with the spread of photography during the 1850s and 1860s, all that changed. Photography did a better job of depicting reality than painting did; it was simply more accurate. Only the quality of the lens limited its accuracy. Painting, as it evolved over thousands of years, was traumatized. By the 1870s, photography was making a huge impact on the world. Painting responded to this challenge by going through a sequence of well-known movements. Impressionism, postimpressionism, pointillism, fauvism, dadaism, surrealism, cubism, and others all followed one another (or occurred simultaneously) in an effort to anchor painting as an art once again. This effort has continued with other movements like modernism, abstract expressionism, post-modernism, Campbell’s soup-canism, pop art, op art, and perhaps in the future, mom-and-pop art.

But as painting changed drastically, primarily in response to photography, criticism changed along with it, and so did the definition of art. Each of the well-known movements in painting was roundly disparaged at its inception, but then was quickly incorporated into the fabric of art. As time went on, representational painting began to lose its significance as an art form. We can compare Gilbert Stuart’s portrait of George Washington, which has always been considered a work of reasonable artistic merit, with any painting of a recent president that is nothing more than another in a series of presidential paintings. It seems apparent that the great portraits of the masters—Rembrandt, Goya, Gainsborough, Reynolds, etc.—would be dismissed if done today because they are too representational, too real. By the same token, photography’s greatest asset, its visual accuracy—its innate realism—is also hard hit by this critical consensus. As photography forced painting to change, painting and criticism have forced the art world to change, and photography must respond to that change or be excluded from the world of art.

The inherent realism of photography is, in fact, somewhat of an obstacle to its acceptance as an art form in today’s milieu, even though that aspect makes its message so powerful. A compounding factor to this problem is the universal usage of photography: everybody has a camera (even the telephone in everyone’s pocket), therefore everybody is a photographer, but surely everybody is not an artist. There is the widespread feeling that photography is easy, as in Kodak’s original advertising slogan: “You snap the shutter, we do the rest.”

The preceding chapters indicate that expressive photography is not that easy after all. It requires immense effort—physical, emotional, and mental. But for all that effort, if the final image is to qualify as art, it must go beyond documentary realism. Even if a photograph stays within the realm of realism, it can have artistic merit if it’s endowed with a leap of imagination on the part of the photographer.

The image must have something that carries it beyond pure documentation. Perhaps there’s a heightened sensitivity—something deeply felt and revealed that offers the viewer deeper insights and understanding. Perhaps there’s a quality of mystery—something left unanswered that requires the viewer to investigate the print and think about it further. Or maybe there’s a surprise—something unexpected that leaves the viewer in wonder and amazement. Perhaps there’s a heightened sense of drama or grandeur or calm. Whatever the quality, it must be more than a scene, a person, or a thing

Some Personal Examples

Allow me to discuss several of my photographic pursuits over 45 years to illustrate the point I am trying to make.

My Bodie photographs from the mid-1970s into the 1980s failed because they were photographs of things—weathered wood, peeling wallpaper, partially collapsed structures, bubbled windows, etc. They were well executed, but they had no leap of imagination. Though I was drawn to Bodie, my interest was superficial and my photographs had no real base from which to leap. I should note that beginning in 2000, I began revisiting Bodie and producing new images that I feel are far more interesting and insightful than those produced earlier. Perhaps I started to see and feel Bodie differently.

The photographs I produced in the English cathedrals in 1980 and 1981 are different from my Bodie efforts. They, too, are pure realism: they are visually accurate (perhaps with slight aggrandizement through lens choices, choice of camera position, and camera movements), and they were created with a conscious attempt to avoid any form of abstraction. In cathedral after cathedral, I was struck by three aspects of the architecture: the musical interaction of light and forms; the mathematical feeling of infinity created by repeated columns, vaults, and arches; and the overwhelming grandeur. As my gaze ran up the columns into the arches and vaulting overhead, I saw music unfolding before my eyes. I felt awed and uplifted by the magnificent forms. They struck me as examples of what humanity can accomplish at its best. I attempted to depict these aspects through my photography (see figures 1-7, 3-1, 9-4, 14-4, and 14-10). I felt something beyond just an appreciation for good architecture and wonderful craftsmanship. Those elements added up to more in my mind; Bodie’s elements never did.

Another way for photography to reach the realm of art is through abstraction. Abstraction, as stated in the definition, immediately removes a photograph from the realm of documentary realism. Good photographic abstraction requires tremendous insight to be effective. Anybody can photograph small portions of things to produce an unrecognizable image, but only when the image has both compositional strength and that almost indefinable commodity known as internal conviction does it prove to be a work of art.

Abstraction implies imagery in which the inherent qualities of the subject matter are separate from the physical object. The Bodie photographs lacked this characteristic. By contrast, I feel my slit canyon photographs possess that quality. I often saw their swirling lines and forms as the paths traced by dust particles and gases that coalesce into planets, stars, or whole galaxies, and at other times as the heavenly bodies themselves, or as the forces that move these objects about. I attempted to strengthen that vision by eliminating any references to place, or to documentation of the canyons (figure 16-3).

The slit canyon photographs are virtually devoid of scale. Few people can tell with any certainty whether the area photographed is large or small, and most people who have expressed their perception of size to me have been woefully wrong. The uncertainty of scale is intentional on my part. I want the viewer to become involved in the flow of forms and forces, and in the cosmic aspect that I feel in the imagery—not to become involved in thoughts about the canyons themselves. I have consciously removed scale from the images by using lenses that distort scale and by excluding objects that would indicate size. In much the same way, few of the images have an easily identifiable orientation. It’s hard to say with certainty whether the view is straight ahead, up, or down (see figures 1-6, 3-6, and 3-12). In 1992, I started exploring the concept of combining two separate negatives to create a single, realistic-looking landscape. A foreground from one location could be combined with a background from another, with the negatives produced many years apart, and from different parts of the globe. I called them “ideal landscapes,” for the simple reason that if I had ever encountered the created landscape I would have photographed it. These cannot be considered realism because the resultant image doesn’t exist anywhere on earth (instead it exists in two separate places), nor can it be considered abstract because, in most cases, the images look quite realistic (figure 16-4). Are these images simply lies?

Figure 16-4: Moonrise Over Cliffs and Dunes
This was the first of my “ideal landscapes,” i.e., fictional landscapes derived from more than one negative. Neither of the component images—the dune image in Death Valley (exposed in 1976) nor the cliffs and butte in Utah (exposed in 1991)—was fully satisfying to me. Putting the components together made good artistic sense but initially drew extreme displeasure from viewers outraged by the “falseness” or “trickery” of it. Some still refuse to accept it; most have changed their minds and accept it as artistically valid.

When I first displayed these composite images, some viewers objected strenuously, claiming they were, indeed, lies. Interestingly most objectors had no qualms about the work of photographer Jerry Uelsmann, who creates surrealistic images made by combining many negatives. Apparently, the obvious surreal character of Uelsmann’s work contrasted with the apparent realism of mine. This difference immediately creates difficult questions about truth or deception in the mind of many viewers. But is a painting of any landscape realistic or a lie? What would be the reason to call a landscape photograph made from two separate negatives or two separate RAW files a lie when a landscape painting made with the easel set up in front of a magnificent landscape or in a studio is never considered a lie? It’s always looked upon as the imagination of the painter. My “ideal landscapes” were created in my mind and darkroom. What is the difference? Uelsmann’s surrealistic images are neither realism nor abstraction. They surely are surreal.

This blurs the line between realism and abstraction. But is it art? Ultimately, this is the critical question. To my mind, it is art because it has been intentionally created, with thought and planning that went into it, and my intent was to draw viewers into the images and create an emotional reaction. However a final image may be created—from one or two or more negatives or RAW files—is immaterial. To my mind, the real questions are as follows:

Does the image display a good sense of light?
Does the image possess a good compositional feel?
Does the image seem to convey an underlying message?
How do you respond to the image?

Let’s consider another example. In the year 2000 I began photographing the sand dunes in Death Valley. (I have earlier photographs of the Mesquite Dunes in Death Valley from 1976, but chose to concentrate on other things for the next quarter century.) Something intrigued me immensely at the turn of our current century, which I recognized immediately: the patterns on those dunes and the undulating flow from one hill to the next provided a study of pure design that was astounding. But then they quickly took on meaning beyond just design. I soon recognized that being on them was an intensely quiet, lonely (in a very good sense), uplifting feeling, and I saw around me a “purity” that cannot be described in words. Year after year I visited those dunes, realizing along the way that I could never be in the same place twice. It was always changing. The light, the sand patterns, the whole ambiance was always different, always magical. What began as a pure design study in 2000 remained a pure design study, but it also became so much more (figure 16-5, Dune Necklaces, Death Valley). I also realized that the photographic possibilities were infinite. I have photographed the dunes before and after sunrise, in the midday hours, and at sunset. Opportunities exist throughout each day.

I have pursued my dune studies for the past 16 years, always finding more. The imagery is a mix of realism and abstraction, and I surely believe it falls into the realm of art. It is not quite abstraction (to my mind) because it is easily and quickly recognizable as sand, but it is not quite in the realm of pure realism because of its design orientation and it often lacks a sense of scale. Sometimes it’s hard to tell what the lighting conditions were when the negative was exposed . . . sunny? . . . cloudy? . . . midday light? . . . sunrise or sunset? I find that ambiguity intriguing, thereby posing a question to the viewer of what conditions the image was made under. But whether the lighting is obvious or not, I am trying to create an image that captivates the viewer, gluing him to the photograph. I also realize that the dunes, unlike the slit canyons, was subject matter that had been photographed extensively before I turned my attention to them. So I realized from the start that I had a challenge to produce imagery derived from time-honored subject matter that is somehow different. And I must add beauty to my definition of art: I view art as the creation of something beautiful, with a quote from the great impressionist painter, Pierre Auguste Renoir in mind: “For me a picture is something likable, joyous, and pretty . . . yes pretty. There are enough ugly things in life for us not to add to them.”

Figure 16-5: Dune Necklaces, Death Valley
The dunes are alive with activity, but most of it takes place at night, so they seem largely barren and devoid of life during the day. But the evidence is there that whole communities occupy the dunes, as the many footprints attest. They cleverly adapted to the intense heat of the day by confining their activities to the night.

What attracts you? What aspect of it do you find compelling? How do you want to convey your feelings to others through the photographic vehicles of light, color, and composition? Those are your creative tools, just as sounds, rhythms, timbres, and melodies are the creative tools of the music composer. These creative tools have to be used wisely, and melded with the technical tools of the trade to convey your thoughts in the most articulate manner. Finally, and perhaps most important, are you enjoying your photography? And are you trying to communicate something of importance to you?

The Strength of Abstraction

Allow me to return to my images of the slit canyons once more. By seeing the canyons as analogies of the universe, from the subatomic to the cosmic, I photographed them in a particular way—a way that I would not have considered otherwise. They had a further meaning—surely a deeper meaning—to me. Minor White’s great comment that “You photograph something for two reasons: for what it is, and for what else it is” is always worth considering. I photographed the slit canyons specifically for what else they were. Because they are abstractions, other people see things in them that I never saw or could have imagined. One man thought they were wood details. One woman, a marine biologist by training, was reminded of underwater life forms she had studied. I’ve been amazed at the variety of responses, and I’m pleased by the spread of interpretations that the images afford. Each viewer brings his or her own background and imagination to the interpretation, thereby enriching me with alternative insights and interpretations.

 I doubt that photographs can unlock emotion in the viewer if there is none within the photographer.

It’s been my observation in dealing with workshop students over a period of more than 30 years that beginners tend to shy away from abstraction in photography because they feel it lacks emotional value, or they feel it doesn’t “tell the story.” They may be thinking in terms of cold design constructions, for it’s simply not true. Photographic abstraction can be rich with emotion and questions (if not answers). The best way to explain this is by analogy. Surely music is the ultimate abstraction. It’s nothing more than sounds and rhythms. Yet it’s so much more. Who can listen to Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony without being filled with awe; to Gottschalk’s piano pieces without a feeling of delight; to Grieg’s lyric suites without feelings of joy and serenity? Music of all types fills us with emotion, but where does the emotion come from? Perhaps it is within us, and the music simply unlocks it. I believe that photography can do much the same. Abstract photography may be able to do it as well—or better—than realistic photography for it may be subject to wider interpretation.

I doubt that photographs can unlock emotion in the viewer if there is no emotion within the photographer—either in the initial seeing or in the ongoing process toward the final print. It is this inherent feeling within the photographer that I referred to earlier as “internal conviction.” I can’t go out and photograph an arbitrary section of something as an abstraction, then expect anyone else to respond to it intellectually or emotionally if I had no internal response to it myself.

That was my problem with the Bodie images. I was dealing with textures, tonalities, lines, forms, balances, and other aspects of composition, but not with real emotion. For several years, I thought I had strong feelings about them, but in time I realized I didn’t. (Most likely I was just pleased that they were different from my other photographs.) Internal conviction is like love at first sight: It always seems perfect when you’re in the midst of it, but as time goes by you may see it differently. Whether the canyon and cathedral photographs qualify as art is not for me, but for others, to decide. But I can say this: They are honest and they are deeply meaningful to me. They depict the essence of the two subjects as I see and feel them. To me, that’s the most important thing.

What about my multiple negative composites: Are they honest? I think so. They depict whole landscapes I would love to see. In other words, they convey my imagination or vision of the way I would like to see the world. Isn’t that the essence of literature? Is a Brahms string quartet honest? Does it depict reality? Foolish questions, aren’t they? In my composite images I’ve created landscapes that elicit a response in me, as a Brahms quartet surely elicits a response in me. If they also elicit a response in the viewer, so much the better.

It’s interesting to note that while the majority of painting today has long since departed from realism, the work of a realist like Andrew Wyeth is highly valued. The revelation in 1986 of his Helga paintings further enhanced his artistic stature with the general public. Yet critics find it hard to assess his work. One of the problems critics face is that they must make immediate assessments without the perspective that history affords. All we have to do is look at the initial critical response to the impressionists, pointillists, surrealists, etc., to see how wrong immediate assessments can be! Still, it’s my contention that most critics can’t deal with Wyeth’s work because they seek to label it, and the only applicable label is pre-20th century representationalism. They can’t come to grips with the fact that realism can be fine art if it shows heightened insight and sensitivity. Wyeth’s work has that innate quality; most critics do not.

The key difference between Wyeth’s art and the presidential portraits referred to earlier is that Wyeth’s work shows character and feeling, whereas most presidential portraits show a face and nothing more. But then again, considering some of our presidents, one wonders if there is more!

Inwardly and Outwardly Directed Questions

In viewing and responding to photographs, most people miss the point, just as the critics do with Wyeth. All too often, several questions arise that seek information about the making of the photograph.

The first such question is: Where is it? This question applies to a realistic photograph in which things are recognizable. More often than not, the viewer who asks where the scene is located has little genuine interest in the location. However, this is not a meaningful question from an artistic point of view. What does it matter where the photograph was made? The mere fact that this question is asked implies that the photograph is not regarded as a work of art, but rather as a travel inducement.

I’ve never been to Greenland or Baffin Island, adjacent to it. But I’ve flown over both, six miles above them on commercial jets, and have made photographs of each that have excited me immensely, simply because the landscape I saw miles below me—and was able to see under fantastic atmospheric conditions—made the land even more extraordinary and mysterious. The images, of course, are handheld digital images. I had no choice of where to stand or place a tripod (I had no influence over the route of travel and no tripod was used or allowed on the commercial jetliner), and I had to shoot through the plane’s window (they never allow passengers to open the window at 33,000 feet). The image was exposed just about noon, local time. But I had two major choices: whether to make the exposure, and whether to show the result. My answers were emphatically YES to both (figure 16-6). While people surely may ask, “Where is this?” I do not see it as a travel inducement, but as an expressive image of a magnificent section of our planet.

A somewhat different aerial photograph made well after sunset of Mt. Shasta, in Northern California, displays a decidedly impressionistic feel, due to the instability of handholding the camera over a 1-second exposure (figure 16-7). Although attempting to be perfectly steady, it was impossible for that length of exposure and with the plane’s vibration. But I liked the result, and decided instantly to go with it.

The second question people often ask about a photograph is: “What is it?” This question indicates an abstract image where viewers want to be told what they’re seeing. Does it really matter? Would that question be asked of an abstract painting? Surely not! But because a photograph is real—it is “of something”—people almost always ask what it is.

The final question most often asked is: “How was it done?” This concerns itself with the technical aspect and is the most pertinent of the three questions, but it still misses the point of artistic value. Each of the questions indicates a superficial interest in the photograph and a lack of real interest in its artistic merits. I feel that each of those questions are outwardly directed. They seek information about the making of the photograph.

Figure 16-6: Baffin Island Fantasy
Stiletto-sharp summits jab through clouds on Baffin Island, Canada, as seen from 33,000-feet in the air. It was like looking down on a dreamlike fantasy landscape that appears unearthly in so many ways. The maneuverability of a handheld digital camera has opened up photographic possibilities that I had never previously experienced, extending my expressive and interpretive reach in new and exciting ways. As such, my digital camera is the best “second camera” I have ever used.

From an artistic point of view, inwardly directed questions are far more pertinent. One such question is: What do I see in the photograph? This could apply to photographic realism, abstraction, or whatever. It asks how you, the viewer, interpret the work of art. A second such question is: How do I respond to it? Again, this applies to both realism and abstraction. You may respond positively or negatively; you may be confused, amused, angered, or depressed. You may experience any number of other emotional reactions. These questions are independent of the photograph’s location, the subject matter, and the method of production.

 When viewers ask inwardly directed questions, they are truly looking at photography as art. When photographers ask these questions of their own work, they are likely to be at the brink of producing fine art.

I feel that when viewers ask inwardly directed questions, they are truly looking at photography as art. When photographers ask these questions of their own work, they are likely to be at the brink of producing fine art.

The outwardly directed questions appear to be unique to photography. They are rarely, if ever, asked of a painting. I doubt that such questions are ever asked of other art forms. Nobody would ask what Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony is, but most people surely would ponder how they are affected by it!

It’s important to remember that the finest art always elicits an emotional response. The response doesn’t come from a print that simply has a good white and a good black, but rather from one that has good content, good composition, and personal meaning. When these three ingredients are made clear through good printing, the photograph will find an appreciative audience.

Figure 16-7: Mt. Shasta, Impressionism—Dusk
Not all images have to be sharp. This one isn’t. But it works for me in a different way. It has an impressionistic feel, and I liked it when I first saw it on my monitor, and liked it more as time passed.

The Power of Photography

In the first chapter, I discussed my feeling that photography’s inherent realism makes it the most powerful art form in the world today. People generally view a photograph as a literal depiction of reality, even when the image is highly manipulated or overtly abstract. This gives the photographer the power to alter reality greatly and still present it as reality, which is a power that no other art form possesses.

For example, most viewers feel that Ansel Adams’s Moonrise, Hernandez, New Mexico, 1941 is a literal depiction of the scene under extraordinary conditions. Great numbers of people roam about with their cameras waiting for similar conditions so they can duplicate the drama of that image, and they have no realization that the conditions never existed, but that the photograph was heavily manipulated to achieve the effect. They feel that Ansel was fortunate to come upon such spectacular conditions. They feel that he was simply in the right place at the right time. They view the conditions as realistic without recognizing that he greatly aggrandized nature by his method of printing. A painter could hardly hope to have an aggrandized landscape accepted as reality.

Although the perception of a photograph as reality appears to apply solely to realism, that perception also enhances the impact of abstraction. Again, I refer to my slit canyon images. An abstract painting of the canyons would automatically be viewed as artistic imagination, but an abstract photograph imbues the scene with reality—and therefore with heightened meaning and importance. And it goes beyond that. One of my images, Phantom Arch, Lower Antelope Canyon (figure 16-8), is a double print of a single negative. It’s printed back-to-back to create the impression of a stone arch within the canyon. Because of the printing method, the image is impossibly symmetrical from a natural point of view. Yet because it’s a photograph, people instinctively respond to it as reality. Most just shake their heads in amazement at the astonishing natural phenomenon! Again, only photography could do this.

Consider another aspect of photography: its universal language. Like music and the other visual arts, it needs no translation. Its message can be felt by anyone worldwide. Photography, like all other visual arts, transcends language and reaches across international boundaries. The work of André Kertesz, Ansel Adams, Joseph Sudek, Mary Ellen Mark, Sabastiao Salgado, Manuel Alvarez Bravo, Brett Weston, and others speaks to the world because the visual language is universal. It would be shortsighted and foolish to underestimate the power of that communication.

In conclusion, it must be said that photography is a very powerful art form. It’s a powerful form of communication. For an individual photograph to achieve the level of art, it must go beyond literal representation. Both realism and abstraction offer avenues toward achieving photographic art, but each must possess the integrity of artistic conviction. Because we are so inundated with photographs in newspapers, magazines, billboards, catalogs, and dozens of other everyday items, the task of the photographer is even greater than that of artists in other media. However, when the level of art is attained, photography becomes the most powerful art form of all. To me, that makes the greater effort worth it.

Figures 16-8a and 16-8b: Phantom Arch, Lower Antelope Canyon
My eye was attracted to a dark swirl of rock surrounded by an apparent outward spiraling of forms. But the resulting image had no appeal to me. I was so displeased with myself that I vowed to do something about it before moving on to any other negative! I’ve never been able to reconstruct how I came upon the idea of double printing the single negative, resulting in the final image. Turning the negative 90 degrees to the right, I exposed 95 percent of it while dodging out the right edge, then turned the enlarging paper 180 degrees in the easel and made a second identical exposure. The dark form at the top merges with itself, creating the illusion of an arch within the canyon. It is complete fiction (hence the name “Phantom Arch”) and one that preceded my multiple negative images by eight years.

===== FILE 24/28: Text%2fchapter17.xhtml =====

Figure 17-1: Creiglingen Reflections #2
Compare this image with figure 14-2c. I found this plate glass window with reflective mylar behind it, giving two reflections—one straight; one distorted—in the small town of Creiglingen, Germany. I was there with photography friends, and we had a ball making multiple images over a period of nearly an hour. Were we simply having fun? You bet we were! We were moving around and whooping it up. Moving just a step or two in the middle of the street completely changed the interaction of the two reflections. Under such circumstances, it’s worthwhile to make multiple exposures, selecting the best ones later and deleting the rest. (Too often people expose multiple images for no discernible reason. It’s wise to be sensible about this aspect of photography.)

CHAPTER 17
Approaching Creativity Intuitively

IF YOU’RE GOING TO ACCOMPLISH ANYTHING IN PHOTOGRAPHY, you’ll have to enjoy doing it. This not only applies to photography, but to any field. It’s close to impossible to do well in any endeavor that you hate doing. You have to enjoy doing it, have fun doing it, and look forward to doing it.

With that thought firmly in mind, if you enjoy doing photography, make it even more enjoyable by trying new things periodically. Of course, some of those new things will be duds . . . totally useless attempts that yield nothing of value. But once in a while, a new approach—perhaps new subject matter you’re photographing, perhaps a very different approach to well-known subject matter, perhaps a new way of post-processing or darkroom printing—will yield startlingly good results. Those successes will vault you into whole new realms of enjoyment and creativity. In many ways digital photographers are ahead of film photographers—largely due to the fact that “pixels are free.” Digital photographers are more willing to photograph anything and everything just to see what comes up. There’s no harm in that approach.

While it’s important to get some basic understanding of the technical aspects of your art, you don’t have to be a master of everything before applying what you know. The important things are to enjoy what you’re doing and to be pleased with what you’re producing.

This has proven to be the case with me, personally. My jump into digital allowed me to start doing things I had never done previously, such as take pictures out of commercial airplane windows and do extreme macro close-ups. I had, in fact, done many extreme close-ups in black-and-white and in color with my medium format camera and extension tubes, but the ease of doing it with my digital camera removed all the constraints. The aerial imagery was a new opening entirely. So, jumping into the digital world indeed opened up new avenues to me. I still consider my 4×5 film camera—I’m now using it exclusively for black-and-white film—to be my primary camera, but I can truly say that my digital camera is the best “second camera” I’ve ever enjoyed. I can also attest to the fact that I’m a bit more willing to try some “crazy new things” digitally than I was with the film cameras (though I’ve done a lot of “crazy new things” with film cameras), but it’s tempered by more than 40 years of looking carefully before shooting to judge if some of those new ideas are just too ridiculous. Yet, when I judge the idea to be worthwhile, I feel far more freedom to explore it more widely with multiple images, with the thought of later editing out the poor ones and choosing the best as “keepers.” In this case, the idea of “pixels are free” has real merit (figure 17-1: compare this with figure 14-2c).

All of us want to be successful. All of us want to avoid failure. (These are two different things, so the previous sentences are not redundant.) Sometimes photographers seem almost terrified to try something new for fear that it may fail. I have seen this syndrome for years hidden within questions I’m asked during workshops, at lectures or gallery openings, or in casual discussions with both amateur and professional photographers. We can all get caught in such hang-ups, myself included, although I consciously try to avoid that type of hesitancy. But I suggest that if you want to know every result before you plunge ahead, you can’t achieve an “aha!” moment that lifts you from the banality of everyday plodding (i.e., neither success nor failure, but just getting by) to something much more exciting, enlivening, and satisfying. The possibility of abject failure is the price you must be willing to pay for trying something new, something different, something removed from your normal procedures. (Initially this may appear to be contradictory to thoughts on previsualization in the early chapters, but it isn’t. Read on.)

Digital photography can be helpful here, for you can try something, decide it’s an abject failure, and delete it on the spot or later. Under these circumstances “pixels are free” is a huge asset. But even here, you can fool yourself, confusing something that is simply “different” with something that is truly worthwhile.

My advice is to loosen up. Don’t plunge ahead foolishly by trying something with no knowledge or insight or feeling of curiosity, but plunge ahead nonetheless. (In other words, don’t waste your time trying things that basically seem useless or silly just to try something, but go ahead with the new idea if it seems truly intriguing to you . . . even if you have no assurance of success.) Most of all, be willing to experiment with new tools, new subject matter, new ways of seeing and composing, new ways of interpreting the scene, and a new and different black-and-white or color palette. Let your intuition take over if it seems to be leading you to something different, perhaps something you’ve never tried before.

Intuition in Science

It turns out that many great scientific advances did not proceed through methods that most people would consider to be scientific. Rather, these advances were intuitive at the outset. Certainly this is true of two of the greatest advances in 20th century physics: Albert Einstein’s theory of relativity (actually two successive theories, the special theory of relativity and then, ten years later, the general theory of relativity, with the latter building upon and extending the former) and Richard Feynman’s theory of quantum electrodynamics (QED).

Einstein asked himself, “What would I see if I were traveling through space at the speed of light, or approaching the speed of light?” He proceeded with a series of thought experiments, ultimately arriving at his conclusions. Thus he used both intuition and existing scientific literature to build up his concepts and eventually his complete theory. But his initial thinking was purely intuitive, as were many of the insights along the way. Previous scientific discoveries—primarily Maxwell’s equations for electromagnetism—were relied upon for the basic foundation and confirmation of his theory, but the original thinking was intuitive.

Years later, Feynman did a similar thing in co-creating the theory of quantum electrodynamics (QED). Working alone, he created a series of drawings, known as the Feynman Diagrams, to describe what others were attempting to understand mathematically. His diagrams are still used today (and have been expanded to other fields) to gain insight and explain phenomena that are almost inconceivably difficult to convey any other way. Feynman effectively used art to explain science.

It may come as a real shock that the greatest advances in physics (the hardest of hard sciences) started from intuitive insights, not from purely mathematical or scientific concepts. But it’s true! Scientists often pursue an idea because it feels right to them, so they follow their instincts and uncover extraordinary new truths. Sometimes they’re wrong, as in the case of two-time Nobel laureate Linus Pauling, who hypothesized a single helix form of DNA before James Watson and Francis Crick showed it to be a double helix.

Avoiding Intuition

Photographers (if my own experiences and observations are correct) seem decidedly averse to following their intuition and trying out new ideas, new methods, or new approaches. This is an obstacle that photographers must force themselves to overcome. Avoiding your own instincts in any aspect of photography—seeing, postprocessing, developing, optimizing, printing, etc.—is deadly. It boxes you in. It prevents you from spreading your wings and flying. Even a bird has to start flying. There’s a time in the life of every bird when it jumps off the edge of its nest or the edge of a cliff and opens its wings for the first time. It’s intuitive. It’s instinctual. But it’s the first time . . . and it better work! There’s no second chance.

Now, think of the other arts such as painting, sculpting, writing, or composing. How much testing is done? How long do painters spend testing things before they proceed with their work? How could Michelangelo test his slab of marble before producing David? How could Shakespeare or Ibsen or Twain or Tolstoy “test” what they were writing—or planning to write—without just sitting down and putting the pen to the paper? Beethoven or Brahms or Rachmaninoff may have played a few bars on the piano while composing, but that doesn’t give a huge amount of insight into an orchestral piece scored for dozens of woodwind, string, brass, and percussion instruments. These artists simply had to proceed with what they were doing. They didn’t—perhaps couldn’t—get sidetracked by testing.

But too many traditional film/darkroom photographers get hung up on testing, and too many digital photographers get too hung up on measuring . . . measuring everything. Does it make them better photographers? Rarely, if ever! In fact, it’s like hanging a boulder around your neck. It drags you down. It sidetracks you from what’s really important: personal expression, insight, involvement, and excitement with what you see and what you want to say.

 Photographers seem decidedly averse to following their own intuition and trying new ideas, new methods, or new approaches.

Even a bird has to start flying. There’s a time in the life of every bird when it jumps off the edge of its nest or the edge of a cliff and opens its wings for the first time. It’s intuitive. It’s instinctual. But it’s the first time . . . and it better work! There’s no second chance.

Understanding and Misunderstanding Intuition

Perhaps the real problem that prevents people from relying on their intuition is a misunderstanding of what intuition really means. When Einstein started to think about gravity, and what ultimately became the theory of relativity, he had some real insights into the issue. The same applies to Feynman when he created his diagrams as a way of explaining deeply vexing problems. Both scientists were fully immersed in the field, understood what was being considered, and were fully aware of scientific understandings to that point. In other words, because they were deeply involved in the issues they were probing, they were able to proceed by applying intelligent “gut feelings” to their own research, allowing them to go where nobody had ever gone before.

Unfortunately, some people think that intuition is something that’s hanging in the air, like magic. That’s not what intuition is. Einstein and Feynman basically prove that point. For both of them, and for everyone else, intuition comes from deep personal interest and involvement, as well as a high degree of knowledge and experience.

My dictionary defines intuition as “the immediate knowing or learning of something without the conscious use of reason; instantaneous apprehension.” Intuition is not only an immediate thing, but it comes from a great understanding of closely related or analogous issues. Intuition surfaces when you’re familiar with and deeply involved with the situation at hand. It occurs when you have already given a lot of thought to the subject, so much so that it’s really a part of you. You can’t have intuitive notions about something you don’t know, something that’s foreign to you, or something with which you’ve had little prior interaction.

In photography, this translates into a true bond between you and the subject matter you photograph. It’s the same in all other fields. As I pointed out in chapter 1, if you asked a noted orator like Martin Luther King, Jr. or Winston Churchill to make a speech on quilting, he would fail because he had no interest or insight into that issue. But in their areas of expertise, King or Churchill would knock your socks off with rhetoric and insight. The moral of the story is, you’ve got to be deeply involved and interested in the things you’re photographing, and you’ve got to have some basic feel for how you want to depict them.

Beyond that, you need a deep respect for what you’re photographing. Without that respect, something is lacking, and believe it or not, your audience can see right through it. I photograph landscapes because I feel a very close kinship with nature. Furthermore, I’m frustrated by the way humanity is destroying nature on the only planet we’ll ever have to support us. That explains why I’ve photographed things like clearcut forests (see figure 1-1)—not because I respect the clearcut, but because I respect nature so much that I need to show how destructive mankind can be. It is my (largely futile) attempt to try to change our ways.

The greatest portraitists deeply respect the people they choose to photograph. By putting their respect together with their lighting and compositional skills, they produce insightful portraits of their subjects. Intuitively, you know what turns you on—the things that you’re drawn to, that you respect, and that you work with best.

In the darkroom or at the computer screen, you need a basic idea of the image you want to create and some knowledge of the methods you’re using to get to that goal. You can’t make a final image if you don’t know the processes involved, but you can’t waste your time testing everything before you apply your knowledge and make the final image.

Figure 17-2: Alabama Hills Bread Loaf
In the 1970s, I began photographing the boulder fields below Mt. Whitney known as the Alabama Hills. I was attracted to the seemingly inexhaustible piles of boulders, heaped on top of one another in endless varieties of forms. Over the years, I made dozens—perhaps hundreds—of photographs of this bizarre area, and I am still attracted to the weathered granite boulders that seem to be the remains of the creation of the earth. In this image, the isolated large boulder sitting atop vastly larger ones, with a wall of more vertical boulders behind, looked like a huge sourdough bread loaf to me.

Figure 17-3: Fields, Alabama Hills (photograph courtesy of Reed Thomas)
Reed Thomas was also attracted to the Alabama Hills, but he interpreted the area in a completely different way. While I was drawn to the boulders in bold, contrasty images, Reed was drawn to the fields with quiet, subtle midtones. The differences were made even more evident as Reed applied a light sepia-type toning to his images (compare figure 17-2). Both visions were deeply felt. Both are truthful and valid. Both say something personal about the area.

Examples of the Intuitive Approach

In 1986, I co-instructed a workshop with Reed Thomas. Prior to that workshop, Reed and I spent several weekends photographing together in the Alabama Hills, the immense rock-strewn landscape below Mt. Whitney in the Sierra Nevada. Prior to that, each of us had photographed that area individually and extensively over several years. My photographs were dominated by deep tonalities and bright highlights, while Reed’s were characterized by softer contrasts and lighter tonalities. I focused on the boulders themselves, while Reed focused on the vast fields of boulders, seemingly spreading forever (figures 17-2 and 17-3).

Reed and I decided to open the workshop in an unusual way: we each placed 10 of our photographs in a stack and then simultaneously showed them one at a time. By the time we got to the eighth print, one of the students cried out, “OK, I see how Bruce sees this place and I see how Reed sees this place, but what does it really look like?” That was the perfect question. To me, it looked like my images; to Reed, it looked like his. Both were valid interpretations. Both were correct. Yet they were strikingly different. Each of us had our own vision, and we both followed our vision—our intuition. In essence, as we walked through the boulder fields I photographed the boulders; Reed photographed the fields. Inevitably, the students would have to see how the Alabama Hills looked through their own eyes.

The key idea here is that both Reed and I had a very definite vision of how we saw the region. Both of us were deeply involved, deeply interested in the place. It’s a truly awesome area. We would walk together at times, and diverge in different directions at other times, each of us pursuing our own personal vision. Each of our photographs was consistent with the others we produced. Neither of us forced our vision. It was simply how we each saw that landscape.

Figure 17-4: Birch and Bracken, Glen Affric
While scouting for a workshop in Scotland in 1998, I came across this scene, looking steeply downhill through a forest of birch trees and a floor of dense bracken ferns. On a brightly lit day with thin, high, overcast skies I saw the nearly white tree trunks and ferns as overwhelmingly luminous. Placing the average reading in Zone 7 (very light gray), I photographed the lovely scene as I envisioned it, thinking that everyone would see it that way. Evidently not. A close friend standing beside me when I made the photograph was utterly astounded by the light tonalities when he saw the final print a year later, unable to determine what I had done to achieve it.

On another occasion, while scouting for a workshop in northern Scotland, I was in the beautiful valley of Glen Affric. Looking from a hillside into a forest of birch trees and tall bracken ferns, I set up my camera. The scene appeared bright and airy to me, and I wanted to convey that feeling. Ian Biggar, a good friend who had assisted me on several previous workshops, was with me when I stopped to take that picture and he looked through the camera when I composed the image. So he not only saw the same scene, he saw my exact composition.

A year later, during the workshop, and after the group had spent a day in Glen Affric, I showed that photograph (figure 17-4). Ian leapt out of his seat (quite literally!) asking, “How did you do that?” I looked at him blankly, failing to comprehend the question. After all, he had already seen the composition in the field. What was it that he was asking? I was clueless. It turned out that the tonalities of my image surprised him. I had instinctively made the exposure by exposing the average tonality at Zone 7, quite high on the scale. I did so without thinking much about it. Everything looked bright and airy to me. I would have guessed that everyone would have seen it that way, since it was intuitive to me! In my mind it was not just the obvious way to see it; it was the only way.

Ian apparently saw the scene as an average Zone 5. So in his mind, the image would have been much darker. I finally understood his confusion when he asked if I had used infrared film. I hadn’t. The negative was exposed on Kodak Tri-X panchromatic film. Infrared tends to lighten foliage, especially foliage in sunlight. I realized that the creative aspect of this photograph was my initial intuitive seeing of the scene as quite bright. Ian’s question about infrared cleared things up for me; he was simply surprised by how bright the image was.

Most people see forests—even birch forests with near-white trunks—as midtoned or dark-toned places. I tend to see forests as luminous places. I am influenced by my love of forests. I live in a forest of large, tall conifer trees in Washington State, and I revel in its light.

So the intuition, the creativity, the insight was in my seeing the forest as bright and glowing, not dark. This could only have come from a deep interest in such natural areas, despite the fact that I had never previously been to this particular area. Intuition doesn’t come out of nothing. It needs deep involvement, interest, and understanding to gain a foothold.

My deepest and strongest involvement leading to intuitive insight was my reaction upon first entering Antelope Canyon (the first slit canyon I ever encountered), which I instantly saw as force fields rather than eroded sandstone walls. It wasn’t something I thought about and concluded; it hit me spontaneously and instantly. No thinking was involved. It was an immediate reaction, like ducking away from a ball coming at your head. The only difference between the two was that my reaction to the canyons came out of my lifelong interest in physics.

This, I believe, is where most people misinterpret the concept of intuition. My reaction stemmed from a lifelong fascination with, and education in, physics. Without that background I could not have reacted to the canyons the way I did. But my response was immediate, virtually devoid of thinking. And it was devoid of thinking because the thinking was already ingrained. It was a part of me.

Some people are intuitive in understanding and “reading” others. Most of us are not very good at it. Those who are good at it have probably been (consciously or subconsciously) students of human behavior all their lives. They are deeply interested in how people respond to a variety of circumstances, they observe people in unusual detail, and in time they intuitively recognize how people will respond to new circumstances. Such people don’t gain their insights out of nowhere, but rather from years or decades of carefully observing human behavior. In time, they become experts at it.

Applying Intuition to Your Photography

The idea of using intuition that I’m considering here has something to do with photography, but much more to do with life . . . your life. You likely have a deep interest in many things. In fact, you’re undoubtedly quite knowledgeable about many subjects. You may even have reached the expert level in some things without even realizing it, and you might not accept that as fact even if it were pointed out to you.

Everyone has deep insight into something. So, ask yourself, “What do I understand and respond to best?” Are they things in and around your home? Is it the people you meet? Is it sports? Is it landscapes, those nearby or far away? Is it flowers or the insects that visit the flowers? It can be any of a million things, but whatever it is, those are likely to be the things you truly know most intimately, and that is the subject matter you can photograph most effectively.

What I’m suggesting here is to apply your lifelong interests to your photographic seeing, especially if those interests have a visual component. I had a lifelong interest in physics and saw its visual component in Antelope Canyon, though I was surely not an expert in physics. Certainly I was not in the class of Einstein or Feynman when I instantly related Antelope Canyon to force fields. I recommend you apply your own lifelong interests, knowledge, and expertise to photography whenever possible. You may not be able to plan that, just as I couldn’t have planned applying insights in physics to a place like Antelope Canyon. You can’t know in advance exactly how the process will work, and that’s OK. I didn’t plan my photograph of the birch forest in Glen Affric; I just did it when I saw it! Nor did Reed and I plan our photographs of the Alabama Hills. Instead, we each just did it!

Follow your gut feelings about how you want to photograph and interpret subject matter. Too often photographers are so unsure of themselves that they’ll point to something and ask, “Is that Zone 4?” or “Is that low on the histogram?” Of course nothing has a zone number on it or a selected location on the histogram. It’s whatever you want it to be! But the question shows both uncertainty and a desire to see the scene, photograph it, and print it in some standard, acceptable way—a “politically correct” way. That approach overrides intuition. It’s walking away from your own gut feelings, from your own real goals.

When Einstein developed the theory of relativity, he didn’t do reality checks with other physicists asking, “Does this make sense to you?” He plowed ahead. Feynman didn’t ask if his silly pictures made any sense to others as he refined his ideas that led to QED. He plowed ahead. I didn’t ask if seeing Antelope Canyon as a force field made any sense to others. I plowed ahead. This is a critical thing to recognize: you can’t force intuition. It happens when it happens. Before entering Antelope Canyon I couldn’t tell myself to go out and find Antelope Canyon so I could apply my lifelong interest in physics to it. But the instant I walked into it, the ideas from my physics background tumbled into my head. I went with those thoughts.

 This is a critical thing to recognize: you can’t force intuition. It happens when it happens.

There’s a lesson here. I didn’t second-guess my instantaneous, intuitive thoughts. I didn’t run away from them or try to suppress them. I didn’t say, “But this doesn’t tell you what Antelope Canyon looks like.” Nor did I ask, “How does this fit into the work I’ve already done?” And I certainly didn’t ask the deadliest of all questions: “Can this photograph sell?” If you’re going to do anything of real value, you have to please yourself, not consider if it’s pleasing to others. In fact, none of that mattered to me. None of that even entered my mind. I was using the shapes of the canyon walls to express my thoughts about something completely different: forces in nature (see figures 3-6 and 9-3). That became my guiding principle. Using the forms in that canyon as surrogates to express my thoughts about forces in nature was the overriding goal for my initial imagery, and those thoughts applied to all my subsequent slit canyon images. I’ve never found such forms in any other subject matter I’ve encountered, restricting that intuition to those narrow clefts alone.

Too many people encounter something that sparks their intuition, but since they literally fear those thoughts, they actively suppress them. They want to be sure they’re not doing something weird, bizarre, way out, or just downright silly. Well, any of those may be true. That’s the chance you have to take. But if it makes sense to you, I urge you to roll with the flow and do it!

Einstein and Feynman had a deep understanding of physics, so their intuitive notions made sense to them. Just as my interest in physics made my interpretation of the slit canyons sensible to me, you can draw on your interest and knowledge of things you’ve observed all your life for your best imagery. Use that understanding to lead your own vision.

Of course, as your knowledge and experience of photography grows, you have progressively more to draw upon to marshal your intuitive ideas through to the final image. For example, my knowledge of reducing contrast in a scene through compensating development gave me the technical tools to carry my vision through in Antelope Canyon. That technical knowledge was new to me at the time. But I needed no new photographic knowledge to see the birches in Glen Affric as I did, or to see the boulders of the Alabama Hills as I did.

With increased photographic knowledge, you can be looser in your field work as well as your darkroom or computer work. You get so comfortable with it that you can give yourself the freedom of altering your usual methods when necessary to create a different result. In time, such decisions also become intuitive because you quickly recognize when standard methods will fail to yield the results you want.

No matter what your level of knowledge is, you can do a lot right now! You will be able to do more in the future as your knowledge grows, but you can still tap into your intuition now. You can, and must, apply your intuition borne of your lifelong interests to do photography in your own unique manner. If you don’t, you’re shortchanging yourself and depriving the world of your photographic insights.

Conclusion

First, let’s see how these thoughts mesh with the ideas of previsualization expressed early in the book. I believe you should previsualize the final image to the greatest extent possible while you’re standing behind the camera, but also that you should give yourself the freedom to see it your way rather than anyone else’s way. The ideas expressed here explicitly ask you to follow your own vision and your own intuition, rather than worry about others seeing it your way (or you seeing it their way). They may see it your way. They may not. That’s their problem, not yours. Follow your instincts, your vision, and your intuition of how the scene should be photographed and interpreted. These thoughts reinforce the earlier ideas about previsualization.

The bottom line is this: Know yourself and your interests. This is more difficult than it sounds because we tend to misread ourselves. Too often we overrate or underrate ourselves, or we just fail to understand our own interests properly. Beyond that, we tend to doubt our own intuition, our own vision. We’re afraid to rely on it or use it. We may even think it’s wrong to be intuitive. It isn’t. Don’t run away from your strongest intuitive notions: They’re likely to be valid. You’ve got to be bold enough to take the risk.

So, although you can’t force intuition, don’t deny it when it strikes. Once you get a handle on your own interests—and along with them, your areas of expertise—you can confidently apply your intuition and understandings far more effectively to all things photographic, from the initial seeing to the finished product, and also to the methods used along the way.

When all is done, try to take a step back and view your work as a dispassionate observer. Ask yourself if your work still communicates with you. Be prepared (and willing) to make some adjustments.

===== FILE 25/28: Text%2fchapter18.xhtml =====

Figure 18-1: Retrochoir, Wells Cathedral
When I first walked into Wells Cathedral, I was so overwhelmed by the central arches that I had to walk away, re-establish my bearings, and collect my thoughts before returning to photograph them. I wandered to the far-east end of the cathedral, where I was equally overwhelmed by the forest of columns and arches in the retrochoir and the magnificent luminosity of it all. They seemed alive and exuberant to me, like fountains or fireworks. This became the first exposure I made in the cathedral before returning to photograph the central arches. This started my study of the English cathedrals, a subject matter I never would have guessed to be of interest to me.

CHAPTER 18
Toward a Personal Philosophy

THIS CLOSING CHAPTER BRINGS THE BOOK FULL CIRCLE. We started by inquiring into ourselves—our own personal interests—and asking what we wanted to say about them and how we wanted to say it. Then we delved into the techniques and considerations that translate those desires into visual statements, and not mere “pictures.” Then we engaged in some philosophical thoughts about art and creativity. In this chapter, I hope to suggest avenues for improving your vision in areas that already interest you, and for drawing inspiration and insight from areas you may have never previously considered.

Flexibility

To my way of thinking, maintaining flexibility in every aspect of photography is the best gift you can give yourself. Avoid limits; avoid boxing yourself in. Try to avoid saying, “I won’t do this” or “I won’t do that.” We all tend to place limits on ourselves unintentionally; let’s not do it intentionally. Of course, whenever you choose the things you’ll do, inevitably, you also choose what you won’t do. You can’t photograph everything; you can’t print everything; you can’t experiment with every approach. But you can keep an open mind and you can periodically delve into areas that didn’t attract you previously. Allow that flexibility.

 Maintaining flexibility in every aspect of photography is the best gift you can give yourself.

Approaches stressed in earlier chapters—exposing negatives higher on the scale, using the full negative scale available, pushing the histogram to the right, always shooting in RAW for best printing results, using the appropriate printing controls, playing with toners, etc.—expand your flexibility by allowing you to photograph in the widest possible range of lighting conditions, and to make prints with the widest possible approaches. A simple technique like cropping keeps me from being beholden to the shape of the camera format or the lenses available to me at any time. It gives me greater flexibility, thus expanding my artistic possibilities.

Don’t be hobbled by thoughts of consistency. Emerson said, “A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of small minds.” For example, my negatives are wildly inconsistent in average density. Much of that inconsistency is intentional; if I want expanded contrast, I expose the scene in the mid-zones and then greatly expand development, yielding a very dense negative, but one with the best possible contrast increase. I can then print those high densities down to the values I desire. So “inconsistent” negatives can produce better prints. That’s the type of flexibility I desire.

What about multiple-negative prints, negative prints, time exposures that may exploit movement, double or multiple exposures, collages, mixed media, or any other type of imagery you can conceive? Try them! Try crazy ideas. Most will fail, but some will work and will launch you into new realms of fun and creativity.

Visual Arts

The most obvious place to search for ideas and inspiration is the visual arts. Visit museums and galleries. Look at art books, but don’t just look at the images, read the text as well. Sometimes the thoughts expressed are even more valuable than the imagery. Look beyond photographs to paintings, drawings, lithographs, and sculpture. They all have lessons to teach on composition, lighting, movement, and color. The same philosophical and compositional elements underlie all visual art forms; they are related, and you can learn from any of them.

I suggest emphasizing the study of great photographers of the past—Berenice Abbott, Ansel Adams, Diane Arbus, Eugène Atget, Bill Brandt, Margaret Bourke-White, Frederick Evans, Josef Koudelka, André Kertesz, Imogen Cunningham, Walker Evans, Josef Sudek, Paul Strand, Edward and Brett Weston, Minor White, Ernst Haas, Henri Cartier-Bresson, Frederick Sommer—as well as contemporary photographers. Pay particular attention to those whose field of interest parallels your own, but study the others, too, looking for new ideas and interesting approaches. Don’t become so thoroughly involved in only their subject matter that you can’t learn from their approaches to light, texture, composition, mood, dynamics, and other aspects of seeing and feeling that you can apply to your work.

Be cautious about including illustrated travel books in your studies. There are a number of coffee table books that are exquisite to peruse but that don’t exhibit the highest artistic standards. Enjoy them, as I do, for their exposition of scenic areas, but don’t rely on them for fine photography because they tend to focus on places photographed on bright sunny days with blue skies, but rarely with interesting lighting. In essence, these are wonderfully done postcard picture books.

Try to see original prints whenever possible rather than just looking through books. Though the reproduction quality of books has improved greatly, nothing compares to the photographer’s own prints. In the original prints you’ll see not only the composition, but also the tonal richness and the hard to define but easy to see quality of a fine photograph.

Whether you look at books or the originals, please don’t look at photographs or paintings like most people do—flipping through pages or walking slowly past the originals hung on walls, looking mindlessly at everything and seeing nothing. Study them. Even if you have time to study only a few and must miss most of the others, study those few with care. Ask yourself if they are worthy of greatness and look them over carefully before rendering a decision. What does the photograph say to you? Is the composition good? Is it unified? Does it show insight on the part of the photographer? If not, why not? It will prove far more valuable to analyze a few photographs carefully than to peruse dozens of them nonchalantly. It always seems strange to me that so many people go to galleries without knowing how to look at what’s in front of their eyes—and then they come out yawning, bored with their waste of time.

Look for personal appearances by noted photographers, and even by “unknowns” who are yet to be famous. Universities, museums, and galleries often present lecture series in which photographers present their work and discuss their philosophy and approach. These lectures not only give you greater insight into their work, but may also stimulate ideas for your own work. Sometimes a lecturer will state a well-known idea in a slightly different way that “clicks” with your thinking. It could open up new avenues of thought for your work. Alternatively, a lecturer may express ideas with which you thoroughly disagree, but which help you articulate your own ideas more clearly.

Nonvisual Arts

Beyond the obvious benefits of seeing great art (painting, photography, lithography, sculpture, etc.), look to other art forms for insight and inspiration. There’s a long history of music inspired by literature, and there’s no reason photography can’t draw from both literature and music. After all, our life experiences all mold the type of person we are. If we incorporate our understandings and revelations from other art forms, we can expect new insights and new directions. Composers and writers attempt to do much the same thing that photographers do: make personal statements about the world around them. Surely there are lessons to be learned from their efforts.

Music can offer extraordinary insights. I believe that I evolved a greater understanding of subtlety in printing as a result of hearing the intricacies of fine orchestration. I also feel that this understanding has been heightened in recent years through my growing interest in and love of chamber music; when only a few instruments interact, I can hear each of them individually along with their mutual interactions. The interplay of harmonies, counterpoints, rhythms, melodies, and phrases seems to have many counterparts in the interplay of lines, forms, tones, colors and other photographic qualities.

How has this given me insights into printing? I have listened to the same musical composition played by different orchestras, ensembles, or soloists, each with different interpretations of the original score. Often, I have fantasized about making the ultimate recording of any one of these pieces by selecting an opening performed by one group, a closing by another group, a crescendo by still another, and so forth. I have directly translated that concept to printing in both the digital and traditional darkroom by optimizing each section of the image for maximum effect. Some parts have to be quieted down so that others can glow with brilliance. There must always be a balance between overall brilliance and the ultimate feeling that I want to convey in the print. In that manner, classical music—particularly chamber music—has given me great insight into my approach to postprocessing and printing images.

Relationships between music and photography have long been recognized. Ansel Adams’s famous negative/print analogy—“The negative is the score; the print is the performance”—is but one famous example. Adams was a gifted pianist as a younger man, with enough ability to give public recitals and concerts. Don Worth was a gifted pianist as well, as are Paul Caponigro and Charles Cramer today. It’s no coincidence that such outstanding photographers also have great talent in music. Most photographers who lack talent as musicians can still draw from their interests in music. This is true whether the genre is classical, jazz, electronic, avant garde, hard rock, country-western, or any other type.

I suspect there are very strong relationships between the type(s) of music you listen to and the photographs you make (or want to make). The relationships may be subconscious, but with effort I believe you can define them and apply them to your photography. Whatever music you find enjoyable, you can probably find some surprising insights in it that can be applied to your photography.

I feel that much of my work in the English cathedrals was heavily influenced by classical music. I saw musical relationships in the interactions of the columns, arches, and ceiling vaults, and with the play of light upon these forms. The relationships changed with every step I took, so that I felt I could control the visual music by the placement of my camera—a half step to the left, up four inches, forward just a bit. Then there were no inharmonious intrusions, no harsh dissonances to mar the score—only a symphonic flow of lines and forms, brilliantly orchestrated by the soft light filtering through the stained glass windows (figure 18-1). In the cathedrals, I was as much a conductor as a photographer, but I must admit I had quite a score with which to work.

At the turn of the last century, photographer Frederick Evans worked with the same “score” and produced quite a different “symphony.” Using uncoated lenses that produced flare whenever exposed to a light source, printing on platinum papers, and working in smoke-filled cathedrals (due to candles, rarely used today), he produced prints that let viewers almost experience the air within the space. In fact, it appears that Evans photographed the air between him and the architecture, as well as the light filtering through the air, rather than the architecture itself. His images are quiet, introspective, and thoroughly magical.

 In the cathedrals, I was as much a conductor as a photographer, but I must admit I had quite a score with which to work.

It’s possible, perhaps probable, that a different printing of my own negatives would produce yet another interpretation of the cathedrals. I haven’t attempted the project because I can’t see them any other way. But following Ansel’s analogy, several years ago I did spend time in the darkroom attempting various printing results from the same negative. I was spurred on by my encounter with several recorded versions of Schubert’s string quartet #14, titled Death and the Maiden. I found that differences in tempo, emphasis, timbre, and dynamics gave each performance a wholly different character, and I wanted to see if the same would hold true of different prints produced from the same negative. Indeed it did, and I was amazed by the different interpretations a single negative could yield.

Years ago, John Sexton carried this type of experiment further. Prior to a workshop, he would send copies of one of his negatives to more than 10 students, asking them to make a print of it in whatever way they chose. Cropping, burning, dodging, toning—everything was up to the students. The variation in “performances” was quite remarkable. (But of course, none of them were actually at the scene when the photograph was made, so none of them could have gained any idea of how they would have interpreted the scene had they experienced it. So while this exercise was both interesting and instructive, it was also limited.)

Does music evoke mental pictures for you? If the answer is yes, I suspect you have a strong proclivity for drawing photographic insight and inspiration from music. It is unlikely that this will produce new and wonderful photographs for you immediately, but try to open up to the possibilities that music offers. It will prove its worth over time.

Literature is another area from which artists have historically drawn inspiration. Any form of literature can provide it. I have long been fascinated by Japanese haiku: three-line poems with only 17 syllables total. The three lines have five, seven, and five syllables respectively. There are, of course, variations of this basic structure, but all haiku stay close to these rules.

Haiku are designed to evoke imagery. They have an uncanny ability of enticing the reader into conjuring up detailed scenes that fit the concept of the words. It’s apparent that in a poem of only 17 syllables, little can be said. The haiku poet must allude to something without spelling it out in detail. He must build a skeleton structure and allow the reader to fill in the rest. This not only allows for widely varied interpretations, but also allows the reader to become involved in the creative process. If you think about it, that lesson can be applied to photography. Let’s look at several haiku to grasp the meanings better. I urge you to read each one slowly and think about the mental picture it conjures up before going on to the next one.

A lightning flash:

between the forest trees

I have seen water.

Masaoka Shiki

A man, just one—

also a fly, just one—

in the huge drawing room.

Issa

Small bird, forgive me,

I’ll hear the end of your song

in some other world.

Anon

A bitter morning:

sparrows sitting together

without any necks.

J. W. Hackett

No sky at all;

no earth at all—

and still the snowflakes fall . . .

Hashin

Each of these haiku paints a vivid picture, but when you stop to think about it, you painted the picture. The poem only stimulated your imagination. It built the structure, and you filled in the details. This bears a close resemblance to the wonderful quote by photographer Ernst Haas: “The less descriptive the photo, the more stimulating it is for the imagination. The less information, the more suggestion. The less prose, the more poetry.” Haiku fits that description perfectly. Do your own photographs come close?

How often do your photographs say everything, leaving nothing more for the viewers? If you’ve said it all, taking the creativity away from the viewers, you can only expect a quick glance before they move to the next photograph.

The lesson I received from haiku is to say enough to interest viewers, but to leave enough unsaid to allow creative seeing and interpretation. Let them spend time thinking about it. Let your work excite and stimulate them, but leave them an opening for their own creativity.

Haiku is not the only form of literature that contains profound messages for working photographers. Other forms of poetry, as well as novels, philosophical writings, etc., all offer new ideas. They reside on the pages like fruit on the trees: you just have to find them, pick them off, and incorporate them into your way of seeing.

Expanding and Defining Your Interests

In chapter 1, I devoted a substantial section to determining your interests. I’d like to return to that from a different viewpoint, and perhaps one that goes further. I’ve long felt that most people segregate their lives, putting their work in one place, photography in another, music in a third, other outside interests in a fourth, etc. I think that by integrating your life to a greater extent you can draw from multiple areas and apply the lessons to each of the others. The nonvisual arts provide perfect starting points for this integrated approach. We are all multifaceted people with a variety of interests, from politics to the arts, from financial investments to recreational pleasures. No doubt some of these interests have greater potential for a visual dialogue than others, but many have potential beyond our expectations.

In our lives, we almost have to segregate these varied interests, but in so-called primitive societies, they intermingle as one. Art, music, religion, food gathering, birth, marriage, and death are all intertwined. Each represents an essential part of life, and none can exist without support from the others. Why we have evolved into a civilization that segregates these aspects of life could be a lifelong study for an anthropologist. But I feel that those of us who are seriously interested in making photographs can benefit greatly by trying to integrate the many facets of our own lives.

What are your interests? Do you find any visual qualities in them, whether or not you see them as photographic qualities? If so, there may be ways to make comments on them with your camera. My outside interests—natural history, the cosmos and the subatomic, architecture—found photographic expression, and I feel that you can have the same gratifying experiences if you pursue your interests actively.

I wonder how many people try to find things that can be photographed where they work—where they spend nearly half of their waking hours. How many people look for photographic subjects around the house or in their neighborhood? How many people probe their general interests—or their everyday environment—for photographic possibilities?

The canyons were special to me, as were the cathedrals, which I discovered almost simultaneously. Prior to that, the natural landscape served as my main source of imagery, and it still forms the central focus of my photography. Each of these areas—as well as my work in urban areas—has opened up new avenues for me that have great importance and meaning.

Nature draws me because I love the beauty and drama of our planet, and I abhor the way we are defiling it. Yet, it has always been difficult for me to photograph the destruction. I don’t like spending hours in the darkroom just to make a print that looks awful! I always wanted to make some visual commentary on humanity’s disregard for the land, but it remained beyond my grasp until rampant development around my home in Agoura, California (from 1980–1982) pushed me over the brink. Then, for the first time, I became so angry that I photographed things I hated: rolling hills once covered with oaks and wild grasses, bulldozed into bare plateaus; homes looking like they came from your old Monopoly set plunked down in rows with concrete block walls surrounding each one like miniature prisons; telephone and power wires hanging in the sky (figures 18-2 and 18-3). Even those photographs are meaningful to me, but I don’t like them. I don’t like what they represent. They’re purely documentary, borne out of anger and frustration of witnessing pleasant natural land turning into rather wretched suburbia, while reading the words of businesspeople referring to such desecrations of natural beauty as “improvements.”

In 1999, I went a step further. After an extended environmental battle that I headed, political interests overturned, rewrote, or ignored existing laws that would have protected the environment from a massive gravel pit and quarry, in the state of Washington, where I had moved a decade earlier. The permitting of this illegal project drove me to make a series of photographs that were not of the project itself, but rather designed to convey my anger, anguish, and torment over the way politicians crushed both the public and the environment with their outrageous decisions.

Figure 18-2: Oaks and Hills, Agoura
Gently rolling oak-covered grasslands northwest of Los Angeles create some of the most quietly relaxing landscapes anywhere. Such rolling hills run for hundreds of miles northward, up to San Francisco and beyond. But they are being cut down, scraped, and developed into suburbs, car dealerships, business parks, and shopping centers. The natural environment is rapidly disappearing. This photograph was taken near my home—a suburban tract that once looked like this—in the late 1970s, shortly before this location, too, fell to the chainsaws and blades.

Figure 18-3: Monopoly Homes, Agoura
Looking like pieces out of your old Monopoly game set, new homes sprang up, almost pushing up against one another, to replace the natural landscape. Each featured a high concrete block wall surrounding the home, turning the development into a set of prison cells, but referred to as “privacy.” (At least there was no barbed wire atop the walls.) Streets of the tract were given names such as “Shady Oak Lane,” substituting a pleasant name for the reality that once existed prior to the development.

Figure 18-4: Ghosts and Masks
This image is one of a series I made in response to a major environmental battle I led—and lost—during the 1990s. Our environmental group won every legal battle against a proposed gravel pit and hard rock quarry, but county politicians altered existing laws and ignored others to grant the permit. The photographs I produced are my “primal scream.”

These photographs are details of burls on a small log I found on my own property in the state of Washington. Though they are all made under soft light conditions, they are printed with exaggerated contrast levels—including deep blacks devoid of detail and light grays glowing out from the blacks. The bright whites in these images are generally products of bleaching to shocking tonalities, but the predominant tones of each image are dark because I wanted to avoid tonalities that might be interpreted as optimistic or positive (figures 18-4 and 18-5).

I presented 10 of these images as my “Darkness and Despair” portfolio in Tone Poems – Book 1. They are far more artistic than the series I did in Agoura and elicit a far greater emotional response from viewers. They are quite abstract—some viewers can’t determine the subject matter—but the universal visual language of sharp contrasts and tightly curved lines expresses my ideas and feelings. Hence, these photographs use a small log for a specific purpose. In essence, I followed Minor White’s dictum of photographing the log for what else it represented.

After Hurricane Katrina ravaged New Orleans and the Gulf Coast of Mississippi, I quickly did a scouting trip for a workshop. The workshop followed several months later. The purpose was to photograph the awful devastation caused by a natural event after years of indefensible human neglect (figures 18-6 and 18-7). It was gut wrenching to see such widespread devastation, and to see that so little changed in the seven months between the scouting trip and the workshop. I hope that these images made an impact, but it appears that government has not been terribly interested in rebuilding New Orleans or the lives of the people who once lived there.

Neither my Katrina images, nor my Agoura images, nor my “Darkness and Despair” images represent my “typical” approach, but they had to be done! I simply couldn’t avoid doing them. Give some thought to what you want to say—with pleasure, awe, sadness, or anger—and how you can say it. Note the things you do aside from photography and see whether any of them have photographic possibilities. Note the things you think about and see whether any of them have visual aspects. Perhaps you can find material objects that relate to those visions. These are the areas where you’ll find your strongest images. Sometimes it may be a surprise encounter with something so unexpected and visually overwhelming that you simply cannot walk away, as was the case for me in a huge church in the remote town of Lampa, Peru, where its most striking feature was a three-story display of human skeletons, skulls and bones (figure 18-8). It was simply too bizarre and too macabre to pass up.

Figure 18-5: Distortion and Desperation
This image in my “Darkness and Despair” portfolio is meant to show the turbulence, horrors, and distortions caused by the illegal political decision to permit the gravel pit and hard rock quarry. The affair proved to me that when big money is involved, there’s no difference between democracy and dictatorship. The entire portfolio derives from close up images of burls on one small log I found on my property, none more than four inches long.

Figure 18-6: Destroyed Home, Ninth Ward, New Orleans
The family photograph on the dining room table, likely placed there after the flooding subsided, had a strong emotional effect on me. It was as if the family had come alive before my eyes, seen in happier days. I never walked into the house and never touched a thing. The image shows exactly what I saw from the doorway.

When you do find a photographic possibility, work with it for a long time, if possible. Try to make a project of it. Study it. Photograph it in every way that has meaning to you—at different times, under a variety of lighting conditions, with an assortment of lenses, and anything else that may produce interesting and meaningful images. Don’t just make one or two photographs and drop it. Keep going back to search for new possibilities. You may be amazed at how fascinating the process proves to be.

Figure 18-7: Multipurpose Room, Thomas Hardin School, New Orleans
This room had served as an elementary school cafeteria, auditorium, and gymnasium. Caked, cracked mud covered every horizontal surface and stained the walls almost to the ceiling. None of the photographs I made following Hurricane Katrina was a pleasure to make. But I felt they had to be made.

Too many people shoot randomly, snapping whatever happens to strike their fancy and failing to look deeply into any specific subject. It turns out that going deeper into a subject can be an exhilarating experience. It’s a form of personal research, personal involvement, personal dedication, and above all, love. By the time you complete your project (if, indeed, you ever complete it), you’ll know it so well—more than anyone else—that you’ll truly love it. I feel the best work always springs from that level of personal involvement.

Figure 18-8: Lampa Cathedral Skeleton Display
This three-story-high display dominates the center of the huge church in the Peruvian town of Lampa. I had no idea what the display meant, but it seemed too bizarre and macabre to pass up. I later learned the display is to honor those of the past who were buried in local graves and those who contributed to the church. It is, therefore, a display of honor.

As you expand your possibilities, you also more accurately define your expressive approach. My own approach is well defined. I like both the art and the craft of photography. I prefer—almost demand—that my prints be sharp and clear. The exceptional rendering power of photography, continuously improved by better lenses and technologies, is one of its chief assets. I like to take advantage of that inherent strength.

I find little appeal in the muddy, out-of-focus creations of the Diana or Helga camera with its plastic lens. Yet I don’t make this preference an absolute rule. On occasion, I’ve produced unsharp images with limited focus because they seemed warranted and effective. Even with my strong feelings about sharpness, I try to maintain flexible thinking rather than rigid rules. The photographs of “Darkness and Despair” have very limited sharpness, especially in their original 16" × 20" size, as they were made with a medium format camera using extension tubes for extreme close ups. I blacked out some of the most out-of-focus areas during printing. Others are visible, but they help create the macabre imagery that I sought.

Sometimes out-of-focus images can be pleasantly appealing, though generally not to me if everything is out of focus. You’ll have to be the judge of what works best for you, and how much can go out of focus (see figure 3-24).

Limitations of Photography

Somewhere in your thinking about how much can be done through photography, there must be the recognition that it can’t do everything. It has limits, just like painting, sculpture, music, and literature, as well as science and technology. None of them can say everything, solve all problems, or reveal all truths. The fact is that photography may not always be up to the task of expressing your feelings, no matter how experienced you become. I still can’t think of a way to express my political views photographically. I feel that an understanding of photography’s limitations is as important as an understanding of its potential.

In 1986, I spent three consecutive days cross-country skiing and photographing in the Canadian Rockies with fellow photographer Craig Richards who lives near Banff National Park, Canada. One day we awakened with the first light of dawn, grabbed a few bites of breakfast, and departed Assiniboine Lodge for a day of exploration and photography before any of the other guests were out of bed. The first hour was drudgery as we laboriously skied uphill through dense forest toward Wonder Pass, several miles away. It was bitterly cold and bleak under a heavy blanket of clouds, and we had constant problems with our skis.

Suddenly, the most remarkable transformation occurred. We broke through the trees into more open country just as the clouds began to part overhead. Wonder Pass lay straight ahead, still a couple of miles away, but visible for the first time. Within seconds the immense wall of mountains to our right opened up, then the slopes and distant peaks to our left. From that moment on the weather became a constantly changing kaleidoscope of calm periods alternating with blizzard-like winds that pushed walls of windblown snow before them. Several times I stood facing the onslaught, only to turn, crouch, and cover my face at the last moment before the blast hit. A minute later it all passed, and I’d stand there cheering with my arms upraised and fists clenched by the exhilaration of it all. Periods of dense fog followed those of crystal clarity. Every moment was special; every vista was extraordinary. It was a day of magic.

At one point I looked uphill toward Wonder Pass for a possible photograph, liked what I saw, but looked to my right before setting down my tripod. What I saw there looked even better, so I skied a few feet to the side to re-position myself. Again I looked to my right, and again found something better! Within moments it happened several more times. Suddenly I realized that I had skied a full 360-degree circle—everything looked better than everything else! It was sensory overload of the highest order. I photographed until I ran out of film. So did Craig. By mid-afternoon we returned to the lodge and sauna, physically exhausted but emotionally charged.

Several weeks later, from my home near Los Angeles, I phoned Craig and asked if he had come away with any particularly strong photographs. There was a period of silence, punctuated by several stutters and stammers, but no words (and Craig is not the quiet type!). I broke the silence by saying, “I’m not sure I got anything, but I don’t really care. It was the day that was so incredible.” “Exactly!” Craig blurted out. “That’s exactly how I feel. I just couldn’t quite find the right words! It was . . . unbelievable! I don’t think I got anything, either, but it doesn’t matter. What a day!”

We both recognized that we were unable to show through our photography what we had experienced. There was too much going on, too fast. No single thing could have been isolated from the ever-changing panorama. It was nature at its most spectacular. Now, if either of us had been equipped with a 35mm camera or a digital SLR, which didn’t exist back then, we might have been able to make the photographs that were skipping past us so quickly. This proves that every camera format has its place, its value. None are better than any other one. Each is a tool. You just have to use your tools as best you can for the task at hand. We had the wrong tools for that kind of day.

I have no regrets that the day yielded no outstanding photographs. The memories are sufficient. Even if I could, I would never trade the experience of that day for a fine photograph—or even several fine photographs. If I had to make a choice between nature and my photography, I would choose nature every time. It’s important to keep things in perspective. To a large extent, my photography is a product of nature, but nature is not a product of my photography.

There are times when the magnificence of nature—or any other subject—can be conveyed with success. There are times when it can be enhanced. Perhaps it could have been on that March day near Wonder Pass, but only by someone who could have maintained his photographic sensibilities better than Craig or I did under those conditions. Perhaps, but I doubt it. There are limits to photography. It’s not always possible to distill so much sensory input into a two-dimensional picture.

There is also another limitation to photography: that of interpretation. You can say what you wish to say through photography, but viewers won’t always get the message you’re trying to convey. This is true of verbal communication, as we have all experienced. Visual communication compounds the problem.

I’ve photographed nature for years—not only recognizing and paying homage to its beauty, but also hoping that others would recognize that beauty as something to be preserved. But I may never see the lush tropical rain forests before they’re completely cut down for palm oil, farms, or ranches. I wonder how long air pollution will go on producing acid rain that destroys lakes, wildlife, and even our own photographs. I wonder what global warming will do to everything, and the horrible impacts it will have on the land, the oceans and the wildlife around this planet. I wonder how many wild rivers I will have the opportunity to see, hear, and photograph before they are dammed and damned as extensions of our indoor plumbing and electric outlets. And how soon will our corporate mentality turn all of the world’s forests into tree farms, ranches, or urban sites?

I have long since accepted the limitations of photography as the perfect vehicle of expression in all situations, but the limits of interpretation are harder for me to deal with. Perhaps a new approach on my part will help solve the problem, and I will surely look for ways to more effectively state my environmental concerns in the future.

There are other minor limitations in photography that are often difficult to detect. One hidden limitation comes via semantics. Landscape photography, for example, is a misnomer. Nature photography is a more appropriate phrase because it is more accurate and allows wider interpretation. My photograph Fallen Sequoias (see figure 3-7) is a landscape photograph, in the usual parlance, yet without the fog that envelops everything in the scene, it would have been excessively complex. Thus, the interaction of the landscape with the ambient weather conditions—nature, in a word—made the photograph possible. It’s not just a landscape, but a nature study, which has broader implications. By speaking of it as a landscape, I believe there is a subtle narrowing of understanding.

Most landscapes truly are broader studies; rarely are they landscapes alone. Interestingly, my abstract canyon photographs are the purest landscape images I’ve produced, for everything within each photograph is eroded rock. Yet they too are broader nature studies to me, because of my interpretation of them as cosmic or subatomic—the embodiment of nature at all levels throughout the known universe.

These are a few of the limitations of photography that I’ve experienced. Doubtless there are others. I feel it’s important to recognize them so you can avoid disappointment with photography’s inability to express every aspect of your thinking. It’s inevitable that such limitations exist. Push those limits to the fullest, but learn to live with them.

Figure 18-9: Mineral King, Sunset
Made in 1969, this image was my entry into photography. This photograph and several others were used by The New York Times as illustrations of this Sierra Nevada mountain valley, which was embroiled in an environmental battle and subsequently added to Sequoia National Park. The Times paid me for the photographs, clueing me in to the astounding fact that I could go camping and get paid for it! At that point, I turned away from missile guidance computer programming, and photography became my new career.

The image, taken just before sunset, has strong side lighting and a dramatic diagonal line of silhouetted trees, adding both depth and a diamond-like design to the photograph. Even today, it holds up as a strong image.

There are also great rewards, to be sure. It’s well known that the work of Ansel Adams was pivotal in preserving vast tracts of land for parks and wilderness, but the process must have seemed glacially slow to him over the years. W. Eugene Smith’s photography of the pollution at Minamata Bay, Japan dramatically alerted the world to the dangers of mercury poisoning, but he was nearly beaten to death by corporate thugs in retaliation. Yet the impact of his work was extraordinary. These are examples of photography at its most effective.

I may have contributed to a successful environmental effort even before I turned to photography as a career. In 1969, I photographed the Mineral King area of the southern Sierra Nevada, a high mountain valley surrounded by Sequoia National Park on three sides. At that time, a major controversy surrounded Mineral King: The Sierra Club wanted it included in the park, but Walt Disney wanted to build the largest ski resort in North America there. I spent several days camping, hiking, and photographing the area, then offered my images to the Sierra Club to help its efforts. Less than two months later, a few of those photographs illustrated a long article in The New York Times Sunday Magazine explaining the issues of the environmental battle. I’ll never know if it helped in the successful effort to get Mineral King into Sequoia National Park, but it certainly didn’t hurt (figure 18-9).

Developing a Personal Style

Photography students of all ages are justifiably concerned about developing a personal photographic style. As a workshop instructor, I am repeatedly asked for the means, the method, and the key to developing their personal style. My answer to these questions is always the same: don’t give it a second thought. (In fact, don’t give it a first thought!) A personal style, like stuff, happens. (There’s a better word than “stuff” in this context, but to keep this book on a higher plain, we’ll settle for “stuff.”)

It’s my contention that anyone consciously working to develop a personal style ends up with a self-conscious, forced, and false style. It won’t be natural. It won’t reflect you. Why not? Think of it this way: In life, there are people who develop self-conscious styles, people who aren’t themselves. We have names for such people: actors and actresses. It’s great when they’re on stage or in front of the cameras, but off stage, they can be themselves. They don’t have to pretend to be someone else.

You are you because of the way you look, the way you think, the way you talk, the way you move, the way you interact with others, etc. That’s you. You didn’t work at that. You didn’t think about being you. It just evolved. It happened. You simply ended up being the person you are. Nobody else can be you.

It’s the same photographically. Once you find the subject matter that really matters to you—that raises your passion to new levels—you’ll respond to it in your own unique way. You’ll see it your own unique way. You’ll interpret it your own unique way. You’ll photograph and print it with your personal stamp. Why? Because it really means something to you, and you simply can’t see or think about it in any other way. Beyond that, nobody else will see it, interpret it, post-process it, or print it the way you will.

 Once you find the subject matter that really matters to you—that raises your passion to new levels—you’ll respond to it in your own unique way. You’ll see it your own unique way. You’ll interpret it your own unique way. You’ll photograph and print it with your personal stamp.

Of course, this implies that your technique as a photographer and printer allows you to do what you want to do. If your technical side is insufficient for the task, you’ll fall short. But while good technique is necessary to make your expression come to life, it’s not sufficient by itself. There must be the initial passion that ignites your fire—that starts your creative juices flowing. You have to find the subject matter that really matters. If you haven’t already identified what it is, keep your eye and mind open for it. When you discover it, you’ll know; you won’t have to think about it.

A corollary to the thought expressed above about seeing, interpreting, and printing things that truly excite you in your own way is that it frees you from the petty thinking that you have to guard your “secrets.” People with secrets invariably lack confidence, and generally for good reason. They fail to make a personal statement about anything, and underneath it all they recognize that failure (though they’re never honest enough to admit it . . . even to themselves). Photographers with ability and confidence share their thinking, their techniques, and their locations freely.

In my workshops, there are no secrets. My co-instructors freely share all their insights with the students, whether it’s locations, techniques, materials, thinking, etc. It’s far more rewarding to share than to be secretive. We share our discoveries with each other regularly. I learned the compensating developer procedure from the late Ray McSavaney, who taught workshops with me for many years. I learned about potassium ferricyanide reducing (bleaching) from Jay Dusard, who teaches workshops with me regularly. Don Kirby, with whom I’ve hiked and photographed for years, has greatly extended my understanding of masking. In recent years I’ve learned most of my digital photography through several friends, co-instructors, and students who have given me tips, tutorials, and valuable on-the-spot advice. In fact, much of my learning has taken place while I was teaching, proving that teaching and learning is truly a two-way street. I have always recognized that students have a lot of insight and knowledge, and I’ve often been the beneficiary of wonderful new ideas offered by my students.

Worthwhile photographers reason that if you learn some of their procedures, their ideas, their workflow, you may be able to eventually show them a wonderful photograph that benefited from one or more of those. Dedicated photographers enjoy not only making great photographs, but also seeing great photographs made by others. My list can go on and on, but my point is that people like these are the ones who are worthy of your company—but only if you are worthy of their company by sharing your discoveries with them.

Self-Critique, Interaction, and Study

Be your own toughest critic. That’s easier to say than do because it involves an extremely difficult transition from subjective response to objective analysis. Throughout the book, I’ve stressed the importance of allowing your emotional response and intuition to tell you what interests you. When you get excited about making an exposure in the field, you do so because you’re subjectively moved by something in front of you. You respond emotionally.

It’s just as important to be objective in analyzing your own effort spontaneously. You respond intuitively. But I’ve also stressed the importance of perfecting the imagery with non-spontaneous thinking about camera position, lenses, filters, exposure, etc. When you look at the resultant file or print days or weeks later, you must remove that subjective response and ask objectively and analytically, “Does the photograph alone convey my thoughts?” In essence, you must separate yourself from your personal involvement and ask if you’d honestly be inclined to stop and look at that photograph. That’s a tough transition. It’s a tough question. But it must be done if you want to analyze your work realistically. The subjective, emotional beginning provides your photographs with spark and life; the objective, analytical end assures that you present strong, meaningful work to others.

This is something you must do by yourself, but there is also more you can do with others. Seek out classes and workshops with good instructors who will push your development, and seek out peers with whom you can share your experiences while pushing one another.

Try to engage in a periodic critique of your own work and the work of others—not on a competitive basis, but on a mutually supportive basis. Again, this will stimulate your thought process and put you in regular contact with other photographers, other approaches, and other ways of thinking. There may be organizations or clubs in your area that promote such gatherings, and if not, see if you can start one.

Beware of organizations that sponsor contests. Contests are antithetical to art. Imagine a contest pitting Rembrandt against Van Gogh, Stieglitz against Strand, you against the next person. Who’s better? It’s a foolish question that deserves no answer. The only pertinent questions in art are, “Does it say something to me?” and “Does it show insight by either answering a question or posing one?” Contests are usually based on rules of composition. The only worthwhile rule is the one stated by Edward Weston: “Good composition is the strongest way of seeing.” Rules constrict creativity. In fact, creativity thrives when rules are broken.

Seek out knowledgeable people to critique your work. We all begin by having friends and relatives look at our work, but at some point you have to go to those who really know what they’re talking about and who are willing to say what they think. It may not be easy to take, but it’s the best way to boost your photographic development. Go back to your friends and relatives between bouts with those who know, and let them build up your shattered ego with praise. Then, when you’re ready, go back in the ring with the pros for another round.

Read about photography and photographers. Such books can open up new avenues of thought and stimulate new directions. Look at photographs and read what the critics have to say about them, but always take their words with a grain of salt. (A review of Reed Thomas’s exhibit in 1981 was quite positive, in general, except for some critical remarks about the images made from multiple negatives. The interesting thing was that Reed had never made a print from multiple negatives, but that didn’t slow down the critic who failed to look carefully enough to note that the multiple image effect came from window reflections and objects behind the windows!) Here and there, good critics can shed some illumination on photographs, and those reviews are useful for helping you analyze photographs yourself.

Photography classes and seminars can be very useful, depending on the instructor. Learn who the instructor is before wasting your time with a poor one. I feel strongly that the best way to learn photography (and perhaps many other arts, crafts, and even some academic subjects) is by old-fashioned apprenticeship. Apprenticeship is long outmoded, though it would be great if it could be brought back today. That approach allows you to learn directly from a master; no other approach can be as effective.

I could stand guilty of prejudice, but I feel that workshops are the best means of achieving photographic growth. Workshops are today’s closest thing to an apprenticeship. You can choose the photographer whose work you admire and take one or more workshops from him or her. You don’t have tests. You’re not graded on your performance, your attendance, your participation, or your attitude. You sign up because you want to learn. I got my start that way, and I see the intensity that develops during an uninterrupted week of interaction with other students and instructors. Nothing can be as informative as that exchange of information and viewpoints. Total, continuous immersion in photography for an extended period, without the distractions of everyday life, focuses the mind on photography. Nothing else intrudes. It’s the best possible method of acquiring maximum information and ideas in a minimum amount of time. You’ll improve your photographic techniques and define your photographic interests and goals.

Finally, always keep an open mind. Consider new methods and approaches. Seek to expand your own frontiers. Photography is a continuing, growing process. Keep growing. There’s always another valid approach, another new insight.

Keep searching.

===== FILE 26/28: Text%2fappendix01.xhtml =====

Figure App-1: Cayucos, Lago de Atitlan
At the close of the day, Guatemalan fishermen bring their flimsy boats (Cayucos), looking like floating coffins with a prow at one end, back to the edge of Lake Atitlan (a volcanic caldera much larger than Crater Lake), and inspect them for the next day’s work.

APPENDIX 1
Testing Materials and Equipment for Traditional Photography

SOME PEOPLE LOVE TO TEST materials and equipment, others abhor the chore. I tend to fall closest to the latter group. There are, however, several tests and equipment checks that I feel are important enough to perform periodically. The following is a run-down of the several that I feel are mandatory.

ASA (ISO) Test

A simple test for film ASA is the following. Expose a gray card at Zone 1, i.e., four stops below the Zone 5 meter reading. (Actually you can expose anything at four stops below the meter reading, because the meter reading is always Zone 5, remember?) Then make two additional exposures, one stop below and one stop above the Zone 1 exposure. All three exposures should be measured at the ASA you have been using until now. Develop the negatives. The true Zone 1 exposure is the one that just begins to impact the film as discernible density above the film base fog.

Check the three exposures carefully, for the Zone 1 exposure determines the true ASA for your film/developer in the following manner: If the preset ASA was 100 and the first exposure exhibits perceptible—but very thin—density, and the next lower exposure is no more than film base fog, then ASA 100 is correct. If the second exposure (one stop below the first) shows density, then the true ASA is closer to 200, for the supposed Zone 0 exposure is actually Zone 1. In fact, further testing may show that a lower exposure still will show density, which means that the ASA is even higher. On the other hand, if the third exposure (1 stop above the first) is the one with the first apparent density, then the true ASA is 50. If even the third exposure shows no density, then the ASA is still lower, and further testing is required to find the correct value.

You may ask, “How long should I develop the negative . . . N? . . . N–? . . . N+?” It doesn’t matter! Remember, Zone 1 develops fully in several minutes and then goes no further. If the film is developed for an excessively long time, film base fog will increase, and Zone 1 will grow more dense along with it. But this will not alter the test in any way. So just develop the test negatives along with any images you happen to be developing the next time you are in the darkroom.

This simple, precise test avoids the need for densitometers or other expensive measuring devices. After all, if you can see perceptible density, you’re at Zone 1. Why spend hundreds of dollars on a densitometer to measure something that requires nothing more than a careful look? All photographers should perform this simple test. It sets the basis for proper exposures. Keep in mind, however, my own procedure and my recommendation to all other photographers: after you determine the proper ASA (for sensitometric purposes), then cut it in half in order to get better separations in the low values (for photographic purposes). Reread the chapters on the zone system (if necessary) to review my thinking on this point.

Contrast Development Test

To determine contrast characteristics of your film/developer combination, use the following procedure. Once the ASA is determined, expose the gray card at Zone 5 (using the manufacturer’s recommended ASA, not the lowered ASA that I recommend for actual photography) and develop the negative normally (i.e., what you have been using as “N” up until now, or what the manufacturer recommends as normal). Then print on a normal contrast paper (grade 2) to achieve the same value as the 18 % gray card (which is the value the meter gives you). Now, using the same development procedure throughout and the same exposure time under the enlarger, will a Zone 9 exposure yield a pure white and a Zone 8 exposure an “almost white”? If so, your “normal development” time is correct for use with your paper/developer combination. If not, alter your negative development time to achieve those Zone 9 and Zone 8 results. For example, if both Zone 9 and Zone 8 are pure white in the print, you are actually overdeveloping your negative. Re-expose the three zones—Zones 5, 8, and 9—and develop a bit less and try the entire process again. If you achieve the desired tonalities this time, you have found the true “normal developing” time. From this point, you can adjust your development table as you now have it—or construct your own for the first time—and you have photographic standards that are correct for your own products.

Lens Sharpness and Coverage Test

Tape a newspaper to a wall and photograph it, or focus on a window screen that fills the frame, and photograph it. With a powerful magnifier, check the negative from corner to corner to see if all letters or all wires are uniformly sharp.

If you have a view camera, you can use this same approach to check your sharpness as you raise or lower your lens, thus determining how far you can move the lens before you begin to lose sharpness and, ultimately, the image itself. This tells you how large your image circle coverage is. Just place a mark on the newspaper or screen at the top of the image with the lens in the normal position, then raise the lens to the limit and rephotograph. If you lose sharpness toward the upper corners, you will know just how far you can go before you encounter a loss of sharpness, and you can work within those limitations.

Bellows Test

This is only for those who own a large format camera with bellows. If your bellows has a pinhole that allows outside light to hit the negative during exposure, your negatives will be fogged. This is bad enough in itself, but the pinhole may be situated in a way that fogs only part of the negative, so you have variable fogging, and this is even worse. The simplest and surest way to test for bellows pinholes is to go into the unlit darkroom, open the bellows and put a flashlight inside, moving the flashlight and yourself constantly to see if a beam of light comes through. Bellows corners are the most likely place to find pinholes. Also, open the bellows to several different extensions and check at each of the lengths, for a hole may open at one length, and cover itself over again at a longer or shorter extension.

I have found that black electrical tape or black masking tape will cover the hole perfectly. You don’t have to buy a new bellows if you find a pinhole—just tape it over. Only when the tape becomes so thick that it begins to impede bellows movement do you need a new bellows. I use my camera a lot, and I push my bellows to the limit with rising fronts and other movements, so I have had more than my share of pinholes, and I have plenty of tape on them as a result. But it’s a light-tight unit, and that’s all that counts. It is also wise to carry some black tape with you at all times when in the field in case you scratch or rip the bellows, but not so badly that it is irreparable.

Safelight Test

How do you know if your safelights are, indeed, safe? Most people test by placing an opaque object on a sheet of enlarging paper under the safelight for several minutes, then develop the paper. If the outline of the object appears, it shows the safelight to be unsafe. True enough, but this test will uncover only a terribly unsafe light, not one that may have a subtle yet serious problem. Let’s create a far better test.

First, any enlarging paper, just like any negative, must be exposed to a minimum amount of light before it will begin to show density. We call this the paper’s threshold. In chapter 10 this was discussed under the technique of flashing. Determination of threshold forms the basis of the safelight test.

Start with the usual determination of threshold: a “test strip” with no negative in the enlarger. This time, however, do it with all safelights in your darkroom turned off. Closing the aperture down to the minimum setting, with the enlarger head at its greatest height on the column and the bellows crunched down to spread the light as wide as possible, make a series of short exposures, moving a cardboard an inch or half-inch at a time down the enlarging paper with each exposure. Assume there are twenty short exposures, and the developed paper shows a light gray band at the top end—the one that received twenty of the short exposures. The next band (receiving nineteen short exposures) is a bit lighter. The next band (eighteen exposures) is still lighter, etc. Let’s assume that you can go down to band #10 with some slight degree of gray still showing. Anything less received a sub-threshold set of exposures. Therefore ten exposures is threshold, and we will now call that ten units of light.

That, of course, would be the perfect test for threshold. But instead of developing the test paper after the twenty exposures as you would for a threshold test, this time cover half of the test paper with a cardboard, covering half of each of the exposures. Now turn on all safelights in the darkroom. Leave them all on for a minimum of eight minutes, then develop the paper. Half of the test paper was now exposed to each of the enlarger exposures only; the other half received the enlarger exposures plus the safelight exposure.

If the safelights put on as little as one unit of light during that eight-minute exposure, each visible band of gray would become one band darker. By comparing densities of gray bands across the portion that was covered by the cardboard during the safelight exposure, you can determine exactly how safe—or unsafe—your safelights are.

Enlarger Light Uniformity Test

If the light distribution across your negative is uneven, your prints will suffer greatly. This is a universal problem, but may be correctable. The way to test enlarger uniformity is this. Focus a negative at 8" × 10", then remove the negative. At any of your common working apertures (say, f/8, f/11, or f/16) expose a sheet of enlarging paper for a short enough time that it will develop to about Zone 5, the 18 % gray card. (If the paper is too dark gray or too light gray, the test will not be as effective.)

Now, see if it is uniformly dense from edge-to-edge and from corner-to-corner. Then, tear the paper right down the middle, and place each corner successively against the torn center. Is the density even? Generally, there is a significant light fall-off toward the edges and corners, and this can be corrected by extra burning of each negative outward from the center. If your enlarger exhibits this common problem, you can correct it as long as you are aware of it.

The real problem comes if the fall-off is erratic or if you have somewhat of a checkerboard pattern of light and dark areas across the gray print. If you have this problem, you should buy a new light source, because there is no way to correct it!

Enlarger Lens Sharpness Test

Tape hairs across your negative carrier from opposite corners (if you are bald, borrow someone else’s hair!). Be sure the hairs are pulled tightly. Focus on the crossing point. Are the hairs sharp at the edges? Stop down. Do they become sharp? If so, at what aperture? Always stop down to at least that aperture. (You should check this by actually exposing the cross hairs and developing the prints.) Do the cross hairs lose sharpness if you stop down beyond a certain aperture? If so, do not stop down that far.

A further test is to again use hairs; this time taping them across each of the four corners of your negative carrier (i.e., diagonally from one edge to the next, close to the corner) and perform the same test. The reason for this is that the lens may blur outward from the center in a uniform manner, and the two cross hairs radiating out from the center may not show the blurring that can be seen on hairs that cross them near the four corners. If both tests show the hairlines to be sharp, you have an excellent lens. If not, consider buying a new one.

Add to this list of tests as you see fit, but make sure your tests are good ones or they waste time and accomplish nothing. It is a good feeling to know your equipment and materials. Even if you find some minor defects or limitations, at least you will be aware of them and you may be able to work around them.

===== FILE 27/28: Text%2fappendix02.xhtml =====

APPENDIX 2
Enlarger Light Sources

THERE ARE THREE BASIC TYPES OF ENLARGER LIGHT SOURCES: diffusion, condenser, and point source. Each has its proponents, and each has characteristics that differ from the others. Diffusion gives the softest contrast of the three, point source the harshest, and condenser somewhat closer to point source than to diffusion—perhaps two-thirds of the way to point source.

With diffused illumination, such as a cold light source (so named because the fluorescent-type light source puts out little heat in relation to its light output) or a bulb diffusion source (such as the color/light heads of the Saunders LPL, Omega, and Beseler enlargers, or the variable contrast heads made by Saunders or Oriental, among others), the gradations of contrast are softer and smoother, especially in the highlights. A negative that will print with barely perceptible highlight detail from a diffused light source will lose that detail if printed with a condenser or point source enlarger. A point source enlarger is one that has a small, intensely bright lamp, such as a projector-style quartz-halogen bulb placed far from two glass condensers, which collimate the light and send parallel rays down through the negative. This light creates the sharpest contrast of all. A negative that will print with barely perceptible highlight detail with a point source light will lose a slight degree of “snap” in those highlights with a condenser source, and the same highlights will be somewhat grayed with a diffusion source.

The condenser enlarger is effectively a “poor man’s point source enlarger”. It has the same familiar glass condensers as the point source, but it uses a conventional bulb as its light source, and the bulb is placed relatively close to the condensers. The width of the bulb itself, and its proximity to the condensers, prevents the condensers from perfectly collimating the light, but a fairly good approximation of true collimated light is achieved.

Diagram A-2.1: Enlarger light sources Diffusion (left); Condenser (center); Point Source (right)
The light from the diffusion enlarger (left) reaches the emulsion beneath the scratch in the base (base thickness is exaggerated in diagram) because light is refracted through the film base from all directions. With the condenser and point source, parallel beams of light refract away from the emulsion beneath the base. The scratch will be harder to see under diffusion enlargement.

Photographers argue the merits of these light sources, but the fact is that each works well as long as the negative made for it is appropriate. Use of a point source enlarger necessitates a lower contrast negative than one required for diffusion. As long as the entire system is compatible with itself, it will do the job.

Some people claim that the diffusion enlarger has less sharpness than the point source or even the condenser. It may be true, but I don’t feel disappointment with lack of sharpness in my prints, nor was I unhappy with Ansel’s sharpness. If a sharpness difference does exist, it may be measurable by instruments, but is not readily apparent to the eye.

The diffusion enlarger can claim superiority in one respect: slight scratches in the film base will be rendered invisible, but will be visible with the condenser or point source. The reason is that light from the diffuser hits the negative from all angles, is then refracted crazily through the thickness of the negative’s base before hitting the emulsion, and continuing on to the focusing lens. Slight scratches in the film’s base will cause different refraction patterns through the thickness of the negative, but light will still go through all portions of the negative. With the condenser, and even more with the point source, the collimated light hits the scratch and is diverted to the side, while light hitting elsewhere on the negative’s surface goes essentially straight through. So, less light hits the emulsion below the scratch, and it is recorded as a lighter line on the print.

All negatives can be scratched, but if film holders are kept clean and pressure plates on roll film holders are cleaned regularly, and the negative is handled with care, scratches will be held to a minimum. These precautions should be followed by all photographers, under any circumstances, so do not use this as an excuse to shy away from condenser or point source enlarger light sources.

===== FILE 28/28: Text%2fbackmatter01.xhtml =====

Join us on social!@rocky_nook