TITLE: power-of-humility-leadership
ISBN: 9781000834185
FILES: 23


===== FILE 2/23: xhtml%2fendorsements.xhtml =====

Endorsements

“Franziska Frank makes a compelling case that in leadership, humility is a source of strength, not a sign of weakness. She offers useful guidance for identifying your weaknesses, increasing your self-awareness, improving your relationships, and accelerating your learning.”

Adam Grant, #1 New York Times bestselling author of THINK AGAIN and host of the TED podcast WorkLife

“This is a great work. In some parts I would even compare it to Peter Senge. It is profound, has warmth, humor and absolute practical relevance. The book shows us how after defeat comes learning in engaged, reassuring humility to draw from it strength for renewal. Humility eases, awakens, increases receptivity, and, moreover, turns you into a more agreeable person. There is a Danish proverb: ‘He who carries his nose high is always in bad company.’ Humility as elaborated by Dr. Frank helps us to simply wear our nose straight. This is just as it should be.”

Peter Baumgärtel, Director Talent Development Germany, Eastern Europe, Nordics, Sitel Group

“We are living in a time when we can hardly plan for the long term. That means we have to become much more flexible in our thinking and simply get used to not having everything under control and being able to know everything. For this, we need humility. We also need it to stick to our own development, to reflect and not fall into rigidity and comfort. That is why I appreciate Ms. Frank's book very much. It not only puts a finger on the open wounds, but also shows practical ways into a future in which employees and managers get their ego under control and take responsibility for the bigger picture. Living leadership in humility, so to speak.”

Claudia Zeimes, HR Manager Bayerngas GmbH & Leadership Coach

“As CEO, my maxim is that any manager’s success ultimately is simply the sum of the employees’ successes. You need to build on the strengths of each individual and value their commitment, creativity and hard work. It is my job to get behind them instead of putting myself above them.

The gratifying insight for me from Ms. Frank's compelling book is that it clearly proves the effectiveness of humble leadership. I will continue being alert – a great culture is ruined in no time!”

Axel Ritzberger, CEO Utz Gruppe

“Humility is a big topic that has occupied me since I was a child. In our company, we've been trying to live it for decades, too. For example, with as much appreciation as possible: There are no extra offices, no extra toilets and no extra meals for us executives. Instead, we strive to work not only at the same level but also with maximum transparency. I have now found the scientific evidence that we are on the right track in Ms. Frank's book. In addition to data and enriching stories, I also received a bevy of tips that will help us as we move forward. With humility it is like with many other things: you have to work on it, develop yourself further. Standing still means taking a step backwards here, too!”

Artur Peplinski, CEO igus International

“I'm pleased that research is finally confirming what I've been trying to practice for a long time: managers, especially high-level ones, need to engage more with all employees, listen more, direct less and let employees take responsibility. Even if this is difficult for some employees at first, it is the only way to get the commitment that is suitable for our times. What excites me about the concept of humility, as Ms. Frank describes and teaches it, is that it provides evidence of exactly how effective these behaviors are. In addition, humility places a strong focus on the benefits of making mistakes. After all, if it is said that you won't make a mistake at 50, then you also won't learn anything from the age of 50 onwards. And that is not only be lacking in humility but also in responsibility for the company!”

Hartmut U. Müller, Vice President IT Technology & Cross Functions at Mercedes-Benz Group AG

===== FILE 3/23: xhtml%2fhalftitle.xhtml =====

The Power of Humility in Leadership

To many people, the words “leader” and “humble” are not natural bedfellows. Yet once they have grasped the definition, most employees desire a humble leader, while a majority of managers believe they already are one. What appears deceptively simple is trickier than expected. Narcissism, lack of perception, and fixed mindsets, neuronal default settings are only a few of the stumbling blocks on the path to humility.

What exactly is this sought-after humility? Humility consists of four key elements: 1) Seeing one’s own strength and weaknesses and revealing them where needed for the bigger picture; 2) Appreciating others for what they are, do now and can do; 3) Being open and willing to learn; 4) Understanding that we are all only a small part of a larger picture, easily replaceable and favored by luck and circumstance. Therefore, humility has nothing to do with being weak or hiding the light under the bushel. Instead, it is about clarity, taking a step back from one’s ego and thus being able to serve the greater picture.

The author’s own research with more than 3,500 managers contributes to the canon of positive effects of humility that have been measured by dozens of researchers during the last decade. Humility benefits employees (ranging from better performance, more innovation, stronger resilience to better client relations, and stronger morals), the organization (ranging from better ambidextrous strategies, a better culture to fewer sunk costs) and the managers themselves (ranging from more seen leadership potential to less stress and better relationships with employees). Dozens of case studies, quotes from more than 170 interviews with top managers, lively storytelling of real-life examples, and solid research with actionable takeaways, plus personal assessments, make this an eminently readable and practical book for managers worldwide.

===== FILE 4/23: xhtml%2ftitle.xhtml =====

The Power of Humility in Leadership

Influencing as a Role Model

Franziska Frank, PhD

===== FILE 5/23: xhtml%2fcopyright.xhtml =====

First published 2023

by Routledge

605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158

and by Routledge

4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN

Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business

© 2023 Franziska Frank

The right of Franziska Frank to be identified as author of this work has been asserted by them in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.

Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.

ISBN: 978-1-032-41420-1 (hbk)

ISBN: 978-1-032-41419-5 (pbk)

ISBN: 978-1-003-35801-5 (ebk)

DOI: 10.4324/9781003358015

Typeset in Garamond

by Deanta Global Publishing Services, Chennai, India

Originally published in German: Mit Demut zum Erfolg. Leadership in the 21st Century by Dr. Franziska Frank Copyright © Springer-Verlag GmbH, DE, part of Springer Nature 2022. All rights reserved.

===== FILE 6/23: xhtml%2fcontents.xhtml =====

Contents

About the Author

Introduction

1  The Image of Humility Today

Summary

At First Glance, Professional Investors Do Not Like Humble Executives

The Business Press Loves Simple Explanations

Only Employees Already Know that They Want Humility

Notes

2  Defining and Measuring Humility for Everyday Business

Summary

Looking at Humility in the Historical Perspective

Humility Today

Assessing Yourself Correctly

Appreciating Others

Openness and Willingness to Learn

The Bigger Picture

What Managers and Employees Say about Humility

Measuring Humility

Notes

3  The Status of Humility in Companies in Our Day and Age

Summary

Not Enough Managers Show Humility

People Overestimate Their Own Humility

Size of Company Only Selectively Relevant

The Interesting Issue of Men and Women

Only Some Difference in Humility According to the Level in the Company

The Length of Time Spent in a Position Has No Impact on Humility

Diversity Is Better for Humility

Number of Direct Reports Matter

Covid-19 Changes a Little

Four Activities Strengthen One's Own Humility

Notes

4  The Benefits of Humility

Summary

The Fundamental Effects of Humility

Benefits of Humility for Employees

Better Individual Performance

Better Team Performance

More Creativity and Innovation

More Emotional Labor and “Deep Acting”

Stronger Morals and Ethics

More Acceptance of Differentiating Behavior

Better Top Management Teams

Summary: Seven Measurable Benefits of Humility for Employees

Benefits of Humility for the Organization

More Successful Strategy

The Type of Strategy

Communication of Strategy

The Implementation

Better Culture

Greater Willingness to Take on Responsibility

More Diversity

Less Turnover

Less Investment in Loss-Making Projects

More Customer Loyalty

Summary

Benefits of Humility for the Leader Themselves

Better Performance

More Perceived Leadership Potential and More Promotions

Less Exhaustion

Better Dealing with Stress

Better Relationships

Better Understanding of Employees

The Wanting of Employees

The Feeling of Employees

Summary

The Upside of Humility for Start-ups

A Short Pause

Notes

5  Willingness to Recognize One’s Own Strengths and Weaknesses (and to Show Them Where It Makes Sense)

Summary

Stumbling Blocks When Looking at Strengths and Weaknesses

Self-Perception: Danger of Narcissism

Self-Perception: The Danger of Overconfidence

Self-Perception: The Imposter Syndrome

Self-Perception: Limits of Biology

In the Interaction: Considering Yourself as Being Too Obvious

In Interaction: Overestimating Your Own Significance

The Spotlight-Effect

The Role of the Team

The Role of Chance and Luck

Recognizing Your Own Strengths and Weaknesses

Showing Strengths and Weaknesses Correctly

How Do I Show My Weaknesses and Mistakes Correctly?

Showing Strengths Correctly

Notes

6  Appreciating Others

Summary

The Consequences of Appreciation

Stumbling Blocks in Appreciating Others

How to Get Appreciation Right?

Notes

7  Ability to Learn and Openness to New Ideas and Feedback

Summary

Willingness to Learn

Knowing That Something Can Be Learned

Learning from Errors and Not-Knowing

Knowing How Something Can Be Learnt

Meditation as a Tool for Learning and Humility

Knowing How to Create a Culture of Learning

Notes

8  Seeing the Bigger Picture

Summary

What Is the Bigger Picture?

The Bigger Picture in Everyday Life

See the Bigger Picture

Yourself

Your Role

The World and Beyond

Notes

9  The Limits and Disadvantages of Humility

Summary

Humility Must Be Real and Not Fake

Humility Allows Employees to Object

Success of Humility Depends on the Employee and the Situation

Power Distance

Demography

Without a Good Top Team, Humility Is Useless

Underestimating Your Own Knowledge

Too Little Exchange of Knowledge

Humility in the Absence of Competence Does Not Work

Humility Can Be Stressful for Employees

A Different Image

Notes

10 Different Nationalities, Ages and the Topic of Gender Revisited

Summary

Nationalities

Britain

China

France

Germany

India

Italy

The Netherlands

Singapore

Switzerland

US

What to Take From All of This?

Gender

Age

Notes

11 Humility in Politics

Summary

Do Humble Politicians Manage to Get Elected?

Can Politicians Stay Humble after Having Been Elected?

Notes

12 Examples of Humility as an Inspiration

Summary

Pixar

Zappos

Benjamin Franklin

Humility in Action: Interacting with Employees

Humility in Action: Communication

Humility as Seen by Benedictine Monk

Humility in Selected Well-Known CEOs

Admitting Weaknesses and Errors

Showing Strengths

Appreciating Others

Willingness to Learn

The Bigger Picture

Notes

13 How to Implement Humility in Your Company and a Glance into the Future

Summary

A Glance into the Future

Notes

Appendix A: FAQs

Index

===== FILE 7/23: xhtml%2fpreface2.xhtml =====

About the Author

Dr. Franziska Frank (©Uwe Klössing | werdewelt berlin)

Dr. Franziska Frank works as a freelance trainer, keynote speaker and author in three languages: English, German and Russian. She is also Visiting Lecturer and Affiliate Program Director at ESMT Berlin, Germany’s Nr.1 business school.

Her core theme is the art of influencing in all its facets:

Influencing by indirect interventions – living mindfully as a humble leader.
Influencing by direct interventions such as the right structures for decisions, the correct approach to negotiations and the precise phrasing in intercultural communication.

At the age of 15 she left her hometown Munich to attend an English boarding school where she completed O- and A-Levels. She read history at Peterhouse, Cambridge (B.A. and M.A.), followed by two honors degrees in law in Germany. During her studies, she worked as a freelance journalist for the Süddeutsche Zeitung and other newspapers. After her doctoral thesis, she worked as a management consultant at the Boston Consulting Group for six years, followed by ten years as a full-time program director at ESMT Berlin. Since 2016 she works freelance and has published numerous books in English and German.

===== FILE 8/23: xhtml%2fpreface3.xhtml =====

Introduction

Yesterday I was clever, so I wanted to change the world. Today I am wise, so I am changing myself.

Rumi (Persian Poet 1207–1273)

Summary

Humility is about courage – the courage to really see yourself as you are; the courage to appreciate others for what they do; the courage to always be open and willing to learn; and the courage to see the bigger picture. Especially in our day and age, this fundamental virtue of humility is vital. Whoever embraces the contents of this book will not only understand what positive impact humility has to offer for employees and the organization but also grow to reap the benefits of humility for themselves.

Are you courageous? If not, you can stop reading right now. Because humility is about courage. About a lot of courage.

You need the courage to see yourself as you really are. Not as you would like to be. The courage to see your weaknesses and mistakes, bear them, keep them in check, learn to conquer them or at least to own up to and at times apologize for them.

You also need the courage to see your strengths and use them to their full. The courage not to hide or don a comfortable cloak of modesty, but to really use your prowess where it is needed. Not to avoid conflicts, but engage with them where this is vital for the role that you have taken on. This also entails moving into the limelight, where this is necessary for the cause. At first glance, this may sound surprising in a book on humility. You will understand!

You need the courage to acknowledge others for what they are doing right now and what they can do in the future. To respect and appreciate them. Not to ignore their shortcomings, but to focus benevolently on their strengths. This is strenuous and must be done with awareness.

You need the courage to always and relentlessly stay open-minded. Not to rest comfortably in your existing knowledge or extensive experience, but to always scan the horizon for what is new. What is out there for the team, the company, for yourself and others? What new knowledge, what new skill, what new behavior should be mastered? And then master it.

This is the courage that George Bernhard Shaw refers to when he wrote: “The only man who behaved sensibly was my tailor: he took my measure anew every time he saw me, whilst all the rest went on with their old measurements and expected them to fit me.”1 You need the courage to take new measurements of yourself, others, situations. At every moment. Always. And be brave enough to forget your old assessment and assumptions.

And last but not least, you need the courage to see that every one of us is simply a small and finite creature, that is easily replaceable. That we are all part of a much bigger picture. A picture in which chance, luck and circumstances play a huge role. A bigger picture that goes beyond the individual at this moment in time to encompass not only your individual life as a whole but – depending on the situation – the team, the company, the world, its fundamental values and (even) spirituality.

Once you see all this, being humble no longer rings of cowering, being overmodest or servile as it does for some, but like a prerequisite for anyone who wants to take on the good fight for the world he, she and we live in.

Instead of being a sign of weakness, humility then represents a fundamental virtue that every manager should internalize and foster in order to successfully lead themselves and others.

Sadly, this insight, as well as the necessary courage to follow up on it, is not always present. In fact, all too often it is bitterly lacking.

Let me give you a tiny example upfront: 80 percent of managers admit to taking out the easy way at least once a year. How? By taking defensive decisions which they know full well are not the right ones. 80 percent!

Why would they do this? In most cases, simply to protect themselves, their ego and their position. A full 20 percent even admit to going down this safe path for half of their decisions.2

Here it is staring us balefully in the eye: The danger of the ego, the peril of focusing only on yourself.

Humility on the other hand goes beyond the self, sees the role the individual has taken on, sees others as well as the larger picture, is willing to learn and fight, does not cling to its own ego and can make others shine.

So, let us cut to the chase: What type of leaders do we need in this day and age?

Narcissists who think they are the center of the world?
Servile martyrs, who sacrifice themselves and prefer to whine and whimper rather than act and set those boundaries which their role requires?
Egoists who cannot bear others performing well, or egocentrics who do not even notice that others exist?
Narrow-minded people who think they have seen everything, know everything that needs to be known and sardonically insist on neither them nor the world being able to change?
Insular thinkers who never see the bigger picture, where the dots are, how they connect, but stick to the small because it is far easier to control?

And if we now realize that we do not want any of these leaders, then let us – courageously – look at what is happening right here and now in the 21st century. What sort of managers do we have?

A powerful hypothesis, of course, would be that the current situation is catastrophic, indeed: CATASTROPHIC:

That the typical CEO, the typical founder, the typical manager is narcissistic, arrogant, unwilling to learn, narrow-minded and about to lead the economy down the drain.
That their hubris, their lack of humility has skyrocketed in the last decades.
That only a return to the long-forgotten virtue of humility will pull the world back from the brink of economical and societal abyss.

The hope then would be that everyone feels shocked by this real-life depiction, eagerly picks up this book and while reading it ripens along with its lucid propositions, the neat research, the logical conclusions. Freed from tiresome hubris and elephantine ego, the next day they rush into work, elated and ready for a bright future. There, employees cheer their newborn, iridescently humble superior and immediately transform into equal, responsible partners. The result and the happy end: Together they drive the company to undreamt-of heights of success and interstellar growth.

Of course, such strong hypotheses are beautiful. They shake you up, create an emotional reaction of joyful approval or angry rejection that brings decent attention to the book. But such theories simply have no place in a book dedicated to humility. Why? One of the key elements of humility would thus be disregarded: the benevolent recognition of strengths, the non-judgmental perception of what complexity there is.

Simply put: The world of management is not a catastrophe. Many managers, whether they manage 4, 40, 400, 4,000, 40,000 or 400,000 employees, simply want the best for their organization, their department, their employees, and they are fighting a good fight for it.

Equally, many managers on the executive floor or lower down the corporate ladder are aware of the fact that they are not superheroes, that they have strengths AND weaknesses and that others would also perform well in their place. They see themselves as replaceable, favored by luck and circumstances. Many managers deploy their employees wisely and strive to give them the appreciation they deserve. They work at establishing an open atmosphere for learning, and open culture for dealing with errors and even realize that they are part of a larger context as individuals – be it in the company, in society, in the global economy or in a universal bond.

If this is the case, why this book? Why this persistent emphasis on the courage needed to be humble?

Because we are stuck in everyday life, which puts enormous pressure on managers to deliver results – how then can the individual manager avoid hogging the limelight?
Because there is fear: The fear of the manager as to what will happen if others find out that he/she does not know everything and repeatedly makes mistakes – how then can a manager openly own up to weaknesses or genuinely praise others?
Because there is the storyline: The storyline, which loves to link successes and failures to the individual manager – and how then can one stop feeling like Atlas who has to master all – alone – and who rightfully stands at the center of attention?
Because there is a lack of knowledge: A lack of knowledge about what exactly humility and how great its impact is – and how then can you apply it with the courage that it requires?
And finally, because the word is exactly that: “humility.” A word that rings of saints, being demure or servile – so how then should it be desirable at all?

This book not only shows what humility is and why it has a vital place in business life and also politics. It also shows by using dozens of examples how quickly humility goes missing even in the best-intentioned individuals and organizations. It shows what damage this lack of humility causes and how the conscious practice of humility has a positive effect on the whole organization, the employees and the managers themselves.

As each morning we look in the mirror and tidy our exteriors, in the same vein we should take a daily look at ourselves, at how we lead ourselves and others. This book will make it easier to not only steal surreptitious glances at yourself but will also give you the energy to freshen up internally and strengthen yourself. Why? Because, typically it is only small behaviors, little elements of your mindset, aberrant thoughts in yourself, in others, in the company, that need to be noticed in order to react properly. Consciously. Humbly.

What will aid you during this journey that the book proposes to take you on? Being open-minded. Every so often putting the book down and really reflecting on how things are in yourself and in your company. Avoiding the quick conclusion that this piece of research or this story does not apply to you. Steering clear of (presumptuous) assumptions that this behavior will not work with your people. Keeping away from thoughts, that this or that person will always be like that and you will never be able to effect a change in them.

Our brains love the efficiency of the status quo. Our ego defends itself with the best rhetoric against perceived attacks. Our attention bounds towards the obvious. You have to consciously use energy to recognize for yourself what is really going well and what is worth changing. This also takes a lot of courage, since you, like all managers, really have enough other things to do!

Will it all be worth your while? In the end, only you can be the judge of that. However, I know that this book contains facts, analyses, ideas and stories that will improve every manager who internalizes them.

That does not sound one iota humble, does it? Yet it is. Because humility is also about strengths and I know the strengths of this book.

At the same time, I also admit its weaknesses. It has become quite long because there are so many important stories, ideas, facts and analyses. It is also based on hundreds of pieces of research. And research usually means small samples, just a few hundred instead of thousands. Actually, to be precise, the research that is covered in this book has been run with approximately 35,000 managers and employees all over the world. That is a big number and a tiny one at the same time. Much of the book is also based on stories and interviews. And each story is unique and will never fit your circumstances exactly.

Yet I would like to follow Paolo Coelho in this: “Let us be absolutely clear about one thing: we must not confuse humility with false modesty or servility”3 and therefore I now simply submit the book to you as it is.

What is the structure of the book? It follows a red thread from understanding what humility is to its concrete implementation. The whole has 14 steps that build logically on each other.

A first introductory look at humility today. Do investors want it? Do the press or employees? Is it a genuine trend?
What exactly is humility – not in the world of theology or philosophy, but in everyday management, in this our very own digital age? How can humility be measured?
What is the current situation of humility in companies? How big is the percentage of humble leaders?
What is the impact of practiced humility? What benefits are there for employees, the company or the managers themselves?
How to put humility into practice? How can you really see yourself in all your strengths and weaknesses?
How can you truly appreciate others? Are you actually able to see enough of what they do?
How can you always be open? Is there a limit to what you can learn?
How can you perceive and keep the bigger picture in mind? During your everyday work?
Are there limits to humility? Times or situations where humility is out of place? What can go wrong if I use humility at the wrong time or with the wrong people?
Are there relevant differences in humility when it comes to nationality, gender or age?
Is there a difference in humility when it comes to political leaders?
What examples of companies and leaders are there to inspire?
What are the concrete steps that I can take to implement humility in myself, my employees and my organization?
A section of FAQs to answer concrete questions that often crop up during the teaching of humility.

Next to the scientific research, I will share dozens of examples from managers, history as well as military successes and failures. What will these examples be about? About seeing where something humble has happened or – and this is even more important – where, instead, there was a failure, a humility disaster. For many of these disasters, we first have to train our perception. Initially, the response or behavior will look quite ordinary and quite correct to you. Only at second or even a third glance will the debacle reveal itself with all the damage it causes.

Furthermore, four pieces of my own research will be included: In Chapter 3, I go into detail on two quantitative ones that I ran with more than 2,500 participants. The learnings from more than 170 interviews that I ran with Top Executives will be interspersed throughout the whole book.

In Chapter 10, I will dive in more deeply into my research regarding gender, age and nationalities. In Chapter 11, I will refer to a piece of research with more than 200 participants on politics and humility.

What will you be able to do after reading this book?

You will be better at perceiving yourself. In your strength and weaknesses. And understand how and when to show them.
You will recognize where you may not have seen others properly and where you may have failed in appreciation.
You will see the point of being open to learning on more leadership dimensions than you may believe possible right now.
You will determine what your personal bigger picture is and how you can keep that alive during the stress of your daily life.
You will understand what this virtue of humility can and will provide for your employees, your organization and yourself.
Finally, you will know, how to bring forth humility in your area of responsibility and beyond.

What does it take? And here I repeat myself deliberately!

It takes that you do not merely read, but that you reflect again and again about your own experiences, your own situation, your own employees.

That you do not judge the people in the stories, but ask yourself, where have I – perhaps less poignantly – thought, said, done something similar?

And that you already now pat yourself lovingly on the shoulder and praise yourself for having the courage to embrace such an uncool-sounding word as humility. And the courage not only to embrace it verbally but also cognitively, emotionally and with spirit!

Notes
Shaw, B. (1922). Man and Superman: A Comedy and a Philosophy. Brentano’s, First Act.
Artinger, F. M., Artinger, S., & Gigerenzer, G. (2019). CYA: Frequency and causes of defensive decisions in public administration. Business Research, 12(1), 9–25.
   https://twitter.com/paulocoelho/status/871010118867013632?lang=en. Retrieved 12.11.2022.

===== FILE 9/23: xhtml%2fc1.xhtml =====

Chapter 1 The Image of Humility Today

DOI: 10.4324/9781003358015-1

Chickens don’t praise their own soup.

Saying from Martinique

Summary

Humility has negative connotations for some and is not immediately appreciated by all. Professional investors as well as the press need a second glance to treasure the virtue. However, employees as well as managers are yearning for it – seeing it as a prerequisite for dealing with today’s upheavals, crises and opportunities.

In my more than 30 years of experience, I have not often encountered managers who possess the characteristic of humility. Humility is actually the opposite of what we tend to see: Managers become managers precisely because they are not humble.

(Interview No. 8, VP People and Development, 15,000 employees)

It was after one of my classes that a manager connected with me and wanted to share a story. He was a successful HR leader and had been passionate in supporting his board member in organizing this session. The aim had been to showcase humility, the research, how it could be learnt and applied within everyday management. He thanked me and said: “That was a fine discussion. I am delighted that humility was taken on board so enthusiastically. I was not sure, if that was actually possible.” I looked at him in surprise. This was a cooperative insurance, which was no stranger to the idea of humility being something positive. They even had it written in the company’s values. He continued:

I actually have a T-Shirt with the word “humility” printed on it in huge letters. And you know what? Whenever I wear it, I get negative comments on the street. People call me “weirdo,” diss and sneer at me. I bet that would not be the case if the T-Shirt said “Arrogance” or “Narcissism”.

This story made it clear to me that the word “humility” still has some uphill battles to fight before being positively seen. So far “humility” or “humble” and “humble” are not words to open everyone’s heart. Instead, they are often seen as unappealing and can – in the public mind – be linked to being self-effacing, subservient and even sycophantic. When students were asked to describe what the word “humble” meant to them, more than 50 percent answered that someone who is humble feels badly about themselves, is ashamed, sad, lonely or shy.1 About 10 percent of older adults, when prompted to talk about humility, embarked on a story in which they found themselves exposed and humiliated. And while, in general, humility was perceived as a positive virtue, it was not seen as a particularly useful strength in leaders (nor entertainers, which many of us would think can be quite similar…). In addition, the more narcissistic the participants were, the more negatively humility was seen – closer to shame, humiliation and low self-esteem.2 What effect this attitude has on political leaders, we will see in more detail in Chapter 11.

And what about us? Are we actually able to appreciate someone who acts with humility?

Let us begin with a small test: Whom would you rather have for your boss?

The thoughtful manager who struggles with their own “not knowing,” regularly consults the team, emphasizes its achievements, presents luck and chance as the driver for their own successes and their own mistakes as the cause for failures.

Or?

The manager who offers security? The one who moves forward – albeit somewhat noisily – with a clear plan and concrete instructions. The one who pulls us along and neither shares doubts (if there are any) nor failures or weaknesses (even if he or she is aware of them).

Cross your heart.

The first one seems a little cumbersome, less sexy, less alpha, less tangible. And is it not wonderfully convenient to believe in someone who has all the answers? How pleasant to allow oneself to trundle along mindlessly? Submit to the luxury of following without having to do much thinking. Enjoy the comfort of not having to expose one’s mistakes nor be guilty of errors? How could one ever err, if the path was clearly staked out by the wise forces from above?

There are indeed some initial indications that the second type of manager is overly treasured by investors, the press and employees. Let us look at the research.

At First Glance, Professional Investors Do Not Like Humble Executives

We all know that professional investors are experts, so we should be able to rely on their assessment. Correct? Can we really? Doubts have already been sown by those studies that show that professional investors assess and trade companies differently on sunny as compared to cloudy days.3 Or by those studies that reveal how investors prefer to trade companies with names that come early in the alphabet4, companies that have cool tickers such as GEEK for Internet America, GRRR for Lion Country Safari or MOO for United Stockyards5 or generally prettier names6.

These doubts about the rationality of investors are given credence by a study from 2019 that took a look at companies from the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index to see how humble CEOs were faring in the assessment of “expert” investors.7

Firstly, the researchers spent hours searching for video footage from CEOs of these 500 largest listed U.S. companies. For any of the companies where this material was available, they dug into the performance data. The result: 122 CEOs with data of more than 880 years of company performance.

In the next step, the researchers trained external observers to watch the anonymized videos and assess the CEOs’ level of humility according to defined criteria. A kind of anti-ego value.

At the same time, the researchers analyzed the publicly stated expectations of the analysts, the subsequent results published by the companies and, of course, the overall performance of the company on the stock market. What they saw was profoundly human! The analysts had measurably lower expectations of those companies that were led by “humble” CEOs. In the spirit of: “She only ever talks about her team that means she will not be the type of agentic leader we are looking for.” Or “He’s so calm, he admits to errors, no way will he be tough enough to turn the company round.”

Since market performance is strongly driven by whether a company underperforms or overperforms when pitched against expectations, analysts were subsequently thrilled when those companies that they had (foolishly) underestimated performed better than expected. “Wow, this guy is doing really well,” “What a successful lady.” Now something strange happened. The lack of expectation regarding the earnings per share turned into a meaty valuation bonus. Ergo: companies led by humble CEOs eventually delivered a better market performance than those led by unhumble CEOs.

Since this is complex, let us think this through again: Step 1: The analysts underestimate humble CEOs. Step 2: They are positively surprised by the company’s results. Step 3: They give a substantial valuation bonus.

So, in the long run, it is clear that humility does not harm – and we will later see more data on how it actually delivers a more positive bottom-line result.

By the way, analysts actually do not learn to correct this expectation discount in subsequent years! Just like in “Groundhog Day,” the analyst's brain automatically keeps on reacting less positively towards CEOs who are not brimming with ego. As a consequence, they regularly have lower expectations and are regularly astonished to find that “Wow, these CEOs are great,” which, once they realize, they and the entire market consequently reward.

As readers of a book on humility you must therefore sadly face the fact, that at this very moment in time, professional analysts and investors are drivers for egocentric, narcissistic CEOs being more appreciated than the humbler versions. Initially. We as humans tend to be at first more impressed - almost animalistically - when we are confronted with a chest pounding narcissist than with a prudent sage who places focus on his or her team and acknowledges errors. It is only, once we tune into our rationality that this changes. And the more that rationality is bolstered by data, the easier the correction will become.

So, we can expect this automatism to change once humility becomes an “official” value criterion for CEOs. That which happens now only at a second glance will become first and primary.

Take-Away: Gloom turns to light – Professional investors, while surprisingly critical of humble CEOs, ultimately award a premium for their good results.

The Business Press Loves Simple Explanations

What about the business press? Are expert journalists prepared to recognize and appreciate humility in organizations?

In one way, of course, they are. The number of articles on humility and leadership has skyrocketed in recent years. Typical titles are “Do You Have Enough Humility to Lead?,” “How to Build Humility, the Magic Ingredient in Leaders’ Success,” “Why You Need Humility to Lead through Change” or “The Importance of Leader Humility in a Downturn.”

Board members also regularly speak publicly of their own humility as regards the tasks, responsibility and honors they face or receive.

Yet if you look at the regular run-of-the-mill company portraits, there is still little space for humility. Instead, most business journalists tend to religiously adhere to the story of the great executive hero that drives a company up to new heights or down into old pits. The performance of the company and even the industry is more or less exclusively judged by the CEOs,8 regardless of how often they may try to communicate to the outside world that it was the employees who were instrumental in creating the success, or that these positive results were largely due to the dynamics of the industry or that they were simply lucky.

Why is it so difficult for business journalists to follow a different tack? Because it is easier for the human brain to make a connection between only two points of reference: CEO and company performance. A straightforward story that is much easier to explore than all the thousand other reasons for success and failure. This neuronal default setting results in articles with sentences like the following:

Welch has delivered extraordinary growth, increasing the market value of GE from just $12 billion in 1981 to about $280 billion today. No one, not Microsoft’s William H. Gates III or Intel’s Andrew S. Grove, not Walt Disney’s Michael D. Eisner or Berkshire Hathaway’s Warren E. Buffett, not even the late Coca-Cola chieftain Roberto C. Goizueta or the late Wal-Mart founder Sam Walton has created more shareholder value than Jack Welch.9

Or somewhat more up-to-date:

More assertive, more intelligent, more structured - top managers have to be above average in many fields. Many of them are. But only one of them becomes Manager of the Year. This year it is Oliver Bäte. Since 2015 he has been Chairman of the Board of Management of Allianz S.E., one of the largest insurance groups in the world. And since then, Bäte has been delivering: Allianz posted a record profit in 2018 and has been shining for years with an above-average dividend yield.10

This halo awarded to existing CEOs of successful companies leads to newcomers being regarded hugely critically. Look at what happened to Tim Cook of Apple. A 2011 editorial of the Huffington Post predicted that Apple would never recover from Jobs’ death:

His management, even his vision is replaceable. But that brilliant sense of taste, to which Apple owes their success, will not be matched by the next regime.

In other words, the external observer cares little about what dozens of other reasons might have contributed to the success of the company. They find it hard to look beyond the public facade into the detailed workings of a company. They focus more on the Steve Jobs of this world than on chief designers like Jony Ive who shaped the design of Apple products far more than Jobs did. They overlook that Tim Cook was the one who had already been running the operations of Apple for many years and who had also ensured that design was a top priority.

In short, they tend to overlook the sum of people, structures, processes, culture and market environments that determines any company’s success. Of course, this is difficult to see and evaluate from the outside, making it so much easier to look to the CEO for explanations of why something is happening. And it has a wonderfully reassuring effect to work with this simple linearity. “A did X, that is why Y happened.”

By the way, if asked about themselves, external observers tend to reject any simplistic arguments of cause and effect. Any journalist worth their salt would argue: “What we write and how we perform as a paper is primarily our doing and not that of our editor.”

So, what will happen if a humble CEO tries to place employees into the spotlight, the company culture, the market environment and the bigger picture? The eyes of the press and with it the eyes of the readers will stay fixed squarely and unfairly on the activities of the CEO. UNTIL! Until both readers and writers begin to look beyond simple models of causality and take time to let complexity sink in.

Which is not to deny that a CEO or a manager can have a powerful impact. (We will revisit this in more detail later.) Yet what we all must learn to see is that many concrete business results are also due to other factors.

Take-Away: Causality defeats humility – Many journalists see causality in the person alone, even in someone who acts with humility - that is, the individual ego and individual achievements are seen as the all-justifying yardstick - not, on the other hand, the colleagues, the employees or the situation.

Only Employees Already Know that They Want Humility

The final question then is: What do employees want from their CEOs? Well, they are actually clever and differentiate. On the one hand they see the person at the helm as the source of much that is good or evil. 45 percent of 1,700 managers surveyed in 2015 emphasized that the company's reputation mainly depends on its CEO.11 And 50 percent believe this to be true not only today but also for the future. Why: They claim that CEOs who are positively perceived bring in more investors (87 percent) as well as the right type of media attention (83 percent). Which, as we have seen, is actually a very true representation of the facts.

Employees, though, also have a second perspective – the internal one. And here humility is right at the top of the list. Employee surveys show that humble behavior on the part of their leaders is desired.12 And my research shows (in Figure 1.1) that a full 97 percent of employees see humility for managers as important or very important. When it comes to looking at their direct manager, they are slightly less needy with 89 percent. For board members, it drops down to still a high 85 percent – presumably honoring the need of the media to see all powerful leader.

Figure 1.1 How important is humility according to the definition?

And even for themselves, they see humility according to the definition (which we will talk about in the next chapter in detail) as relevant with a full 88 percent.

The managers themselves agree as you can see in Figure 1.2. Humility scores high for all – most of all for themselves.

Figure 1.2 How important is humility: Answers from CEOs and top managers.

Take-Away: Employees see clearly – Employees are aware of the power attributed to CEOs in the outside world. At the same time, they generally appreciate a humble leader.

Now that we have seen what employees and managers themselves think it is not surprising that humility is a big trend. In early 2022, the term “humble leadership” had more than 67 million Google hits. Journals, magazines and dozens of researchers have also taken up the topic – that means the time must be ripe, correct?

Let us see why today is the right time for humility.

Because we all still remember what happened during the 2010 BP oil spill. CEO Tony Hayward made the mistake of focusing on himself and not the bigger picture and the pain others were experiencing when he said: “I want my life back.” The public was relentless in punishing this conspicuous lack of humility. More recently, think about how egocentric leaders such as Adam Neumann from WeWork or Uber Travis Kalanick lost all public backing. Grandiose narcissism is more and more being seen critically.
Because business leaders are allowed to admit mistakes today without being seen as weak. Just remember how Elon Musk admitted that he had put “too much new technology into the Model 3 all at once.”13 There were no long-term negative repercussions. Nor were there when Zoom CEO Eric Yuan apologized in April 2020 for not having been on top of security measures. The share price showed that this oversight was forgotten in less than two weeks.
Because companies themselves have started to ensure that new positions are filled with humble executives. Head hunters report that they are asked to fill more and more positions with leaders who show this virtue.14 A clear evidence that companies themselves have put the issue on the agenda.
Because digital transformation needs a different kind of leadership. Both research and press agree: “What is needed is leadership that relies less on hierarchy and ego and more on collaboration in a community.”15 Many of my interviews confirm this. Let us take just one quote: “In my view, digitization requires humility. It simply fits better to the way people have to work together.” (Interview No. 11, Head Learning & Development, 300,000 employees)
The rapid changes, the obligation to cooperate more with customers and even with competitors, requires a different mental attitude. In the age of New Work with fewer status symbols to go around, with the clear need to share and distribute leadership, there is no room left for individual hubris and excessive ego.
And finally, because the downside of ego-focused leaders is just too great! A full 70 percent of employee motivation depends on the manager!16 From motivation stems productivity. And if the manager is only focused on himself or herself, not on the employees or the bigger picture, the motivation in the department or company will plummet.

Before you whole-heartedly now embrace the concept of humility and become part of the cultural shift, let us look first in the next chapter whether you buy the definition of humility as research proposes it.

Notes
Wright, J. C., Nadelhoffer, T., Perini, T., Langville, A., Echols, M., & Venezia, K. (2017). The psychological significance of humility. The Journal of Positive Psychology, 12(1), 3–12.
Exline, J. J., & Geyer, A. L. (2004). Perceptions of humility: A preliminary study. Self and Identity, 3(2), 95–114.
Goetzmann, W. N., Kim, D., Kumar, A., & Wang, Q. (2015). Weather-induced mood, institutional investors, and stock returns. The Review of Financial Studies, 28(1), 73–111.
Itzkowitz, J., Itzkowitz, J., & Rothbort, S. (2016). ABCs of trading: Behavioral biases affect stock turnover and value. Review of Finance, 20(2), 663–692.
Head, A., Smith, G., & Wilson, J. (2009). Would a stock by any other ticker smell as sweet? The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, 49(2), 551–561.
Pensa, P. (2006). Nomen est Omen: How company names influence short-and long-run stock market performance. Available at SSRN 924171.
Petrenko, O. V., Aime, F., Recendes, T., & Chandler, J. A. (2019). The case for humble expectations: CEO humility and market performance. Strategic Management Journal, 40(12), 1938–1964.
Hayward, M. L., Rindova, V. P., & Pollock, T. G. (2004). Believing one’s own press: The causes and consequences of CEO celebrity. Strategic Management Journal, 25(7), 637–653.
Business Week. (1998).
   https://www.handelsblatt.com/politik/deutschland/manager-des-jahres-wie-allianz-chef-oliver-baete-die-versicherung-zukunftsfaehig-macht/25327760.html?ticket=ST-369087-G7ySJgOEeOGzfGG1iItd-ap6. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
Shandwick, W. (2015). The CEO reputation premium: Gaining advantage in the engagement era. https://www.webershandwick.com/news/the-ceo-reputation-premium-a-new-era-of-engagement/#:~:text=Weber%20Shandwick%2C%20in%20partnership%20with,Advantage%20in%20the%20Engagement%20Era.&text=This%20new%20era%20is%20marked,to%20help%20grow%20the%20business. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
   https://www.fastcompany.com/90351437/we-need-more-humble-leaders-heres-how-to-get-them. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
   https://roundtables.abl.org/admit-mistakes-correct-move-on-elon-musk/. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
Companies hunt for CEOs with high EQ and humility, Maratha Singh, 15.4.2019, Times of India. Retrieved 2.3.2020.
   https://www.welt.de/wirtschaft/wirtschaftsgipfel/article173102529/Digitalisierung-Bosse-muessen-ihr-Ego-zurueckschrauben.html. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
   https://www.gallup.com/workplace/231593/why-great-managers-rare.aspx. Retrieved 12.11.2022.

===== FILE 10/23: xhtml%2fc2.xhtml =====

Chapter 2 Defining and Measuring Humility for Everyday Business

DOI: 10.4324/9781003358015-2

Humility is not thinking less of yourself; it is thinking of yourself less.

Rick Warren (American author born 1954)

Summary

Humility has long been regarded as consisting of moderation, prudence and self-knowledge. In recent centuries, it acquired negative connotations of being connected to weakness, servility and naivety. Modern research has succeeded in shining a brighter light on the term by focusing on its four core elements. Humility is not seen as a leadership style, but as a fundamental virtue that underlies any leadership behavior.

The Stoics are best at humility; they do not take themselves so seriously.

(Interview No. 109, Managing Partner, 1,600 employees)

It was one of my first evenings as a fifteen-year-old German girl at an English all-girls boarding school. One of the six other girls in my dormitory was fed up with me. She shouted: “That’s not the way we pack, that’s not the way we wash, that’s not the way we speak in England.”

My reaction? I squabbled back, thought the girl stupid and shifted into a satisfying mode of hostility for the next few years.

Only later did I understand that what I would have needed there and then was a view from the balcony. An understanding of who I was, an understanding of where these other girls had come from culturally, a willingness to learn about them and see that there was a bigger issue at stake here: I was in their culture; it and I were hugely different. I should have prepared myself for the difference. Instead, I had been quite human and quite stupid at the same time: I had simply jumped into school life, acting on autopilot as I had always done, observing little and listening even less.

My four years there ended up being a glorious experience. But a bit of humility as defined today would have made it yet greater.

Looking at Humility in the Historical Perspective

Historically, humility is truly an old hat. Look at the ancient Chinese, for whom humility encompassed moderation and wisdom and was the key to good leadership.

600 years before Christ, the philosopher Lao Tzu wrote politically astute:

Why is the sea king of a hundred streams? Because it lies below them. Therefore, it is the king of a hundred streams.

If the sage would guide the people, he must serve with humility. If he would lead them, he must follow behind.

In this way when the sage rules, the people will not feel oppressed; When he stands before them, they will not be harmed.

The whole world will support him and will not tire of him. Because he does not compete, He does not meet competition.1

Some 300 years later, the philosopher Xunzi stressed that a successful leader should be “strong but not brutal; humble but not inferior.”

Clearly, humility already then had nothing to do with being of “lesser” value. Hiding one's light under a bushel, being overmodest or weak is not part of the historical definition.

The Greeks followed along the same path. They took for granted that everyone should see themselves in their weaknesses and strengths. Admittedly, the famous phrase “know thyself,” written on the pillars of the Temple of Apollo at Delphi around 450 BC, was first intended to focus us on our limitations. Yet, with Plato around 330 BC, the emphasis shifted. We as humans can develop and build on what we already have. The consequence: in any given moment our focus should not only be on our faults but also on what it is that we are good at. How to focus on both at the same time? Using “wise perception,” a tool that was advocated by the Greeks and seen as trainable.

Plato’s contemporary Xenophon went one step further and defined humility as THE core virtue which is instrumental in allowing our other virtues to shine. He used the example of a war horse whose strength and power only unfolds when both are under the control of humility.2 Men are seen as being no different to horses: Their powers only truly shine once controlled by humility.

Aristotle expanded this Greek understanding of humility with his principle of moderation. Wisdom lies in avoiding extremes and taking a middle position.3 This means no excessive self-confidence but also no feelings of inferiority; an ego that is not overly strong but also not too weak. At the heart of every human should lie balance.

The Stoics found this balance in removing overpowering and draining emotions from reality. They also focused on the bigger picture. Emperor Marcus Aurelius perceived it as follows in his “Meditations”:

You have the power to strip away many superfluous troubles located wholly in your judgment, and to possess a large room for yourself embracing in thought the whole cosmos, to consider everlasting time, to think of the rapid change in the parts of each thing, of how short it is from birth until dissolution, and how the void before birth and that after dissolution are equally infinite.4

How do religions look at humility? Buddhism sees it as a positive and necessary condition: First I must recognize this very self of mine, the extent and the demands of my own ego, before I can consciously let it go.

It was the monotheistic religions that struck a blow at the concept. Humility was instrumentalized for a hierarchy, in which individuals find themselves below the authority of God and the church.5 Mankind must accept this low and inferior position and under no circumstances rebel against either.

This view fits well with the roots of the German term for “humility” which is “Demut.” The original term “diemuotī” comes from Old High German and consists of the two words “serve” (dienen) (dionōn) and “courage” (Mut) (muot). While today many tend to look at the word courage as the key element of humility, the Church for centuries looked to the serving and obeying part. Independent thinking and courage were not emphasized. To be brave against God, to be an advocate of mankind with its strengths, was not a focus.

Of course, there were also thinkers such as Thomas Aquinas, who cleverly posed humility in relation to the size of the soul – the greater the humility, the larger the soul. Only he who was humble could think big, feel big, be big-hearted. Yet, in general, the focus in an authoritarian church was directed towards obedience.

It was this emphasis on service and submission that led the philosopher Nietzsche to revile humility as the morality of a slave – turning man into a “writhing worm.”6 The Übermensch, once he had finally developed, would no longer be in need of humility. Instead, Nietzsche saw humility as “one of those dangerous, slanderous ideals behind which cowardice and weakness, and therefore submission to God, lie hidden.”7

Charles Dickens put up a monument to this negative view of humility in David Copperfield. The character of Uriah Heep professes to be “umble, very umble” and is merely pushing sham humility into the face of others while sneakily pursuing his own evil plans.

Humility Today

In recent decades, the image of humility has changed considerably. For most of today’s philosophers and theologians, humility is powerful and has to do with a sense of proportion, self-knowledge and, of course, self-esteem. The etymology of the word “humility” is used to bolster this view. Just as the word “human,” “humility” also stems from the Latin word “humus” which has to do with earth and being grounded. When are you grounded? When you do not believe yourself to be greater than you really are. But you also do not need to turn yourself into mud!

A few examples for this change in perception:

The British Rabbi Jonathan Sacks sees humility as an appreciation of oneself, one's talents, abilities and virtues as well as an appreciation of others coupled with an openness to the world.8
The philosopher Christian Halbig focuses on the value we assign to ourselves: “Humility without self-respect becomes sheer despair at the demands of the moral laws.”9
The American professor of philosophy, Robert Solomon, compares humility to a speech given at a film award ceremony. Arrogance and false pride should be avoided. But self-mortification is also wrong. “Humility need not be pathetic; it is often no more than a realistic assessment of one's own contribution and the recognition of the contribution of others.”10

In consequence, humility is not about being modest or misjudging oneself. It is merely about having a different focus. A focus towards others. Thinking less about yourself and more about others as well as the bigger picture.

Management thinker Jim Collins already made this clear in his 2001 classic From Good to Great:

Level 5 leaders embody a paradoxical mix of personal humility and professional will. Level 5 leaders look out the window to attribute success to factors other than themselves. When things go poorly, however, they look in the mirror and blame themselves, taking full responsibility.11

At the same time, humility is also about excellence. Humble leaders are seen to have outstanding competence. In recent years, this has even become a prerequisite. In other words, only those who are excellent can be humble.12

Leadership research since 2012 has exploded on the topic. Its core findings?

Firstly, it has established that humility is not an additional leadership style (more details on this in the FAQs) but a foundational virtue. This virtue alongside the values that come with it allows you to employ all leadership styles that are needed.

Secondly, it has identified four elements of humility and tested the concept with samples of more than 35,000 employees and managers to ensure that this is not old wine in new skins, but a valuable stand-alone concept which delivers measurable results.

Humility is shown by those who demonstrate the following:13

A clear willingness to assess themselves accurately in their weaknesses but also in their strengths (and be willing to show them where it makes sense for the bigger picture).
A displayed appreciation of the strengths and contributions of others.
An ability to continuously learn and be open.
A cultivated understanding that the world is bigger than oneself. This is the idea of “self-transcendence” and even “spirituality.”14

Some researchers explicitly name this fourth element: Only those can have humility who recognize that they are a small part of a bigger whole, are finite, easily replaceable and that many of their successes are due to chance, luck and circumstances; who can put themselves in perspective with their demands, their wishes as well as with their mistakes and failures. For those who do not name this self-transcendence explicitly, it is seen as an integral part of the other three points: If leaders assess themselves correctly, they see that they only play a small role in a larger context. If leaders appreciate others, the focus shifts from a mono-causal ego to the bigger world. If leaders are open and willing to learn, their understanding grows as to how much bigger the world is and how little each of us can ever know and influence.

A quick look at each of the four core elements before we go into more detail in the later chapters.

Assessing Yourself Correctly

A lady went up to Picasso’s table in a restaurant. She asked him to scribble a picture on her napkin. Whatever it turned out to be, she would be willing to pay any price. Picasso did as she asked, then gave her the napkin and announced: “$10,000.” The lady was stunned: “But that only took you 30 seconds.” And Picasso replied: “No, it took 40 years.”15

This is humility in the modern sense of the word. Picasso did not hide his light under a bushel – he correctly assessed himself, his decades of striving for perfection and quoted a price that reflected that.

Should – as is most likely – this beautiful story be apocryphal, a similar one concerning the American painter James Whistler (1834–1903) is vouched for. In 1878 he was called up before court to defend his painting “Nocturne in Black and Gold.” The accusation was: “It has only taken you two days to complete the painting, yet you charge 200 Guineas (today about $27,000). This is usury.” Whistler replied: “No, I ask it for the knowledge of a lifetime.”16

Humility is about knowing yourself in an objective, not ego-blind manner with all your weaknesses but also with your strengths. Hence: If I can do something optimally and it helps the bigger picture, I may and must say so.

Where then, you may ask, lies the difference between humility and arrogance? The answer is simple: the humble person does not revel or luxuriate in what they are great at, they do not spend much time thinking or talking about it. They look at it like their individual height. You have X centimeters to your name, but waste no time thinking about it, nor do you praise yourself for it or spend energy to bring your height to the fore of other peoples’ minds.17

As to weaknesses: if there is something that I am not good at, I should at least know it. Then I can do something about it. Or employ people who are better at it than me. And where needed, I should also show my weaknesses and errors.

Sounds easy? Well, there are considerable obstacles on the path to clear self-knowledge. Which ones and how to overcome them, we will see in Chapter 5.

Appreciating Others

Panasonic founder Matsushita was eating in a fine restaurant. During the main course, he asked the cook to come to his table. The chef rushed from the kitchen, anxious as to what might have gone wrong with such an important customer. Matsushita smiled at the nervous man and said that he wanted to apologize. He had not been able to finish the steak, which he had enjoyed very much. It was vital for him to say this face to face. Otherwise, Matsushita was fearful that the cook would feel bad seeing a half-eaten steak brought back into the kitchen.18

Humility is about appreciating others. It is an interpersonal virtue that thrives on valuing others for what they do and what their contribution is. While this sounds easy as pie, it is often surprisingly difficult. Depending on the piece of research, between 25 percent19 and 59 percent20 of employees complain that they are not appreciated at work. Which lack of appreciation has a considerable and measurable impact on their motivation and performance.

A typical example of an accidental failure in appreciation is the following situation:

In the annual feedback meeting that will also determine the bonus, the manager asks how the employee evaluates the success of an event that he had organized with some colleagues. The employee proudly and enthusiastically describes what had been done, how much the clients enjoyed the event, how fine the outcome was…. only to be stopped short by the manager saying: “That is not what I heard. I heard from the other team members that you had a tough time as a team. Arguing and fighting!”

At this moment, the meeting might as well be stopped – there is little that can be done to repair the damage. The employee will not feel appreciated and as a consequence will not be willing to listen. By not having said something positive about the event first, the manager has ruined her chances of discussing how the team might perform more harmoniously together next time. Is the manager an evil person? Most likely not! Only a person mindlessly focusing on the one point she had jotted down about the event. Instead of first listening, appreciating and then leading the employee to gain an understanding of where things might be improved in the future. Which then could have led to an interesting discussion about team development and forming, storming, norming and performing – a discussion which now will never take place.

On the other hand, even a little appreciation can quickly break down barriers, as seen in this example:

There was one participant in a management development program whom everyone found challenging. He was an elderly gentleman, just before retirement, white hair. It was late in a multi-modular seminar that the topic of how to hold team meetings came up. At the end of the discussion, the gentleman suddenly spoke up: he had been working in the company for years and had recently been assigned to a new manager. He knew that he had been passed on as a problematic case, simply for the manager to sit out. The manager had then established team meetings and he, the employee, was asked to give an update on his work. “This manager was the first person in all of 35 years to ask what it is that I do.” This was touching and impressive: on the one hand, the humility of the employee, who was willing to get involved in the process, on the other hand, the humility of the manager, who had not given up on this employee but instead had asked and listened. The other participants had respect for the journey that this participant had made. After all, he was just a person who had never been properly appreciated.

(Interview No. 12, VP Development Change, 100,000 employees)

So while appreciation sounds so easy and most of us believe ourselves to be good at it, we often stumble. How to appreciate correctly, we will see in Chapter 6.

Openness and Willingness to Learn

In my late thirties, I talked to a 70-year-old professor from America about e-books and said that – as an owner of more than “real” 5,000 books – I would probably never read books this way. The venerable-looking gentleman smiled at me and said: “We have now put all the materials for the MBA students on an e-reader. I personally like using my reader for textbooks and for novels when travelling.”

I was caught up short and realized that, while being only half his age, I clearly had to work on my openness towards the new.

Humility is based on the inner conviction that both personal growth and behavioral change are possible. For many, this feels like a liberation: “I don't have to keep on being like this or acting like this if I don't want to.” This mindset of being both a grounded person and capable of transformation is a great catalyst for change. It prevents people from constructing excuses for self-stagnation, as so many tend to do.21

When it comes to learning, there is one statistic that really stands out: 60 percent of managers complain that they have never received a single day of training on how to lead.22 This is a shocking piece of information. Is it not? But please pause here. It is definitely sad that companies make no concerted effort to arm their managers with necessary leadership skills. Yet, most likely we also have a real lack of humility in the managers themselves.

This is the first example where it becomes clear that a lack of humility is often apparent only at second glance. Initially, we are all out to chide the companies. But at second glance, we ask ourselves: Who of these managers looked for a training course by themselves? Who sought a conversation with their leadership or with their HR? Who spent some of their own money to invest in learning how to fulfill the new role that they had CHOSEN to accept? Clearly none of the 60 percent. After all, it is so wonderfully practical to blame the organization for one's own ignorance and incompetence.

This lack of humility as seen in an unwillingness to learn and embrace the new also explains the following: In the year 2014, only 34 percent of all employees actually aspired to become managers. For men, this was 40 percent, for women a sad 29 percent. And only 7 percent of all employees wanted to become board members.23 By 2020 this had even become worse: only 9 percent of all employees wanted to become any form of manager.24 This is an indication that in many of us there is – at one level – a fundamental unwillingness to learn and develop new skills.

In Chapter 7, we will see what all can be learnt and how to be truly open.

The Bigger Picture

Abraham Lincoln was asked why he had taken three of his closest rivals into government. Every single one of them had fiercely attacked him during the previous election campaign. There was no reason to assume that they would become meeker now and cause him less trouble. Lincoln countered: “I had looked the party over and concluded that these were the very strongest men. Then I had no right to deprive the country of their services.”25

A good manager should see the bigger picture. Not only where he or she stands in the corporation but also how the members of their team are faring, what the company needs and what role they and the company play in the world. Yet sadly many seem to struggle with this. Why? One reason is that on a simple biological level we perceive through our own eyes, ears and through our own thinking. It is no wonder then that we initially pay the greatest attention to ourselves as individual beings. At the same time, we are also aware that we live in societies and need these to survive. This actually pushes us to seeing the bigger picture.

Since societies are different, it is no wonder that at first glance the way to perceive the bigger picture differs all over the world. Researchers, for example, have shown that the Japanese tend to focus more on the whole, whereas Americans focus on the more prominent and the individual.26

Does this national result always holds true? Is one nation condemned to be more aware of the bigger picture and the other more of seeing the largest fish? No. It turns out that the way we perceive is strongly related to social mobility. The less people feel they are able to look for new relationships, the more they depend on the existing society, the more they train their brain to perceive the bigger picture.27 This applies to a society like Japan just as much as it does to a small village in the Cotswolds or the Rocky Mountains in the times of Corona.

In other words, we humans can train ourselves for what we need to see. And in the case of a manager who wants to be a good leader, we need not only to see how the team is doing, where it stands within the department, how the company is faring, but also what is happening in society and how humans are connected with each other and even with the planet.

We will see in Chapter 8 how you can identify your bigger picture and defend it in everyday life.

What Managers and Employees Say about Humility

Let us now look at what managers and employees say about the term and the concept of “humility.” A few quotes from my interviews.

Humility has to do with inner stature, knowing who you are and who you are not.

(Interview No. 22, Head HR, 21,000 employees)

Humility is about respect for everybody else – regardless of where you stand in society. It is the realization that you cannot be successful on your own. Much has to be right: Timing, culture, country, people, conditions. Humility is valuable when you have a reason to be arrogant but you are not. Humble is not submissive – it is not about thinking low or less about yourself. Instead, it is about respecting yourself.

(Interview No. 29, Group Head Customer Experience and CSR, 27,000 employees)

Humility has nothing to do with being a wuss. It’s about appreciative leadership, real interest, listening properly and admitting when one is wrong.

(Interview No. 13, CFO, 3,900 employees)

For me humility is also about gratitude. Becoming aware again and again that I am in a very privileged position.

(Interview No. 102, CEO, 1,800 employees)

I follow the oracle of Delphi – do nothing to excess.

(Interview No. 42, CTO, 7,000 employees)

98 percent of those interviewed agreed with the definition of humility as proposed by research. The remaining 2 percent struggled with being a “small” part of the bigger picture. They feared that the focus on smallness could lead to lethargy.

When asked to talk about humility in their own words, there was mention of being “down-to-earth,” “working together as equals,” “appreciating everyone regardless of whether doorman or CEO” as well as about “asking for feedback with an open heart,” the courage to “involve people across hierarchies,” “asking for help,” “admitting when you are wrong,” “allowing others to convince you” and finally “willingness to put the interests of the group above your own.”

Two interviewees would have preferred not to use the term “humility” and resort to “gratitude” or “vulnerability” instead, but the overwhelming majority liked the definition and the concept.

One interviewee summed it up very nicely:

The other day someone said about an actor: He takes the audience seriously and sees himself as not especially important. For the humble manager that means: They take employees, competitors and customers very seriously and do not see themselves as especially important.

(Interview No. 8, VP People and Development, 15,000 employees)

Quantitative research with hundreds of employees confirmed this view of humility. The word cloud (Figure 2.1) shows that most see humility in a positive light. Being concerned with the bigger picture, accepting things, being grateful and able to admit to mistakes. Only a few negative elements come up, such as being servile or restraining strengths.

Figure 2.1 What is seen as humility.

So, in general, if you ask employees and managers to reflect about the topic of humility, the understanding is very close to the modern, non-authoritarian version of researchers.

What about you? How does the word “humility” sound to you?

A few words about the use of the word “humility” in this book. I have to accept that for some the words “humility” and “humble” still carry elements of weakness, servility, being overmodest or of being humiliated. I hope that the meaning of the word will slowly change for you during the course of the book and morph into something strong and powerful.

Bob Stahl, a wonderful meditation teacher from the US told me the following: “Once you realize that the opposite of humility – narcissism and egocentricity – causes so much suffering, then you understand how humility becomes a greater pathway for deep listening and mutual respect that fosters understanding, connection and interconnection.”

My hope is also that those of you that are skeptical regarding the word give the concept behind it a chance. The following acronym may help in shifting the focus to the concept behind humility.

Humility in a nutshell:

Humble are leaders who
Unveil themselves to themselves as well as others
Measure others positively
Believe in openness and learning
Look to the bigger picture
End the rule of their ego
Measuring Humility

How can we measure humility correctly? You can imagine that it is not very helpful to ask someone: “Excuse me, is your direct supervisor humble? On a scale of 1 to 10?”

This sort of question inevitably leads to mis-reporting on several levels. Many have no clear concept of what exactly the term “humility” refers to. It may be that for some the word is primarily about being modest, submissive, holding back. For others it may have something to do with religion and adhering to authorities. Whatever – it is quite clear that you will elicit many wrong answers.

If you answer the question about yourself, other dangers arise: Someone who full well knows their strengths and weaknesses and tries to lead humbly may consider themselves far less humble than their narcissistic colleague. Why? Because they will have a clear idea of where there is still room for improvement compared to someone who is radiating hubris.

For this reason, only some of the more than 22 different questionnaires developed in recent years to measure humility are suitable for this book. Namely those that a) are not (only) completed by the manager themselves and b) ask about the key elements of humility without using the term “humility.”

My preferred scale is the Owens' Expressed Humility Scale from 2013.28 It typically has, what is important in research circles, a high internal consistency – the so-called Cronbach Alpha – of 0.92 to 0.96, which is excellent. I have supplemented this scale with three questions on the subject of the bigger picture from Ou's questionnaire, also highly valued in research circles.

If you would like to see where you stand, I suggest following a three-step process.

First answer these 12 questions for yourself (see Table 2.1). Be honest with yourself. Only you will see the results.

Table 2.1 Measuring Humility – Self-Perspective
On a scale of 1–5 (1 = strongly disagree and 5 = strongly agree)	1	2	3	4	5


I actively seek feedback, even if it is critical

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




I admit it when I don’t know how to do something

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




I acknowledge when others have more knowledge and skills than I do

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




I take notice of others’ strengths

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




I often compliment others on their strengths

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




I show appreciation for the unique contributions of others

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




I am willing to learn from others

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




I am open to the ideas of others

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




I am open to the advice of other

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




I try to make the world a better place

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




I see myself as a small part of a larger whole

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




I believe that not everything is under my control

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

Now answer the questions again but with a twist; How do you think your employees perceive you? Take a mental average – as if your employees are just now meeting over coffee. One of them asks these questions and the group has to come up with an average score (Table 2.2).

Table 2.2 Measuring Humility – Assumed Perspective of Employees
On a scale of 1–5 (1 = strongly disagree and 5 = strongly agree)	1	2	3	4	5


X actively seeks feedback, even if it is critical

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




X admits it when they don’t know how to do something

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




X acknowledges when others have more knowledge and skills than themselves

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




X takes notice of others’ strengths

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




X often compliments others on their strengths

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




X shows appreciation for the unique contributions of others

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




X is willing to learn from others

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




X is open to the ideas of others

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




X is open to the advice of others

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




X tries to make the world a better place

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




X sees him/herself as a small part of a larger whole

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




X believes that not everything is under their control

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

Most managers will now have two different results. For the vast majority of respondents, the answers to the first questionnaire will be more positive than those to the second. Once people focus their mind on which of their intentions are outwardly visible grades plummet. Why? Now we realize that we may only be appreciating three of our ten employees regularly, or that we are mainly asking for feedback from a small circle of trusted peers.

For some managers, it is the other way round – that the second questionnaire shows better results than the first. This could be an indication of the so-called Imposter Syndrome, which you will hear about later. If your scores are considerably less in the first questionnaire, you may actually be underselling yourself to yourself.

It would be ideal if – as a third step – you distribute this questionnaire to your team and, once completed, have it aggregated. Whether this is done anonymously or openly depends on your company culture. You can decide whether to ask for “This person” or “My manager.” That is only a matter of individual taste (Table 2.3).

Table 2.3 Measuring Humility – Genuine Perspective of Employees
On a scale of 1–5 (1 = strongly disagree and 5 = strongly agree)	1	2	3	4	5


This person actively seeks feedback, even if it is critical

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




This person admits it when they don’t know how to do something

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




This person acknowledges when others have more knowledge and skills than themselves

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




This person takes notice of others’ strengths

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




This person often compliments others on their strengths

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




This person shows appreciation for the unique contributions of others

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




This person is willing to learn from others

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




This person is open to the ideas of others

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




This person is open to the advice of others

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




This person tries to make the world a better place

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




This person sees him/herself as a small part of a larger whole

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




This person believes that not everything is under their control

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

Once you have the results, you can see where you stand in comparison to thousands of other managers, as we will see in the next chapter.

All questionnaires are available for download at www.humility-book.com. You simply have to enter the code Humility-24/7. You can also connect with me if you are interested in comparing your results with others.

What is a good score? One in which all three versions of the questionnaire result in an average score across all 12 questions of more than 4.0. Then you can count yourself among the humble leaders and expect to reap the benefits of humility as described in the following chapters.

Notes
   https://www.wussu.com/laotzu/laotzu66.html. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
Žiaran, P. (2015). Humility and self-esteem as key predictors of ethical attitude in leadership. Procedia Economics and Finance, 34, 689–696. The Greeks have the word “Praus” for humility, which is often translated as meeekness.
Molyneaux, D. (2003). “Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth”–An aspiration applicable to business? Journal of Business Ethics, 48(4), 347–363.
Aurelius, M. (2013). Marcus Aurelius: Meditations, Books 1–6. Oxford University Press.
Morris, J. A., Brotheridge, C. M., & Urbanski, J. C. (2005). Bringing humility to leadership: Antecedents and consequences of leader humility. Human Relations, 58(10), 1323–1350.
Nietzsche, F. W., & Hollingdale, R. J. (1909). Beyond Good and Evil: Prelude to a Philosophy of the Future. TN Foulis.
Article Demut. In: Martin Gessmann (Hrsg.): Philosophisches Wörterbuch. 23. Auflage. Kröner, Stuttgart, 2009, ISBN 978-3-520-01323-1.
   https://www.chabad.org/library/article_cdo/aid/83807/jewish/On-Humility.htm. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
Halbig, C. (2018). Demut und Großgesinntheit. In Liebe–eine Tugend? (pp. 335–356). Springer VS, Wiesbaden.
Solomon, R. C. (2003). A Better Way to Think About Business: How Personal Integrity Leads to Corporate Success. Oxford University Press, USA quoted in Frostenson, M. (2016). Humility in business: A contextual approach. Journal of Business Ethics, 138(1), 91–102.
Collins, Jim. Good to Great: Why Some Companies Make the Leap and Others Don’t. Instaread, 2016.
Norcross, M. A., & Manning, M. R. (2019). Humility as an enabler of organizational growth and change. Research in Organizational Change and Development.
Owens, B. P., & Hekman, D. R. (2016). How does leader humility influence team performance? Exploring the mechanisms of contagion and collective promotion focus. Academy of Management Journal, 59(3), 1088–1111.
Naseer, S., Syed, F., Nauman, S., Fatima, T., Jameel, I., & Riaz, N. (2019). Understanding how leaders’ humility promotes followers’ emotions and ethical behaviors: Workplace spirituality as a mediator. The Journal of Positive Psychology, 15, 407–419.
McCormack, M. H. (2016). What They Don’t Teach You at Harvard Business School: Notes From a Street-Smart Executive. Bantam.
Whistler, J. M. (1967). The Gentle Art of Making Enemies. Courier Corporation.
Wright, J. C., Nadelhoffer, T., Perini, T., Langville, A., Echols, M., & Venezia, K. (2017). The psychological significance of humility. The Journal of Positive Psychology, 12(1), 3–12.
Kotter, J. P. (2012). Matsushita Leadership. Simon and Schuster.
   https://employeebenefits.co.uk/third-employees-poorly-motivated/. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
   https://m.economictimes.com/jobs/88-employees-willing-to-stay-longer-if-appreciated-at-work-survey/articleshow/55202176.cms. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
Grenberg, J. (2005). Kant and the Ethics of Humility: A Story of Dependence, Corruption and Virtue. Cambridge University Press.
   https://www.forbes.com/sites/davidsturt/2018/03/08/10-shocking-workplace-stats-you-need-to-know/#633617d8f3af. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
   https://www.careerbuilder.com/share/aboutus/pressreleasesdetail.aspx?sd=9/10/2014&siteid=cbpr&sc_cmp1=cb_pr841_&id=pr841&ed=12/31/2014. Retrieved 12.11.2022
   https://www.bcg.com/publications/2020/end-management-as-we-know-it. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
   https://www.nytimes.com/2005/11/06/books/review/team-of-rivals-friends-of-abe.html.
Masuda, T., & Nisbett, R. E. (2001). Attending holistically versus analytically: Comparing the context sensitivity of Japanese and Americans. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81(5), 922.
San Martin, A., Schug, J., & Maddux, W. W. (2019). Relational mobility and cultural differences in analytic and holistic thinking. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 116(4), 495.
Owens, B. P., Johnson, M. D., & Mitchell, T. R. (2013). Expressed humility in organizations: Implications for performance, teams, and leadership. Organization Science, 24(5), 1517–1538.

===== FILE 11/23: xhtml%2fc3.xhtml =====

Chapter 3 The Status of Humility in Companies in Our Day and Age

DOI: 10.4324/9781003358015-3

A humble man is not afraid of failure. In fact, he is not afraid of anything, even of himself.

Thomas Merton (US-American Author 1915–1968)

Summary

Only 35 percent of managers score as humble if assessed by their employees. When asked about themselves, people hugely overestimate their own humility. The size of the company has only little relevant impact on the humility of the leader. Regarding the gender of the leader, younger female leaders are somewhat humbler than elder ones. With male leaders, there is no measurable age difference. While spending a long time in a position does not have an impact on humility, the level of leadership in the company has a small effect. Diverse and smaller teams make humble behavior for employees easier. The pandemic situation around Covid 19 seem to have led to a slight increase of humility.

It had been a long day – the board members relished the fact that the official part was over. Dinner had been pleasant and now they were sitting in the glorious medieval hall, graced by a burning fire, wall paintings, deep armchairs, a humidor and full glasses. The hotel had its own sommelier. Between one of the board members, Alex, and the sommelier a conversation started about one of the red wines on offer. After some happy banter, the sommelier opened the bottle that had been decided on and took a sniff. He smiled happily and poured the wine. Alex took a first sip. And frowned. And took a second sip. Decisively he put the glass down and said: “This wine is corked.” The sommelier took up the bottle again, sniffed and said: “I cannot smell it.” Alex insisted: “It is corked.” The sommelier brought a glass for himself, poured and took a sip. “No, sorry, I don’t taste it.” The situation escalated while the onlookers offered different ways of solving the stalemate. The sommelier insisted on the wine being perfect and refused to replace it. This riled Alex so much, that after a few more minutes fighting, he stormed out of the hall and shouted.

I will make sure that this hotel goes down the drain. I will make it known how bad the service is – and if anyone should ask in a year’s time why this hotel is doing so badly, you can tell them, it is thanks to the board member from room 145.

This experience made a big impression on me. Not only was I surprised at the stubbornness of the sommelier. The wine was not cheap at $80 the bottle, but in such a fine hotel a solution should have been found. But even more, I was surprised by the fact that Alex was clearly keen to use his position in order to sanction a merely private irritation.

Yes, surely this was an annoying situation. But was it worthwhile becoming so angry? Driving his status home, while behaving like a child. All day, in the interactions at the workshop, Alex had been hypersensitive. Everyone had to be careful not to tread on his ego, make sure he did not feel attacked or even worse, not taken seriously. It truly astounded me that someone who was so much focused on himself, would be in a position to run a whole company with thousands of employees.

This story stuck, so when I had the chance to do research on humility, I jumped at it. The key question I had was: What is the percentage of non-humble versus humble managers? How many managers act like Alex and are self-focused, status-driven and obviously not in control of their feelings? Are they a small minority? Who is statistically humbler? CEOs? Managers lower down the corporate ladder? Female or male managers? Younger or older managers?

Simply put: What is the status quo of humility in our companies in this day and age?

First, let me confuse you initially with two different research results. A study from 2015 suggests that only one out of four CEOs is seen as humble. These 25 percent are hugely valued: they are perceived as outstanding corporate leaders.1

While the 2016 HR@Moore Survey, when it surveyed 126 CHRO about the narcissistic and humble behaviors of their CEOs came up with a whopping 60 percent seen as humble, and a mere 5 percent as being strong narcissists.2

So at the outset, we have a huge gap between 25 and 60 percent of humble leaders. Who is right? Well, let us look at this in more detail.

Since 2020 I have been conducting various pieces of research on humility with more than 3,500 participants.

The study consisted of three separate parts – the second part of which is still ongoing to generate a global database in which every manager and employee can match themselves.

400 global Executives (50 percent C Level) recruited from my network and via LinkedIn from all over the world assessed their direct reports.
Nearly 2,500 Employees (of whom more than 50 percent were also managers) from all over the world answered questions regarding their direct managers. This happened in three waves. One set of 350 was recruited early 2020 via the online research portal Prolific, another 350 from the employees of the 400 global Executives above, via contacts I have via my executive education programs and via LinkedIn. Another set of 1,800 was recruited in 2021 via Prolific and Upwork and since then via LinkedIn. Out of this whole group of 2,500 approximately 900 also answered a question about narcissism.
Qualitative interviews with more than 170 Top Managers recruited via LinkedIn and other contacts from Executive Education. 55 percent of the interviewees were C-Level. They came from 20 countries, all company sizes and represented most industries. 75 percent were males, 25 percent females

In the quantitative research, a 5-point Likert-Scale was used with answers ranging from “Strongly disagree” via “Disagree”, “Neither nor”, “Agree” to “Strongly agree”. As a result, answers equal and above “Agree” – i.e., 4 out of 5 points – are evaluated as positive. Why? Would you call someone humble if their employee answers to the question: “My manager seeks feedback even when it is critical” with a ‘neither nor”? I guess not.

So anyone described as humble in the upcoming pages, will have got a score of 4 or more out of 5.

Most of the questions did not use the word ‘humility’. Instead, they employed the expanded Expressed Humility Score, which I described in chapter 2, for an evaluation of the 12 behaviors that are seen to demonstrate humility.

Only afterwards, when I shared the extended definition of humility and a short one about narcissism, then and only then were participants asked to rate their leaders and themselves as regards to these definitions.

Other questions such as precedents of humility, personality types and mindsets were also investigated. To these I shall revert later during the course of the book.

In Figures 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 you can see the descriptive statistics for the three parts of the study.

Figure 3.1 400 Top managers assess their employees.

Figure 3.2 2,500 Employees look at their direct manager.

Figure 3.3 More than 170 interview partners.

The result? There are some good and quite a lot of bad news!

Not Enough Managers Show Humility

There are different ways of looking at humility in managers – some with negative, some with a more positive result.

The first option is to look at how many managers scored in the humble zone for all the 12 behaviors. I.e., how many managers exist, where employees said “Agree” or “Agree strongly” to every single of the 12 sub-elements of humility.

That is a sad number of merely 35 percent of truly or somewhat humble managers. With most managers being a wishy washy neutral or worse (Figure 3.4).

Figure 3.4 Percentage of humble managers according to employee assessment of behaviors.

Some may say that one needs not get a high score on all 12 sub-elements, and that it is even more important to see what employees say of their managers once they have heard the definition of humility.

This is a more positive result (see Figure 3.5). Then 23 percent of leaders are seen as truly humble and 44 percent are seen as somewhat humble by their employees.

Figure 3.5 Percentage of humble managers according to employees after reading the definition.

That is not a small number and needs to be appreciated.

YET. Yet, even if you choose to follow this second form of assessment, this 67 percent still means that more a third of managers are obviously not able to give their employees the feeling that they act beyond their own ego, appreciate them, are willing to learn and see the bigger picture.

Where do they fail most?

Figure 3.6 shows the answers. These are now not tied to an individual but are the percentage of leaders for each separate leadership behavior. So, in an individual leader’s case she might get a 5 for praising but only a 2 for asking for feedback. In the graph below you see the summary for all the 2,500 managers assessed and how the breakdown is for each sub-element.

Figure 3.6 Sub-elements of humility that managers are strongly struggling with.

We can see some positive things first. It seems that leaders in general are not too bad when it comes to noticing the strength of others (78 percent), appreciating their contribution (73 percent) and being open to the ideas of others (75 percent). There are some middling scores in the sixties and then some truly bad scores when it comes to seeking feedback (a mere 52 percent), and generally the topic of seeing and being part of the bigger picture (between 45 and 51 percent).

We will discuss later when we come to the stumbling blocks for humility, what to do with these results. Merely let it be noted now, that there is definitely room for improvement!

And remember that this way of looking at it is already seen with a positive slant, since looking at the different sub-elements separately shifts our perception away from the fact, that only 35 percent of managers were seen as humble on all 12 dimensions.

How do you personally evaluate the situation? Please reflect a moment. How high would you say is the percentage of humble leaders around you?

People Overestimate Their Own Humility

Before we dive into different analyses about age, size of company, gender etc. let us look at how the employees (of whom more than 50 percent are managers themselves) who assessed their direct manager see their own personal contributions to humility.

And here (in Figure 3.7) we see the huge danger of assessing your own humility. The overwhelming majority sees themselves as paragons of humility! The lowest score is 68 percent for “trying to make the world a better place”. That seems quite self-critical until we remember that they gave their direct superiors 22 percent less, namely a miserly 45 percent.

Figure 3.7 People see themselves as grandiosely humble.

In general, we are clearly dealing with saints:

99 percent are “willing to learn from others.”
96 percent both “acknowledge when others have more strengths and skills” and “take notice of other’s strengths.”
95 percent are “open to ideas of others.”
93 percent “admit when they do not know how to do something.”

This points gently yet firmly into the direction of overconfidence and wishful thinking. If you look at the difference in average scoring between the managers and their employees the difference becomes yet more striking. For every single behavior, employees score themselves as far better than their leaders – most of the behaviors for all the participants reaching into the golden zone of “Agree” with all of the humble behaviors (see Figure 3.8).

Figure 3.8 There is a strong tendency to overestimate oneself.

And remember how there were only 35 percent of direct managers, who scored a 4 or above on all 12 sub-elements of humility? Yet 70 percent of employees and managers award themselves this halo!

But who knows, possibly this is not hyperbolic but simply correct? Maybe people in their role as employees truly do excel at humble behaviors?

Well, one indication that this is not the case lies in the way direct managers assess their employees. The 400 top managers made clear, that they see considerable gaps to be closed with their employees.

Again, the good news is, that depending on the behavior, they see between 61 and 76 percent of their workforce as getting it right. These figures are quite close to what the employees saw in their leaders – when they looked at the individual sub-elements of humility.

But – as you can see in Figure 3.9 still at least a third of employees appears not able to do something as simple as seeking feedback! And nearly 40 percent fail to compliment others on their strengths – while the employees had believed themselves to be nearly perfect with approx. 80 percent.

Figure 3.9 What top managers see in their employees.

This discrepancy has serious consequences: if I already think of myself as a humble employee or a humble manager (remember about 50 percent of the employees were also managers) why should I look at my behavior more closely? Why try to see myself and the situation more clearly if I am already such a glorious being?

It is vital to be aware of this (over-)confidence: the misperception that you and your team are already doing perfectly fine. In most cases, there is considerable room for improvement and you would be a wise and humble person to recognize that.

Size of Company Only Selectively Relevant

Many interviewees expected that the size of the company would be very relevant. If you look at this word cloud in Figure 3.10 this will become clear. Employees were asked, who in their view shows humility.

Figure 3.10 Who shows humility in business.

Please pause briefly and let the following results resonate:

The largest number of participants responded to the question “Who do you consider to be acting with humility in the business world?” with “No one”!
After “No one” comes “few”, SMEs, NGOs and finally at last two managers Nadella and Gates.

Why would people expect a difference when it comes to SMEs? The assumption or the stereotype is that smaller companies sport a warmer culture, have an all-caring boss, who often is the owner and therefore acts with the best interests of all at heart.

Sorry to have to disappoint you here. Small companies are in no way better than larger ones.

There is no statistical difference in any of the 12 sub-elements of humility as regards the average or the percentage of direct humble managers.

Only on two fronts do smaller companies fare better. Namely, when it comes to managers beyond one’s direct superior. Here – as you can see in Figure 3.11 – mid-size and larger companies do far worse, even though all the scores are generally depressing!

Figure 3.11 Some differences according to the size of the company.

These somewhat better results for smaller companies could have something to do with an internal cohesiveness. The larger the company the fewer details yet the more rumors you will hear about other departments. In addition, with more departments in larger companies, there may be more collisions between the different responsibilities. Due to lack of knowledge or due to regular clashes with other departments it will be easy to assume that other managers are actually far worse. In smaller companies, however, it is easier to see what the other departments are doing, there are also less likely to be overlaps in responsibility.

As regards top management the argument could be that in small companies, I have a chance to actually see, meet and hear the top managers and let them become human to me. In companies with more than 250 or 1,000 or 10,000 employees this is much harder and would need the concerted efforts of Satya Nadella at Microsoft in order for a top manager to make a positive impression on all the employees.

This piece of research therefore should be an incentive for all but in particular for larger companies to look at their internal communication and see how they can succeed in generating a visible culture of humility for the top management.

All in all, however, it must be said, that the differences between the companies by size are not there for the direct manager. Regarding the 12 leadership behaviors all companies do equally well or equally poorly – regardless of whether they have fewer than 251, fewer than 1,000, fewer than 10,000 or more than 10,000 employees.

The Interesting Issue of Men and Women

When arrogance, narcissism and hubris are discussed, there is more mention of men than women. When it comes to humility, instead, many interviewees bring female executives into play. Out of the 170 interviews more than half said, that women are humbler both as employees as well as managers.

This verbal assessment is initially confirmed by data when we look at what superiors say about their direct reports. As you can see in Figure 3.12 the 400 Top managers see their women reports as showing far more humble behavior than their male reports. Between 17 percent (Believes that everything is under control) and 44 percent more (Admits when does not know how to do something) – which is truly a large difference.

Figure 3.12 Top managers see female employees mostly as more humble than men.

On the other hand, you still have more than half of respondents, seeing absolutely no difference in their employees, with some actually crediting men with more humility – going up to 10 percent for complimenting others on their strengths.

Nevertheless, the result for women as employees could be taken as an indication that employees then should also perceive women managers as humbler. Why? If 400 Top managers, say of their direct reports most of whom are leaders themselves (remember more than 72 percent of the participants were C-Level and C-1, so their direct reports by definition will mostly also be leaders) that women are humbler, then we would expect employees to also see a measurable difference.

Here we are in for a number of surprises:

At first glance, if you look at the percentage of men and women that manage to score a 4 or more on all 12 subsets of humility, they come out quite close. Yet already with an interesting twist. Remember on average 35 percent of managers manage to reach that score. For men it is 36 percent and for women 32 percent as you can see in Figure 3.13.

Figure 3.13 Female managers seen as less humble than male managers by their employees.

While that is not yet statistically relevant it gives us an indication that not all may be as expected.

The second indication is, that there is no statistically relevant difference on the average score female and male leaders receive from their employees. As you can see in Figure 3.14 both sexes are seen as equally bad or equally good. Remember that a 1 is a simple agreement of the employees with the relevant statement, while a “strongly agree” which would be a 2, is nowhere in sight.

Figure 3.14 At first glance no statistical difference between men and women.

If you look at the percentages in detail, there is a small, yet significant difference on two fronts which you can see in the Figure 3.15. While 68 percent of male managers are seen as acknowledging when others know more as compared to 62 percent of female managers, female managers on the whole seem to be better at understanding that not all is under control, with 60 percent rated as humble versus only 52 percent amongst male leaders.

Figure 3.15 Some differences between the genders.

Small fish, you might say.

Yet when you dive more deeply into the different age groups, something surprising happens.

On the one hand, unlike many of my interviewees expected there is hardly a relevant difference regarding humility and age in men. The younger generation is not filled with humility, nor do the older managers reap a huge amount of the expected benefits of wisdom.

With two exceptions. The young generation of men seems to be more able to ask for feedback even when it is critical. 59 percent of the male leaders below the age of 40 are assessed by their employees as doing this, versus only 48 percent of those over 50 years of age.

Still a small number – yet matching what we know about younger generations and their wish for regular feedback.

On the other hand, there is a higher percentage of older manager that take notice of other people’s strengths. 79 percent of the managers over 40 versus only 71 percent of those under fifty. As if awareness of others was indeed growing over time.

In general, however as you can see in Figure 3.16, there is no big difference across the ages. (Only where the percentage is shown is there a statistical difference.)

Figure 3.16 Percentage of male managers seen as humble by their employees.

The same holds true for the average score across all 12 sub-elements. It is around 36 percent, with the drop to 34 percent for older men not being statistically significant (Figure 3.17).

Figure 3.17 Average humility for male managers.

For female managers, the story appears to be a different one. It is here that we find an age gap. Female leaders above the age of 50 are seen as significantly less humble than the female leaders below the age of 50 on a number of dimensions.

Even though the difference is not everywhere statistically different, it gives us quite some large gaps between younger and elder women of between 9 and 11 percentage points. This is quite a stunning result, that you can see in Figure 3.18.

Figure 3.18 Percentage of female managers seen as humble by their employees.

This result is supported when you look at the drop in average humility for the elder age group (Figure 3.19).

Figure 3.19 Average humility for female managers.

Before we look at explanations for this, let us also look in more detail at how the different age groups compare across gender. In the group of leaders below 40 (Figure 3.20) female leaders exhibit some more humble behaviors than men. Apart from when it comes to asking for feedback even if it is critical.

Figure 3.20 Comparing female and male leaders <40.

Again, remember: Only the points where the percentage is recorded are statistically relevant. There is a significant difference, when it comes to such “officially” female skills such as complimenting or showing appreciation. Yet, at the same time, considering how much difference was expected between men and women regarding humility even in this age group, women are not in general humbler.

Even this small difference disappears in the age group between 40 and 50 (Figure 3.21). Female leaders are not seen as humbler. And, indeed the opposite holds true for the dimension ‘Sees as a small part of a larger whole’ where men are ahead.

Figure 3.21 Comparing female and male leaders <50.

And for the age group above 50 female managers are actually less humble compared to men (Figure 3.22).

Figure 3.22 Comparing female and male leaders >50.

And while there are no sub-elements where there is a direct relevant difference, all the little gaps add up so that only 24 percent of female leaders are seen as humble versus 34 percent in the same age group of men (Figure 3.23).

Figure 3.23 Percentage of humble managers across gender and age.

In the light of this analysis, it is then no longer surprising that there is no average difference between the genders, since the humbler younger female managers make up for the less humble older ones.

But how to explain that female managers seem to become less humble the older they get?

There may be several explanations, all of which require further research to stand the test. On the one hand, it may be that the generation of women over 50 has decided (or felt compelled) to show less humility in the corporate context in order to be seen as strong and promotable. This is the whole issue of women managers putting on leadership behaviors that are judged to be male in order to fight their way up the career ladder. Much anecdotal evidence for this comes from the interviews and discussions with my executive education participants.

On the other hand, it may also be the case that female managers are judged more critically by their employees than men in the same position. Research shows clearly that women are often perceived more negatively than men. For example, women leaders are seen as more at fault, when they have committed an error as compared to their male peers.3 When a male manager has made a mistake, his rating as a leader drop by 10 percent, while the female manager was immediately perceived 30 percent worse!

Want more examples? Female professors receive worse grades than their male counterparts – not for the way of teaching but for the identical online content that they have distributed!4 In addition, female leaders are penalized when they lead with emotions as well as when they employ too little emotion.

So, the fact that somewhat older female leaders score worse, may have to do with them being judged more harshly.

If a man is arrogant that is not perceived as arrogant but as self-confident.

(Interview No. 38, Director, 390,000 employees)

Thirdly, it may be that companies actually (tended to?) prefer promoting non-humble female managers, believing them to have more chance for success.

The discussion remains open and research will continue. It will be interesting to see if the younger generation of women will also become less humble with age, or if they will keep their slight advantage. Also, whether as so many interviewees predicted and hoped for themselves, elder leaders of both sexes will learn to find it easier to be and lead humbly.

I will return to this topic of gender and age together with a glance at nationalities in Chapter 10.

Only Some Difference in Humility According to the Level in the Company

Employees see more or less an equal number of humble leaders among each level of leader. The only differences as you can see in Figure 3.24 is that there are significantly more humble managers in the band of C-1.

Figure 3.24 Percentage of managers seen as humble by level.

That comes as a surprise on two fronts. On the one hand, a number of interviewees mentioned how much easier it was for them to be humble right at the top of the company. Now they could hire the best people to compensate for their weaknesses and no longer needed to actually pretend not to have weaknesses. Now they gave themselves the permission to act more freely and set the tone, instead of being in a chain of command where someone else defined the culture.

On the other hand, numerous employees mentioned how they expected humility to decrease right at the top, since there would be less honest feedback given. They saw the danger that Top Management would actually living in a bubble.

Both arguments are not borne out by the quantitative research. Apart from CEO – 1 there is an average score of around 35 percent with no difference between the CEO and CEO – 2 and lower. Only the CEO – 1 level is doing better at 43 percent. This may have to do with the bigger picture that managers at that level already observe while there may still be more room than right at the top for receiving feedback.

In addition, there are some other smaller differences to observe.

Firstly, when it comes to making the world a better place: here around 51 percent of the upper echelons (C and C-1) are seen as humble leaders versus a mere 39 percent at the lower levels. Figure 3.25 shows clearly, how our grasp of the bigger picture grows once our role demands of us that we have to answer questions such as “why are we here as a company” or “what does our company want to contribute to society”?

Figure 3.25 The higher the level the more purpose.

Secondly, as you can see in Figure 3.26, the C-Level falls prey to the belief that things can be controlled, the illusion of being master of fates. We will dive more deeply into this topic later on, yet here it is interesting to see that while 61 percent of leaders lower down the rank believe that not everything is under their control, only 49 percent at C-Level are seen by their employees to have the same understanding.

Figure 3.26 The higher the more belief of being in control.

The Length of Time Spent in a Position Has No Impact on Humility

Humility and routine are bad bedfellows.

(Interview No. 35, CDO, 4,700 employees)

I experience with our managers who have been long in one position that their own ego prevails. They find it harder to appreciate others, see their own strengths and weaknesses.

(Interview No. 43, Head HR, 15,000 employees)

Even though research with a smaller number of data points seemed to suggest that there is a decrease in humility after more than 10 years in a position, the newer analysis for this book with more than 2,500 participants did not yield those results.

As seen in the quotes above, many interviewees expected there to be a decrease in humility the longer a manager is in their position. But this is not borne out by the data.

So, while job rotation may be good for the culture of innovation and cooperation, it does not seem to be necessary for fostering humility.

Diversity Is Better for Humility

One third of the top managers surveyed have direct reports with over 70 percent being men. In this group, by their own assessment, various elements of humility drop between 4 and 10 percentage points compared to more diverse groups (Figure 3.27).

Figure 3.27 Lack of diversity has costs.

While this research only looked at gender as an element of diversity, we know from other experts that we can expect similar positive results from a mix in nationalities, education and personality type.

All in all, yet another indication that diversity truly pays off.

Number of Direct Reports Matter

Many leaders lead more than 5 direct reports. In the current research 85 percent of managers do this. And they pay a price for this.

Which one? The top managers have themselves reported humility costs on numerous dimensions in Figure 3.28. In particular, most of the learning from others seems to get lost. Which is not surprising, since in larger groups it may not clear whom one can learn from. In addition, there will be fewer meetings for all to connect and discuss once the direct reports exceed a certain number.

Figure 3.28 Downsides of larger teams.

This result is also interesting in that it points to the fact that it is once more the situation that is decisive on how much humility there is. Just as being in a primarily male teams seem to have an impact, in just such a way is the organizational impact of team sizes also visible.

Since this is the case, every manager needs to make sure that larger teams have other benefits to compensate for losses on the humility front. Or spend more time ensuring that bigger teams also get the chance to learn from each other.

Covid-19 Changes a Little

We see more gratitude towards employees, partners, customers.

(Interview No. 4, Corporate Vice President Digital Marketing, 50,000 employees)

Yes – there is almost a forced humility: you must let people do their own thing. And then many people have realized that it can be done.

(Interview No. 11, Head Learning & Development, 300,000 Employees)

There was the chance to learn what people are capable of. In general, you can say that many employees are hugely underestimated.

(Interview No. 12, VP Development Change, 100,000 employees)

I have the impression that some managers have simply stopped leading.

(Interview No. 129, CEO, 600 employees)

It used to be enough to be charismatic and drop in on people ever so often. Now in Covid times, even charismatic leaders have to find a new way to lead.

(Interview No. 15, Head of L&D Europe, 1,500 employees)

The interviewees agree – something has happened in terms of humility during the Covid-19 crisis. In both directions! On the one hand, the crisis has shown that there is much to acknowledge and that one cannot and should not have everything under control. Many things have become more humane. People talk more with and know more about each other.

At the same time, there is an opposite trend: the decisive crisis manager, who likes to decide everything on his own, has been given a wide rein. Also, a number of managers have simply stopped leading.

The feeling is therefore: “The crisis only reinforces what is there” and does not necessarily trigger a fundamental change towards more humility.

The figures confirm these ambivalent statements: On the one hand 36 percent of those surveyed see more humility among managers in this Covid-19 period and 33 percent expect this effect to continue. On the other hand, this is only just a third. For two thirds, everything seems to have remained the same and they expect nothing else.

Four Activities Strengthen One's Own Humility

There are activities that have a discernible correlation with humility – and can also be assumed to be causal.

For example, as you can see in Figure 3.29, significantly more executives are seen as humble if they have a coach, have studied abroad, read a lot or listen to a lot of podcasts, or do volunteer work. And this is true for both the behaviors observed and the humility employees see in their leaders after seeing the definition of humility.

Figure 3.29 Activities that correlate with more humility.

This already gives us a preview of the fact that humility can be learned!

 

Takeaway: A long way ahead – This research suggests that while there are some interesting differences in gender, age, size etc. there is quite a lot of work ahead for most managers and companies to develop humility. How is your company faring? How are you doing yourself on the different dimensions?

In the next chapters, we will see the large benefits that humble leaders convey and also dive more deeply into why so many people (around 90 percent) think of themselves as being humble, while not actually being so! You by now know the number 35 percent as being the overall percentage of humble leaders. A sad result!

Notes
Gaines-Ross, L. (2015). What executives value in their CEOs. Harvard Business Review, 5.
   https://www.hrmagazine.co.uk/content/features/the-prevalence-of-narcissist-ceos. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Brescoll, V. L., Dawson, E., & Uhlmann, E. L. (2010). Hard won and easily lost the fragile status of leaders in gender-stereotype-incongruent occupations. Psychological Science, 21(11), 1640–1642. https://hbr.org/2016/04/research-we-are-way-harder-on-female-leaders-who-make-bad-calls. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Mitchell, K. M., & Martin, J. (2018). Gender bias in student evaluations. PS: Political Science & Politics, 51(3), 648–652.

===== FILE 12/23: xhtml%2fc4.xhtml =====

Chapter 4 The Benefits of Humility

DOI: 10.4324/9781003358015-4

It is amazing what you can accomplish if you do not care who gets the credit.

Harry S. Truman (American President 1884–1972)

Summary

Over the past ten years, research in hundreds of projects has identified measurable, predominantly positive, results of humility. These can be divided into three groups: Effects of a humble leader on the employees (e.g., in terms of performance or creativity), results for the entire organization (e.g., in terms of strategy or culture) and positive consequences for the leader himself or herself (e.g., in terms of performance or stress).

While I am standing here before you, the top team is away on a two-day retreat, discussing the future of our strategy. If they had needed me last year or this year, they would have asked. As it is I will join the discussion in a few days’ time.

The person saying this is not a junior member of the company but Wilf Blackburn, regional CEO of Prudential Asia. An energetic, alert Englishman, who has worked abroad for decades and who clearly manages to keep his ego in check. No need for him to be present at the yearly retreat. Let the team brainstorm freely, without any self-censorship in front of the boss.

“In many cases I am not actually needed,” he continues. There was a crisis in 2018 when the company had accidentally deducted too many premiums from their customers. He went to his team and said: “I'm sure you can handle this!” The result?

I realized precisely how much they wanted me to leave the room so they could work on the problem in peace. The Chief Technology Officer actually brought pizza – and the great thing was not the pizza, but that he was not needed.

Once the problem was solved, Wilf apologized publicly to all the customers – an unusual step and one that was appreciated by customers and employees alike. Sheela Parakkal, Chief Human Resource Officer cites a positive internal impact:

Before the crisis, a fairly junior member of the team had just handed in her resignation. After we had dealt with the crisis for ten days, she withdrew her notice since, in her words, “we have shown how we are as one in the face of crisis.”

Sheela emphasizes that when Wilf joined the company, it was ready for someone like him. “We had already started on a journey of defining purpose and living values. But Wilf was the jet fuel. He had the courage, the charisma and the vision.” She continues:

At the same time, he respects differences in opinion and gets people to realize options and choices elsewhere. Many people have been actually exited for the bigger picture, but he spent a lot of time mentoring and coaching them – with a huge respect for each individual.

Wilf tells a story which illustrates this point.

I am not big on hierarchy; I have always found it a hindrance. We have no status symbols – no one has their own desk; we do not show people’s rank on business cards. I try to push decisions downwards and stop them from coming upwards. Of course, that sort of culture takes time to instill. For example, I thought it vital, that we stop working behind closed doors. So, I picked an empty desk in the Walk-In Customer Service Centre and worked from there until the whole office had been converted to open space. Before this was done, I asked all my managers “Is there anyone who still needs their own private office?” A number of people raised their hand. I said: “Thank you, I will help you find jobs in other companies.” And I did. Every single one of them has moved to a leadership culture better suited to them. I would never sacrifice an employee, but always try to find a new role for them with us or outside of us.

He looks at the bigger picture and tries to balance what employees require with what the company needs:

We want to attract people who seek experience and plan on staying about 5–6 years. That way we keep on getting fresh ideas. Of course, we do not fire anyone who wants to stay but our focus is on those employees who are keen to continue learning and many therefore wish to move on. We also want to have a great alumni net – just like the consultants and lawyers. I just recently heard an impressive example from an Indian company where I am on the supervisory board. They wrote to every alumnus of theirs: “If you lost your job during Covid, please let us know – we are hiring.” What an amazing sense of community.

Wilf talks openly about his personal development:

Last month, I was at a Swiss business school – many managers and employees think that my talking about the training and my “need” for it is a sign of weakness. But we all need to keep on learning and refreshing ourselves.

When it comes to his assessment of his own persona, he is very clear:

You know, as a CEO I am simply playing a role. Nothing more. I was once at Disney World in Paris and saw someone wearing a Minnie Mouse costume. Just as that person in the Minnie Mouse costume should not get their self-esteem from their costume, in the same way I should not get my self-esteem from the CEO costume.

How does he see his impact:

20 years ago, I was thought of as a Maverick – now, what I do is no longer seen as crazy. And it will be continued: My successor has been picked by the company to continue what I started – to bring his own stamp, of course – but not to fundamentally change direction.

I found Wilf inspiring – and wondered how he had become the leader he was. He explained it with a twist:

You see, I was never so wildly excited by the content of the work – so I had no wish to lead by mere mastery. Instead, I wanted to focus on the people and how I can influence them without playing the hierarchy card. My Executive MBA really helped there – all those great case studies.

When I embarked on this book, Wilf came to mind as a proverbial humble leader. Someone who knows his weaknesses (“I am not so big on details; that drives my line manager nuts”), knows his “strengths (“I focus on doing the things that only a CEO can do”), appreciates others by empowering them (“you can do this”), is willing to openly learn (“the three most powerful words are: I don’t know”) and sees the bigger picture (“it is vital that I help these 20 CEOs become the best they possibly can become”).

The question that baffled me following the conversations with him and Sheela, was the following. “Hearing these great stories, how can we know that they really have a measurable impact on the employees, the organization and the leader him or herself.”

Wilf gave only some indications that his behavior at the helm may have been effective. There was mention of less fear, more engagement, good customer relations, a new type of employee coming to join the firm – but he strongly pointed away from himself instead to the whole company culture, the changing times and, and, and….

Sheela as Head of HR provided more concrete data points, namely that the company used to rank quite low as number 124 for employer of choice. Over the years of working with Wilf, it had moved up to 42 and then to number 11. In 2021 it was actually named one of the top 15 employers in the region – the only insurance company in the group.

Yet the question for me still was, whether there was strong evidence from other firms, quantitative proof that humility in a leader was actually working? Could I find data that would help convince those managers who were worried about being seen as weak? Those that feared that their employees would begin taking the easy way out if not firmly taken at hand? Those that were apprehensive of what their bosses would think of a humble me? Those that saw stress on the horizon if they tried something new?

250 academic articles, dozens of books, numerous conversations with other academics later, it was clear that I could! In my hands, I had dozens of measurably positive effects that a humble leader generates. Hundreds of studies that showed in beautiful graphs, in long tables what exactly the impact is on employees, the organization and the leader him – or herself of knowing/showing strength and weaknesses, appreciating others, being open to learning and seeing the bigger picture.

And I will share them in the following pages in order to award you the proof that humble leadership is not some wishy-washy PR, some new HR trend but a timeless impactful virtue that brings not only joy but also success!

From these lofty heights now to some lowly and humbler comments to put what will follow into perspective:

By its very nature, research is always about statistical results. This means that in general humility causes X for the employees, for the organization and for the manager.

This concept of statistical probability is usually obvious to everyone. Yet, when teaching about the effects of humility, I tend to encounter the hope that research actually gives a sort of guarantee. A guarantee, that if I do X, the outcome will be Y. Sadly, this I cannot offer. Full stop. There is no assurance that in every or even any situation where you apply humility you will achieve exactly the effects described. Why not?

Firstly, numerous conditions in your organization, in you or your staff will play a role, so in your case the effects may occur fully, little or not at all.

Secondly, no results are “one hundred percent” results. In other words, research does not suggest that you have a result of 0 percent without humility and of 100 percent with full humility. Instead, averages are formed over larger groups and these averages show a tendency. This tendency is statistically relevant, which means that humble leaders in total have this or that effect. The precise size of the effect is not an issue. We do not get to see if a 0.5-point higher score on humility makes employees 20 percent more creative. The only thing we know is that in the game of large numbers more humility in leaders leads to more creativity.

Also, in each individual situation, the outcome may be different. With one group of employees, it may have an obvious and great impact; in others, it may only have a small or negligible effect. Nevertheless, if you regularly act humbly, you increase the probability that those effects, which researchers have uncovered, will also appear in your case.

The Fundamental Effects of Humility

What does research say in general? That humility gives you the flexibility to go through your daily management routine far more consciously and far less burdened by your ego. It is humility that enables you to behave in a way that is appropriate to each and every situation.1 What humility offers is a sort of view from the balcony. A balcony that shows how things really are to a non-judgmental eye and allows the manager to ask the question: What exactly does this situation require of me as a leader?

The consequence of this view from the balcony is that it enables the manager to choose flexibly between all different modes of reactions as well as between different leadership behaviors.

Let us think of a humble naval officer. During the planning of a mission, she not only involves her staff but also her superior, be it with a relationship- or task-oriented leadership style. While the mission is running and there is danger on the horizon, she switches to an authoritarian style and gives precise instructions that must be obeyed. After the mission, she focuses on discussing errors and potential improvements, while paying homage to the achievements of the team. This is what humility is about – seeing herself in the greater picture and picking the tools, that are required to align the team with the task.

Leadership is a task, a role that has nothing to do with my ego. It is about what exactly is needed right now, and what I need in order to make the river flow as it needs to flow.

(Interview No. 145, Consultant to CEOs)

This may be done by narrowing the river path, blocking certain outflows or allowing for stretches of calm and shallow water.

If, in the example above, instead the officer only uses authoritarian styles from beginning to end, she will most surely fail and definitely receive far less information and fewer ideas from her staff.

If you do not insist on your rank, position or seniority, you can learn a lot as a manager. Informal channels open up. The manager learns things he or she would not learn if employees had the feeling that the manager was judging everything.

(Interview No. 12, VP Development Change, 100,000 employees)

The manager faces the same challenges. Firstly, he must know his own strengths and weaknesses. That will allow him to bring other voices to the table when planning a strategy, a project, a meeting. In crisis mode, he may have to act in an authoritarian manner, taking on full responsibility and allowing no dissent. After the crisis, there will be time for analysis as well as acknowledgment of the individual contributions. The view from the balcony enables this vital change in behavior.

Ergo: Humility frees you from having to follow any one set path and allows you to truly bring yourself and others on board without your ego getting in the way.

Most of this book will be dedicated to business research. Yet, there are some inspirations that we can draw from other fields.

A study from 2020 demonstrates that patients of humble doctors are more satisfied and more trusting. This is despite the fact that humble doctors clearly communicate their doubts and errors to patients. What a good lesson for leaders. What else? Patients treated by a humble doctor also feel healthier!2 You may object: Feeling healthy is all very well but surely health is objective. And the test should be if they are actually healthier? Well, we do know that subjective experience is one element of how we feel – a sort of subjective objectivity. And we also know that the famous placebo effect triggers physical and measurable improvements in patients. This effect can be weaker or stronger. Take a look at this example: if patients with Parkinson are told that their medication (a placebo) costs $1,500 per dose, they subsequently have better motor functions than those that are given a (placebo) pill for $100 per dose.3 It therefore makes sense that the humility of the doctor is as effective as a placebo pill – leading not only to more satisfaction and trust but also to genuine better health.
A therapist's humility creates a stronger and more supportive relationship with the patient. Why? The humble therapist listens more to the patient, takes on their perspective and judges less. This has the positive consequence of patients being far more willing to work on their key issues. Which leads to faster change and the feeling of quickly getting better.4 Add to this cultural humility and therapy across different cultures gets to be far more successful.5 How would this result differ in a culturally humble business manager? I expect not at all.
Those who are humble are better able to resist substance abuse. Why? Humility fosters self-control.6 Which insight those managers struggling with alcohol or drugs – approximately 10 percent7 – could use well.
If you have been primed towards humility, you become less aggressive and revengeful. How do researchers uncover this? Well, a typical approach is to see how much people shout, swear or honk their horns when they are provoked. This is far less when people have been nudged into a state of humility. Another sort of wonderfully weird approach is to give people the opportunity to pour chili sauce on the food of a person who has criticized them… More humility, less spice revenge!8
Last but not least, humility has a positive impact on interpersonal relations. Researchers analyzed how committed and satisfied each partner is to the relationship. The result is crystal-clear: those relationships in which the partners have an attitude of humility beat the others by a long way.9 Why? Humility measurably keeps the individual ego under control. As a consequence, partners are not so easily offended by each other. Instead, humility makes me realize that I may not be seeing the situation correctly, that I might also be getting things wrong, that the other party might not be all weird and that there might actually be good points in his or her strangely different perspective. The result: more understanding, coupled with the willingness to be more forgiving and to work on the relationship in tough times.

In the following pages, the core focus will be on research about managers leading with humility. Yet, I will continue to include interesting and enriching research from other areas where it fosters the overall understanding. Or the dramatic effect! Since this book is to serve the concept of humility and you, I will employ anything that will help remember things better. And great stories, drama and emotions help our brains to take in and store the new.

Benefits of Humility for Employees

Jim worked at a large conglomerate with more than 300,000 employees. In recent years, he began to feel that the narcissistic CEO was taking credit for all and generating a culture of pushiness – just the opposite from the leadership culture he wanted to live in. Having reached board minus one, not liking the atmosphere any better the higher he had got, he thought to himself: “Time to leave.” A smaller company with 2,000 employees asked him to become CEO once the current one, let’s call him Mark, had retired two months later. Jim enthusiastically joined the company and was appalled. Mark had no habit of talking or listening to his people. In meetings, when Mark peremptorily asked for questions or comments, even his board members fell silent, while lower levels scarcely dared look up. When Jim spent his first two weeks simply asking and listening to employees, Mark sneered: “Why the heck are you doing this? What on earth are you expecting from this wasteful use of your time.” When I spoke to Jim, he was still surprised: “He obviously thought me esoteric and weird. Simply because I had decided to go to the employees, ask and listen.”

Once Mark retired, some elements of the culture changed immediately: “People began asking questions, they commented and they objected. It is wonderful to see how engaged people have become.” Jim is cautiously optimistic: “Of course, we still have a long way to go, but I am hopeful that the first building block is in place: engaged employees.”

It is when you hear stories such as this, that the first set of research results which in Figure 4.1 show measurable benefits for the employees of a humble leader will not come as a surprise: A far greater percentage of those working for a humble leader are better able to see their own contribution as well as their purpose. Many more of them are motivated, satisfied, feel fairly treated and are less likely to want to change their job than compared to those working for a non-humble leader.

Figure 4.1 Some positive effects of humility.

Since purpose and motivation are some of the key drivers for performance, it is not surprising that one of the key findings in humility research is that it improves the performance of the employees as well as other elements.

In the following, I will look at the evidence that research has generated and show you seven areas in which humble leaders generate a measurable difference in their employees.

Better Individual Performance

In the long term, humility will lead to an increase in performance, higher motivation, more productivity and better quality.

(Interview No. 7; VP Training, 20,000 employees)

People like humble leaders and work more for them.

(Interview No. 50, Global HR leader 24,000 employees)

There are five reasons why employees of a humble leader perform measurably better.

Employees of a humble leader feel – by their own assessment – more energy and less exhaustion. Energy translates into activity and the willingness to put effort into what needs to be done. Interestingly this effect is stronger, the more the manager is perceived as “powerful.”10 This makes sense: if I work for a manager who is respected internally, can get things done, then their humble behavior will not only give me a boost but also the feeling that what I work on is valuable to the department and the company as a whole. (We will see later that a humble manager is a) typically believed to be more powerful, and b) because he/she sees what the role requires will fight typically the good fight to get as much power as is needed to get things done.) Yet even for a not-so-powerful manager, the effect on individual performance is still measurable and positive. Employees “feel empowered in their work, more inspired by their managers and feel that their company is the right place to work.”11

Employees of a humble leader also feel more authentic and less vulnerable – which again gives them more energy and motivation.12 Let us look in more detail at this piece of research.

Participants were divided into two groups and asked to imagine themselves as a head server for a busy restaurant. At a retreat with numerous restaurants, their direct manager Alex accepted an award from the CEO of the company and responded in one of two ways.

The first Alex said: “Thank you for this award! I’m honored to accept it. I’ve worked really hard since I took over as manager to make this restaurant one of the top performing in the country. I’m really proud of what I’ve accomplished and it’s great to be recognized for that success here. As a manager, I often receive feedback and advice about how to run the restaurant but I truly believe that I’ve been successful because I’ve listened to my gut and made the important decisions on my own. I hope to continue this success into the future. Thank you again!”

The second Alex said: “Thank you for this award! We’re honored to accept it. We’ve worked really hard as a team to make this restaurant one of the top performing in the country. We are really proud of what we have accomplished and it’s great to be recognized for that success here. As a manager, I often receive feedback and advice about how to run the restaurant and I truly believe we’ve been successful because of all the valuable input I get from everyone working in the restaurant. We hope to continue this success into the future. Thank you again.”

Not surprisingly participants were much happier with the second manager – but only, if they felt the speech was authentic and not put on (we shall see later that faking humility simply does not work). As a consequence, the feeling of vulnerability in the employees decreased fundamentally, as you can see in Figure 4.2.

And imagine an atmosphere where employees do not feel vulnerable – then they will be far more willing to think on their feet, take on responsibility and therefore perform better.

The humble manager fosters a culture that sees her or him as easily replaceable, as not always needed. The result: the leader takes a step back and employees are empowered. They take more responsibility, are more courageous to solve issues by themselves, which allows the manager time for the more important tasks.

Figure 4.2 Interaction of humility with follower vulnerability.

If I take myself too seriously and take on the role: “I know everything, I can do everything” well then, I have to know and decide everything. If I take myself less seriously, then I give more room for others to take over tasks. As a result, I make myself less important. For me personally, this leads to a situation in which, if I don't have to deal with all the “crap”, I have more time for the really important things.

(Interview No. 2, Head of Talent, 10,000 employees)

  In a humble culture, employees also find it easier to be part of a team. They feel that they belong to each other, which makes them willing to work together with extraordinary intensity, show professional excellence in all activities and adopt the open attitude which is needed for “humble enquiry.” What exactly is this humble enquiry? It signifies the ability to really ask, investigate and listen. As a result, difficult situations and behaviors are not covered up but communicated. Equally, no idea will be excluded from the outset, but instead all assumptions can be brought out into the open, questioned and new paths explored.13

Picture a company in which the manager accepts input from everyone. From the department heads as well as from the engineers, the designers and of course from the employees who work directly at the machines or with the client. As a consequence, a problem in the production process, an issue with a customer, a drop in productivity or in quality will be solved much faster through bottom-up information and effort, than in a team where the manager conveys that he or she knows everything.

Look at this lovely, if apocryphal, story of a new CEO. In his factory he sees a young man leaning against the wall and visibly doing nothing. The new CEO wants to show some powerful leadership and resolutely steps towards the man. “How much do you earn.” Somewhat surprised the man looks up: “400 dollars a week.” The CEO says: “Wait,” goes to his office, comes back after two minutes, hands the man 1,600 dollars and says: “Here is the salary for 4 weeks. Now get out and don't you dare come back.” Satisfied, he turns to his people and asks: “Won't anyone explain to me what this madman has been doing here?” And from one corner of the room comes the voice: “That was the pizza delivery service.”

This is what happens when you don't listen, don't ask, don't invite people to be active.

The third reason for greater performance is that humble leaders actually engage in “affirmative coaching.”14 The positive consequences of affirmation have been known for a long time. One of the most famous studies concerns new cadets on their training ship. Those who were told at the moment of recruitment that they were unlikely to get seasick, and even if they did, that this would not in any way affect their performance, spent far less time feeding the fishes. Plus, their superiors rated them as more capable than the control group. (Of course, as is usual in these studies, the supervisors did not know that an experiment had taken place.)15

Want an example for affirmative coaching? Look back at Wilf Blackburn: “I am sure you can handle this” is exactly one of these sentences, that if said with the trust a humble leader has in his/her people will work nicely.

Performance also grows due to employees experiencing a sense of greater self-efficacy.16 “Self-efficacy” denotes the belief held by a person that they can overcome difficult situations through their own efforts. That they are not victims of the situation but can play an active role and achieve relevant impact. To attain this self-efficacy, the person must clearly have the opportunity to be effective, that is to master something by themselves. The more often he or she succeeds in doing this, the more likely it is that this feeling of self-efficacy will help the person succeed at new and harder tasks.

Let us take negotiators as an example. Those that have developed a feeling of self-efficacy through experience and practice do not perform worse if they feel anxious before their negotiation. Unlike those without this experience. For them a feeling of anxiety spells death to ambition: they bring home significantly worse results.17

Self-efficacy is the counterpart of learned helplessness. If I cannot see that my actions have any effect, human creativity fades away, as does the willingness to make an effort. Why should I make an effort if the manager never listens to my suggestions? Why even bother thinking? Just as some people refuse to load the dishwasher if they are always criticized by their partner for how they do it.

If you are self-effective, you can set higher goals. And we have long known that higher goals have a positive effect on people's performance. Two beautiful examples from Harvard Professor Ellen Langer:18 She divides participants into two groups. One group is asked to do 100 jumping jacks. The second group has to jump 200 times. Both groups are asked to flag when they get tired. The first group gets tired at 65 to 70 jumps, the second at 130 to 140. Regardless of the goal, after about two-thirds of the task performance decreases.

The same happens when participants have to type one or two pages of text. No matter the size of the planned task, most of the errors occur after two-thirds have been completed.

What can we learn from this? If I set myself a higher target, my good performance will extend for longer. If I know that I managed X the last time, then I can take on X plus Y and will probably succeed in it.

Look at the hotel chain Ritz Carlton and how they set employees on the road to self-efficacy.

The Ritz-Carlton has given itself the motto “We are Ladies and Gentlemen serving Ladies and Gentlemen.” This immediately conveys a high level of appreciation for the employees. On top of this, each employee has a budget of $2,000 at their disposal. What for? To provide a customer with a WOW moment. No matter how. For example, one employee boarded a plane to pick up a forgotten computer. In another case, a hotel engineer built a wooden path into the sea so that a handicapped boy could go swimming. And in one instance following a water damage, there was not only a letter of apology including the direct extension to the hotel plumber, but also a big spanner made of chocolate.19

The $2,000 is available for each customer. That is generous. And looking at the average life time, customer value of $250,000 it is also a sensible investment.

This simple organizational decision to award employees with funds allows them to develop self-efficacy. I not only have my personal resources at my fingertips, but also monetary resources. From this and experience grows self-efficacy.

The fifth reason for greater performance lies in the fact that employees of a humble leader are more resilient in times of crisis. They are more inclined to accept uncertainties and willingly take on board new information and facts.20 After all, their manager has never claimed to know hundred percent where the journey was going; never said that this was all the information there was and never gave the employees the feeling that it all would be easy. In this way, the employees are not frightened or resistant, but remain flexible and become noticeably more efficient.

They also learn to get up again faster when a crisis or error has occurred.21 With a humble leader who shares information, employees have understood – as had the Stoics – that there are some things that can and others that cannot be influenced. What they can influence they now begin to influence via their actions; that which they cannot influence they do not take personally. The research is very clear on this: Those who have this perspective face the demands of difficult situations better – are more resilient and as a consequence perform better.22

Take-Away: Humility brings performance – Five solid reasons why employees perform better when they have a humble leader: Employees have more energy, are empowered, are strengthened by affirmative coaching, experience more self-efficacy, and are more resiliant.

Now that’s something!

Please take a moment to reflect, when you in the past were driven to great performance. Was there anything that your manager did to inspire you? Be it with confidence, with freedom, with praise, with a willingness to allow mistakes.

And how are you doing with your own employees right now? Any room for improvement?

Better Team Performance

In our day and age there is less and less work done simply by one person, and more done in teams. In particular in changing teams, working within agile concepts and structures.

As we know, the cost of dysfunctional teams is huge. Where colleagues avoid each other, compete for ideas and resources, hide information and generally refuse to collaborate effectively, companies lose out on potential. Full stop. How many teams have you seen, where negative behaviors have led to knowledge not being shared, creativity not being fostered and innovations not being generated? How many teams have you seen, where one or two “rotten” apples seriously damage not only the culture but also the performance of the team?

I bet numerous. Just as one of my interview partners see them in his company.

I see many teams failing with innovation. Not because there is no creativity, but because people are in competition mode. They prefer to defend their own area of power instead of collaborating.

(Interview No. 55, Director Global Learning, 34,000 employees)

A humble leader measurably has an effect on the work and the performance of the team.23 How? By being a behavioral model, showing own strength and weaknesses, openly appreciating team members and modeling teachability. In this way, the humble leader encourages positive and frequent interactions among team members. He or she is what can be termed “social oil,” ensuring smoothness in the team process.

Humble leaders actually use their influence to promote positive interactions while at the same time reducing negative intragroup connections. The result: A supportive environment that advances overall team effectiveness.

Since humble leaders are not frightened of losing personal power, they are more willing to share power and support egalitarianism. This is contagious and leads to followers being more willing to work constructively with their peers. It also leads to team members becoming more open and patient with others. The fine outcome: others are no longer seen as hindrances for getting the work done, but as useful resources whose weaknesses are outweighed by their strengths.

Finally, there is a sense of forgiveness in teams led by a humble leader – and as we all know, being allowed to make mistakes in the pursuit of innovation is not detrimental but actually vital to the performance of teams.

It is therefore not surprising that one of the most successful authors on leadership Stephen Denning postulates: “Agile, in short, requires humility from leaders. We don’t mean a false humility but rather the sort that accelerates learning and bolsters the confidence of every team member.”24

Take-Away: Teams need humilty – A humble leader not only nudges individuals towards higher performance but also teams.

More Creativity and Innovation

Humility promotes initiative and has valuable effects for innovation.

(Interview No. 10, Deputy Head IT, 1,000 employees)

Being humble is a prerequisite to implementing an open innovation approach.

(Interview No. 26, CIO, 68,000 employees)

As I have just described, something happens to the attitude of employees when the manager acts with humility.

We have seen that humble managers empower their employees. As a result, they have more energy, feel self-efficacy and resilience. At the same time a humble leader also awards a sense of psychological safety. “Psychological safety” is a deep-rooted feeling of security at work. Once in place, it gives people the freedom of being able to speak up and act without fearing for their self-image, status or their career. The employee feels a sense of belonging, secure in the process of learning new things, contributing and questioning the status quo without being embarrassed, marginalized or punished.

This feeling is lacking for those who are shouted at, denied loyalty, regularly deprived of or bluntly assigned tasks and who live with the basic underlying feeling that they could be dismissed at any moment.

The importance of psychological safety was first seen in 2012 when Google embarked on a journey to uncover what makes effective teams.25 This endeavor was called “Project Aristotle” and analyzed different groups and teams at Google, assessing them on numerous dimensions.26

The project looked at team composition (e.g., personality traits, emotional intelligence, skills, demographics) as well as team dynamics (e.g., what it was like to work with teammates). They conducted hundreds of double-blind interviews with leaders to get a sense of what they thought drove team effectiveness.

What they found shook up existing wisdom on team compositions and behavior: The single best predictor of team effectiveness was not intelligence, emotional or otherwise. It was not the leader’s vision or anything to do with the way the team gave itself rules. No, the best predictor of a well-functioning and successful team was simply psychological safety. The perception of each team member that it is okay for me to take risks in this group, that I can show weaknesses or gaps of knowledge. That I will not be punished for offering ideas, asking questions, admitting errors, challenging others.

The last point is vital, since it means, that psychological safety is also lacking when I feel unable to challenge others, when there is too much avoidance of conflict in the company.

There’s still a lot to be done when it comes to psychological security. At the moment it is still like this: we are like a family; you do not step on each other's toes. But it is part of the process that issues are actually brought to the table.

(Interview No. 6, Head HR, 300,000 Employees)

A feeling of psychological safety allows for conflicts to be aired and resolved without negative consequences for the team or the individual.

Research shows that a manager who knows his or her own strengths and weaknesses recognizes others for what they do and is still open to new things is a key factor in creating a sense of safety among employees. She will not be an angry or choleric manager at the helm; he will not be somebody who does not care about the well-being of their employees, but instead both will take on the role of a partner on an equal footing. A kind of partner, who at times may be wise, who at times may be not, but who will fill the required role with respect for the team. The result: employees feel safe.27

Reflect on your last meetings with people higher up the hierarchy. How safe did it feel to speak up? Did you, if only in the smallest sense, censor the content of what you were saying in order not to endanger yourself?

How big exactly is the impact of a leader’s humility on psychological safety? Let us look at one study.28 85 teams were asked first to how assess the humility of their leaders and then how psychologically safe they feel. The correlation could not be clearer – and could hardly be stronger if you look at Figure 4.3.

Figure 4.3 Psychological safety and humility.

The more humility, the more psychological safety. Full stop!

What direct results does this psychological safety have? It increases the motivation of employees, their willingness to commit themselves to the job and to put in much positive effort.29

People are then more willing to get involved and go the extra mile.

(Interview No. 6, Head HR, 300,000 employees)

Humility makes more people want to get involved.

(Interview No. 2, Head Talent Management, 10,000 employees)

With a safe environment comes employee creativity. Who is capable of being creative or willing to invest lots of mental energy, when they constantly have to battle to secure their position? Or if they are not appreciated for what they have created? Who can be original when there is a risk of the boss happily appropriating any of their good ideas? Or when errors are a catastrophe and the “guilty” punished?

There is an additional element that has to do with taking perspective. The more perspectives someone is able to see, the more creative they become. Imagine building chairs. If you only take the perspective of men, who are two meters tall and wear long trousers, your ideas will never veer towards chairs that can be lowered for shorter people or materials that need to be chosen in order to protect legs clad with nylon tights.

Humility of the leader engenders this perspective taking, which in turn leads to more creativity in teams.30

Employees of humble leaders are also more active in taking the initiative to craft and optimize their jobs to solve the creative task more effectively.31

They also raise their voice, both in a positive and critical sense. Since the manager is willing to listen and since he or she asks many questions, the employee finds it hard to consistently remain passive.32 And this is vital for creativity. Creativity does not exclude conflict, but instead requires a constant and productive struggle for the best ideas. This means that the willingness to express oneself openly and, if necessary, critically is crucial for the process. Only then are the best ideas identified and brought to realization.

It is a healthy company, when people dare to go into conflict. When sparks fly and people shout at each other, I can go home in peace. When people say ‘Good idea’ and afterwards give you the finger, this is a company without humility.

(Interview No. 57, Director L&D, 70,000 employees)

In summary, humble managers have an indirect effect on the innovative ability of the company through fostering psychological safety.

This effect also occurs since the manager visibly acts for the good of the organization, not for him or herself. In other words, they demonstrate a kind of altruism which ensures that employees are more willing to experiment, work openly and constructively with colleagues in other departments, something which would not have occurred to them without this role model. It also creates more opportunities for organizational learning. Both are important elements for successful innovation.33

And even employees that had withdrawn can be snapped open with humility.

Ronny Grossjohann and Robert Harms had been given the task of building a new production facility at Siemens to manufacture burners for power station turbines. They were unable to achieve any substantial progress within the usual planning process and decided to take a radical change of direction. The workers themselves were to build the factory. “We'll let the people organize themselves! We just provide a room and let go.”

The result:

Everywhere where we let go, things happened that we would never have managed by ourselves! We suddenly experienced at first hand the energy and self-confidence of the staff, and quickly understood: The core of the knowledge can be found within the base. The more we let go, the more ground-breaking the ideas became. Employees who had previously worked in silence, standing at “their” machine for 20 years suddenly joined in the lively discussion and stood up for their ideas. In the debate they took responsibility for the design of the production process - and for six-figure budgets!

The happy end: “After half a year of fruitless standstill, all of a sudden, our only task was to create the space and bring together the knowledge of the employees!”34

One short digression on the topic of innovativeness. Is it correctly hailed as being vital for good business results? Does greater innovativeness necessarily lead to a higher return of assets? Does truly every company fare better if it drives innovations?

Researchers looked at 47 mid-size companies that were driving process innovations.35 They found that innovativeness only leads to a substantial return on assets in those companies that sported psychological safety. The higher the psychological safety, the higher the return on assets and the greater the achievements of the set innovation goal (Figure 4.4).

Figure 4.4 Psychological safety/process innovation and return on assets.

Why? Because innovations only work when they are implemented – and this long and tedious process requires stamina, motivation and clear acceptance of responsibility for one’s own part in the bigger picture. Which again is enabled and fostered by the humble leader.

By the way, creativity is measurably greater in companies in which the exchange of knowledge is strongly encouraged. Here too, managers with humility are predestined to ensure this exchange in and across departments. After all, they create an atmosphere for learning and experimental thinking.

Humble managers also give the employees a feeling of belonging. And no matter where you are in the world, this feeling increases innovation by a good 40 percent.36 What an impressive value.

Take-Away: Humility makes employees creative and innovative – The safety that employees feel with a humble leader promotes creativity and the open and critical thinking that is necessary for innovation. If creativity and innovation are important in your company, then humility is an almost mandatory requirement!

More Emotional Labor and “Deep Acting”

Some phrases need explanation before we can dive into their connection with humility. This section contains three such phrases. The first is: “Emotional labor.”

Work life often demands specific emotional reactions from us. There are frequent moments, when it is not appropriate to show one’s true feelings: Imagine you are working at an airline counter that has just announced a flight delay of four hours. This will make you miss a friend’s birthday dinner. Can you show your irritation and sadness? No, you still have to be friendly to furious customers and push your personal emotions into the background.

The same is true in many other cases: If you have to withdraw a discount that has been granted to a customer; if you are sitting in the IT department and the server is down again; if you have to communicate bad news to your team – in all these situations, it can easily happen that your inner feelings do not match that which the outside world needs from you. Your role requires ever so often, that you should not share your very own feelings such as irritation about the internal discount policy, anger at the technology or furious incomprehension of the strategic decisions of your own company.

Instead, the situation demands that you express other emotions, be it calm, confidence or friendliness – everything that may help the other side deal with the situation.

Remember Tony Hayward from BP, who during the oil spill left his role, focused on his personal irritation and obviously did not manage to look beyond himself.

In other words, there is often discrepancy between what you are feeling at the moment and what you are allowed or encouraged to show. In order to achieve a positive expression, a smile, a friendly voice, a confident charisma, emotional labor needs to be done.

Now the other two concepts come into play: “surface acting” and “deep acting.” Surface acting is the process of clenching my teeth: I smile even when I don't feel like it; I stay friendly even when I would rather slam down the receiver on the rude customer.

We can all do this surface acting. And everyone knows that it takes an enormous amount of energy to show a different face to the outside world than you have on the inside. It is therefore not surprising that surface acting leads to emotional exhaustion, more resignations in companies and generally poorer performance.37

Things are different with the so-called “deep acting.” Here employees make an emotional effort in such a way that they actually end up feeling that which they need to feel. Who does this? For example, employees with a strong customer orientation. They find it easier since they genuinely empathize with the customer. They manage to put themselves into their shoes and get an inkling of what it is that the customer is actually in need of right now.

Others go down a different route in order to generate the genuine feeling. They remind themselves of how they have decided to label themselves. “I would never shout at a customer,” or “I do not lose my calm, come what may.” (This self-labeling is a very powerful tool about which I have written more in another book.)

“Deep acting” leads to the person actually feeling and experiencing the required feeling. This is measurably good for the customers, since they typically see through superficial acting and do not feel valued. Deep acting, on the other hand, is perceived positively. Consequently, customers often manage to switch out of their own self-focus, end up being calmer and giving more positive social feedback – perhaps they thank sincerely, or they manage to smile back despite the crisis.38 This again has an effect on the employee and his or her growing positive feeling.

Deep acting not surprisingly leads to employees feeling less exhausted, sleeping considerably better and quitting less!39

Now that the phrases “emotional labor,” “surface” and “deep acting” are clear, let us look at the humble leader. He or she inspires employees towards deep acting, which in consequence they find easier.40 This effect of the humble leader is all the greater in companies where customer centricity is lower. Why? If customer focus is engrained in the culture, then an individual manager has little additional impact, humble or not. If, however there are no clear rules, no explicit culture, then the humble leader has a large and measurable impact.

How exactly does a humble leader inspire employees towards more deep acting? One reason is that they are more appreciative of the achievements of others, so they are more likely to praise employees for coping or having coped well with difficult situations. This experience from past difficult situations ends up creating genuinely positive feelings for the new difficult situation.

The second reason is that the humble manager with their willingness to see the bigger picture projects a clear picture of someone who has the best interests of the customers and the employees at heart. As a consequence, such managers will in most cases succeed in keeping their own emotions tuned to the needs of the situation. The employee then not only knows the manager to be loyal and supportive but also has their calmness and the view of the bigger picture as an inspiration. If my manager never yells at an employee or a customer, even in the most stressful situations, then I will also learn to do this less. Deep acting will come automatically.

Take-Away: Humility brings positive emotions – Research shows that employees of humble leaders succeed more easily in adjusting their emotions to the necessity of the situation. This is a very pleasing result of humility, which can only be acknowledged with a genuinely felt smile.

Stronger Morals and Ethics

It may come as little surprise that the humility of a leader, in which he or she puts himself or herself in perspective and is willing to learn, is positively linked to the moral and ethical attitude of the employees. Indeed, research shows exactly that.41

In general, it is difficult to have a direct influence on the moral attitude of your employees. If you preach morality, there is a risk that they will be irritated and prefer to engage (frequently covert) in resistance rather than follow your words. This is even more the case if what the manager preaches does not correspond with what the employees can observe in the manager himself.

A typical example is the following anonymized real story: The CEO as well as the divisional managers, one of which is called James, attach great importance to the value of loyalty. They regularly talk about it and emphasize how important loyalty is for the company. How much it is valued and how important it is that everyone is loyal to the company, each other and customers.

One day, the moment of truth arrives: one of James' employees – Olga – resigns. It is known that she had been unlucky in having had an accident and nevertheless having to embark on numerous journeys for James. She also had many different projects with a number of other people. One of these was Jack. In the exit interview with James and the head of HR, the employee Olga was asked why she had quit. Next to many other issues, including the broken leg, she also mentioned a complicated project that she had run together with Jack. And like a hawk, James now pounces on Jack. In the year-end meeting, he accuses him of failing to work well with employees, of being too harsh, of not being able to lead others. No attempt to question or clear up the facts, no willingness to listen and no loyalty. Instead, James brings the ultimate killer argument. When Jack dares to question whether one single comment by Olga should really be taken so seriously, James retorts: “Where there's smoke, there's fire.” Over the next few years, other employees are regularly asked about Jack, specifically probed for bad management behavior. Only negative comments are passed on to Jack. Is it any wonder that whenever the official value of “loyalty” is mentioned, ironic winks or sarcastic grunts are the normal reaction?

Between moral preaching on the one hand and a solid silence when it comes to values or ethics lies the path of humility. What does this path look like? A willingness by the managers to honestly scrutinize themselves and their own moral competence. A willingness to appreciate the moral struggles and behavior of others coupled with a demonstrated willingness to learn.

How exactly does the manager achieve this? By being willing to employ the same openness as when looking into one's strengths and weaknesses. By being willing not only to define one’s values but also to observe one's own evil.

“Evil” is a really big word and unusual in a management book. Many of us like to think that in peacetime we are generally on the side of the good guys. Yet, if you look more closely, there is enough evil that can emerge in mundane day-to-day business. Let me give you a short list: Consciously nagging at others; consciously allowing obvious errors to run their course because it is too exhausting to do anything about them; letting a bad egg in your team ruin the atmosphere while you look away; going for what you know are wrong decisions, since they are easier to communicate and less dangerous to your position; letting yourself go and yell at someone; or, as in the example above with James and Jack, shoving people into mental drawers and doing everything possible to keep them there.

The evil here, of course, is a lesser evil, but I expect that everyone – after a short and possibly painful examination – has to admit that they are not safe from it. This does not mean that you have to chastise yourself. As always, the first thing that needs to be done is to simply recognize what there is within each of us of laziness, anger, sensitivities, carelessness and stubbornness. And then make yourself aware whether you want this behavior in yourself and in others.

The direct consequence of such introspection: You have to be sure of your own values. What is important to you in life, in interaction, in relationships?

That costs energy and time – because you have to be on your toes so as not to be taken by surprise in everyday life.

Matt Mulford, an UK-based professor of negotiation, tells of an expat manager who invites his business partners to a big dinner. When he comes to the restaurant, the restaurant owner stands at the door saying: “Unfortunately, your business partners had to cancel, but here is the bill of €8,000 for the cooked meal, which unfortunately we had to throw away.”

A classic kickback. If you have not thought through beforehand what you are prepared to do for a business deal and what not, it is possible that you will sign the invoice merely because you were not prepared and are bewildered. Which means that accidentally you will have bribed someone and realize this only later on when you “wake up” and are horrified at what you have done.

In times of corporate governance, this example is perhaps less common – but do you for example know your own values towards suppliers?

Sergei Petrov's goal was to make his company, the Rolf Group, the largest car importer in Russia. This meant serving international customs. When his CFO suggested for the second time not transferring an outstanding sum to the Austrian suppliers, but rather wait and accept the penalty, Petrov said (in a rather Russian manner): “Listen, man, I love you very much, and I’m ready to go dancing or fishing with you, but I’m going to hand over the finances to someone else—someone whose mentality corresponds to that of our foreign partners.” That turned out to be Matt Donnelly, the Irishman I recently made CEO of the business.42
Or look at an international technology company that has decided to pay all its suppliers only after 60 days. Imagine the impact this has on a local tradesman. Or on a trainer leading a seminar. While the motive is understandable, the result is clearly a negative reputation amongst all suppliers which the CFO most likely did not want.

If you do not align your actions with values, it may happen that you end up equally accidentally ruining your reputation. It is also possible that as in the example of James you unwittingly create a negative atmosphere in your department by not even noticing that you are demanding loyalty from your employees without awarding it to them.

Let us remind ourselves that James in accusing Jack of making Olga leave is not wanting to be “evil” or without values. Indeed, James has some big values in mind: i.e., protecting the team and generating a positive atmosphere in which employees want to stay. The only problem is that he did not really think through how to reach this goal. He did not reflect that using one piece of hearsay would weaken the culture of loyalty not strengthen it.

How can the manager share moral awareness? Openly disclosing in meetings where moral positions are at stake and putting them up for discussion. Making their own personal struggle explicit. Pointing out that in many cases there is no clear black or white and trying to penetrate the grey area together with the employees. Admitting mistakes, while at the same time honoring the moral behavior of employees. All of which contribute to making moral behavior a general benchmark.

How do researchers measure that employees become more moral if they work for a humble manager? This is done by the employees first assessing the moral humility of the manager with numerous questions from scales such as one shown in Chapter 2. To remind you: These questions measure humble behaviors and do not use the word “humility.”

Next, the readiness to behave unethically is evaluated. This is done by the employees themselves as well as by the manager. What is unethical behavior? Examples are the “slightly incorrect” filing of travel expense reports (the word “slightly” is just one of those self-protective judgments that people like to use when violating rules) and the nicking of company property (“nicking” is used as the friendly face of stealing).

The result? The more humility employees perceive in the manager, the less questionable moral behavior is found among them as a whole group. Are all influenced equally? No. When researchers dug more deeply into the numbers, a relevant distinction came up: There is a greater “contagion effect” of a humble manager to those employees that have internalized the topic of humility. There will always be a lesser impact of a humble leader on hardened, egocentric employees than on those who are practicing the virtue of humility themselves.43

One final point as to how humble leaders support their employees in living their own as well as the company values. By providing a calm atmosphere and reducing stress. Take this story as an inspiration.

In a seminar for priests to be, the young men are asked to give a lecture on the parable of the Good Samaritan.44 You remember it? Being the only one to help a man, nearly beaten to death by robbers. The aspiring candidates were given days in advance to prepare their material. On the day of the lecture, however, far earlier than expected, each speaker is called up: “Quick, get over there. The audience is already waiting. Hurry up!”

The agitated individual hurries from the room through a long connecting corridor to the lecture hall. In this situation, not a single person, NOT a single one, helps the elderly man, who is lying ill on the floor. All of a sudden, compassion and helpfulness among these future priests has evaporated. Why? Because they are under pressure and – whoosh – their values fly out the window.

Things are different for the second group. No “supervisor” puts pressure on them. No hectic, no panic. Leisurely they stroll towards the lecture theatre and immediately the good Samaritan appears in every single candidate priest. In emotional calm, there is ample room for compassion and helpfulness.

Think back to situations where your manager put pressure on you? How did you manage to make sure that you kept your values intact? Research shows, that 50–88 percent of employees misreport if their superior tells them to.45 What dangerous power to have, and what danger of wielding it without noticing.

How can you make sure that you do not accidentally put pressure on your employees that causes them to forego their own values? Learn to be humble.

Take-Away: Humility strengthens ethical behavior – By exemplifying one's own values and composure, the leader’s humilitas achieves greater employee adherence to moral and ethical principles.

More Acceptance of Differentiating Behavior

Not every employee needs the same approach from their manager, the same type of task, the same type of control, the same type of support or feedback. Instead, there are considerable differences that every manager easily recognizes. Yet, if he or she then decides to act in a differentiating manner, a sad consequence ensues. Often employees perceive this adaptive behavior in a highly critical manner. “Why does X get feedback again and I only get to see the boss every six months?” “How come Y gets to work with a coach and I don't?” How easy then for employees to become demotivated or for the manager to desperately try to treat all employees equally. Clearly neither is healthy for the company.

Research shows the solution: since the humble manager is obviously aware of his or her own strengths and weaknesses and at the same time pays honest and open tribute to others, it is accepted that the manager can see exactly what each employee needs. Instead of alienating the followers, the differentiating behavior of a humble manager actually strengthens the identification with him or her. You can see this in Figure 4.5.

Figure 4.5 Identification with a humble leader.

Thus, differentiating behavior is no longer a question of alleged injustice, but represents instead a valuable individualized measure of attention for each employee.

Consequently, actions that follow this differentiating perception are perceived positively. In other words, it is no longer unfair or selfish if the manager spends more time with one employee. It is simply okay – if one team member is helped indirectly, we are all better off. Attention then is not regarded negatively as unfair treatment.46

This also has something to do with pragmatic leadership. Leadership is not generally about lofty goals and visions, but often merely about each employee wanting to be seen in his or her individual situation. This applies to working hours, the way of working, the opportunities for further development as well as feedback to individual ideas.

Many managers shy away from differentiating treatment in this respect, because they fear both a loss of control and that they will be perceived as unfair. But it is clearly “unfair” if, for example, only extroverts speak at meetings. No matter how many times the manager may ask, the introverts will not necessarily learn to speak up. But outside the meeting, it is then every manager's duty to follow up. In such a case, it would be a misjudgment yet a real danger that extrovert employees see this follow-up as an unfair favoring of their colleagues. With a humble manager this does not happens.

In this way, research can dispel the fear that this type of differentiating treatment is seen as an undifferentiated catastrophe. As long as the process for differential treatment is fair, dealing with each person individually leads to greater satisfaction, better performance and even more willingness to help others within the department or company.47 So once again, humility can be seen as a stroke of luck for the overall company climate.

Take-Away: Humility awards freedom – Humble manager are allowed to behave in a differentiating manner. They are therefore free to respond to their employees in the way that is best for both sides. They do not have to worry that this differentiated treatment will affect the climate in the team negatively.

Better Top Management Teams

There is a basic amount of power, and if it belongs to only one, the others have nothing but powerlessness. Therefore, they do not become involved in action. I cannot increase the amount of power - at least in my understanding. But I can distribute it differently. In this way I empower others, who are also more strongly called upon to act. Encourage and challenge.

(Interview No. 2, Head HR, 10,000 employees)

Decisions taken by several people who act as equals are measurably better.

(Interview No. 10, Deputy Head IT, 1,000 employees)

Not surprisingly, humility also has a positive effect at the highest level. A humble CEO succeeds in getting the top management team to work better and more effectively. The proof?

An analysis of 63 CEOs and 328 members of top management teams: Humble CEOs saw more strengths than weaknesses in their top managers. Their mindset of appreciating others helps them see the good in everyone and be aware of where they themselves may need support. As a result of this positive assessment, they were far happier to work with them, empower them and take decisions together in comparison to those leaders that always pick on others overlooking the beam in their own eye.48 The consequence is a greater integration of the top team, which in turn has a measurable effect on the middle management. Middle management then has more confidence in the culture, becomes more engaged, feels more emotionally connected and performs better.

This contagion starts from the top: If the CEO behaves humbly, this has a positive effect on the top team. The cascade then goes down to the middle level, which in turn motivates the next level.

Humility has a second effect on top teams. In general, humble managers do not keep the leadership solely in their hands. Instead, they follow the concept of shared leadership, where everyone in the team, depending on the situation and the skills needed, can step up to be the driving and guiding force. Not surprisingly, this type of leadership is the recommended method to lead in agile work. Being prepared to let go of your own leadership role is just as important in this structure as taking on the role of a leader.

Sam Rayburn, former White House spokesman, recognized this years ago. “You cannot be a leader, and ask other people to follow you, unless you know how to follow, too.”

The humility of the leader is the key here for this to happen: Since the leader is willing a) to lead where it makes sense, b) to admit weaknesses where this is important and c) to be open to the suggestions of others, team members have the courage to take the lead in those situations where their own strengths are of use.49 And the manager will acknowledge this and not insist on his or her own status, but instead award the necessary trust to the individual board members. The same works on lower levels – in this case the manager will allow employees to take over the rein, where it is for the best of the department or company, without trying to keep power as a protective measure for the ego.

Trust, of course, plays a large role here.

Humility is definitely a source of trust among employees. Especially the aspect of recognizing one's own shortcomings. It is helpful for the employee if managers can really see themselves. There is then a high probability that employee participation will increase.

(Interview No. 5, Head Corporate Academy, 300,000 employees)

This is the secret recipe for humility: It is not merely about cognitive-based trust, but also about the emotional trust, that is generated by the humble manager sharing power, putting him- or herself on an equal footing, admitting to weaknesses.50 It works for normal teams, but is even more impactful for the whole company.

Take-Away Humility strengthens top management – Employees not only look to their direct manager, but also to the top team. This is strengthened by a humble leader and consequently works more effectively.

Summary: Seven Measurable Benefits of Humility for Employees

The humility of the manager has seven positive effects on employees: they perform better as individuals and in teams, can better manage their own emotions, are more creative and act more morally. Empowerment, psychological security and self-efficacy play a major role here. In addition, employees are willing to accept differentiating behavior, which in turn gives the manager more freedom in how to act. And with a humble CEO, the top management team becomes better, which is reflected in the entire corporate culture.

Benefits of Humility for the Organization

In my former company we found a link between emotional intelligence, humility and the number of accidents happening. The humbler the manager the fewer accidents. Why? It had something to do with situational awareness as well as the willingness to receive feedback.

(Interview No. 69, Global Director L&D, 86,000 employees)

It was a market already long divided between large competitors, when in 1989 30-year-old Indian born Sunny George Verghese was tasked by his company to set up an export company from Nigeria. In order to grow and be successful, a special culture was needed. Verghese puts it like this: “We did not have the capacity to take on big risks, so instead took up a multiplicity of small risks. In such an environment, the leaders had to own up to their mistakes, and these become learnings for the organization as a whole.”

Meetings at the company therefore always start with a discussion of what went wrong and Verghese was each time the first to do so: “As a leader, I had to set the tone and pace of the meeting, so I always started with the wrong calls, I had made.” One of the employees added: “If you make a mistake and learn from it you can double, triple or even quadruple your performance. This encourages risk-taking in the organization, and leads to high quality results.”51

The result? 23 years later, Olam International is a company with more than $24 bn revenue and more than 40,000 employees worldwide. The CEO receives accolades on employment sites such as glassdoor – 88 percent of 521 employees give him a highly positive evaluation.52 Everyone who knows how bad glassdoor ratings typically are, will appreciate this.

Let us look what humility can bring to organizations. The famous English historian Edward Gibbon wrote about Rome: “But the decline of Rome was the natural and inevitable effect of immoderate greatness.”53 “Immoderate greatness,” what a great phrase, which many feel can be aptly applied to a number of companies. Some have publicly fallen heavily from power. WeWork, Theranos and Enron to name but a few.

So, the time has come to see if humility will not only save kingdoms, but also companies from ruin.

I want to mention one key benefit upfront. Firstly, because it is vital one, and secondly because the paper about it is unluckily still in the publication process and I cannot go into as much detail as I would wish. Yet, I can quote Professor Amy Ou directly. She is one of the leading researchers in the field of humble leadership worldwide and has found:

The most exciting advancement in my humility research is that we can now measure CEO humility from archival data and find that CEO humility in US public companies indeed has a positive effect on return on assets. Humility clearly seems to add to the “business case” for companies.

This is, of course, a good indication for a positive effect of humility directly on bottom line results. Once the paper is published and others along these lines, I will share them via the different channels. Till then, there are enough other positive results to look at.

More Successful Strategy

It is not at first glance intuitive that humility should lead to better strategies. However, research shows this for three elements: The type of strategy, the communication of strategy and, last but not least, the implementation of strategy.

The Type of Strategy

Looking at strategy, there is consensus that our age requires more from companies. That they are able to “milk” existing businesses for revenue while at the same time investing into new products, processes and business models. This is the well-known balancing act between “exploiting” and “exploring.” Companies must succeed in optimizing the old while at the same time initiating the new.

Is this always accepted easily within a company? We all know that a sales department does not rejoice when an online unit is set up; nor are employees in a factory delighted when a platform is founded to sell not only their own but also their competitors’ products. There are also few that are enthusiastic when a new unit is set up for AI or machine learning and is given better premises and more favorable terms than the existing ones.

The solution to this dilemma is the so-called ambidextrous organization. This means that the management focuses equally on the old as well as the new business. The metaphor is one of using both hands equally. For this job the CEO is predestined, while needing the top management team for the execution and support.

Top management teams, however, are typically organized along responsibilities based on the existing lines: old versus new. This can lead to considerable rivalry, a willingness to fight for one’s own area only and to miss out on seeing the bigger picture.

What does the humble leader bring to this situation? Measurably greater success in terms of an effective ambidextrous organization.54

That sounds good, but the question is, how do humble leaders do it?

As seen above, humble behavior helps achieve integration of the top management team. The CEOs neither dictate nor compete with their top managers. Instead, he or she generates a feeling of working in unison with all pursuing a common goal. Equally, the humble CEO shares leadership and the responsibility that comes with it. And if as a member of the Top Team you are suddenly jointly responsible for the bigger picture, the world begins to look very different. Why would a new field of business then be regarded as a self-cannibalization that must be challenged? Instead, the new unit becomes a desirable necessity to ensure the future of the whole company. In such an atmosphere, also any new business unit learns to appreciate and support the old more easily.

What else does the humble CEO do, statistically speaking? Watch out for the money. Not in the sense of saving it, but rather looking out to where it goes: In companies run by humble leaders, there is a measurably smaller difference between the salary of the CEO and that of the other board members. Why? A humble manager who does not see the need to feed his ego will not need the status of a greatly differing salary.

This goes hand in hand with a generally reduced focus on status symbols.

Humility also means approaching the subject of status with a cheerful serenity. Show a greater suppleness, a light-hearted calm when dealing with conventional status symbols – especially in the office context. Who has what parking space, what car, what mobile phone? Just because I could do it, I do not have to do it. Rather I embed it in the context and think about the effect my status symbols create.

(Interview No. 2, Head of Talent Management, 10,000 employees)

The smaller gap in salary strengthens the feeling in the board members or directors of being at the top of the company together, of being truly one amongst equals.

This is another nudge towards thinking in larger dimensions.

Interestingly, there is also solid evidence that humble CEOs also invest more in R&D. Maybe knowing that they do not know everything, they try to make sure that nothing big is missed. They also focus more on the bigger picture, in this case on corporate social performance55, such as donations to the community, recycling within the company or special efforts in terms of safety. Unsurprisingly, companies with humble CEOs have more measurable success in these areas and are far more active in the wider stakeholder community. They also focus more on diversity, employee relations, environmental impact and product safety/quality.

Research confirms that these efforts do not lead to lower corporate results. This seems to imply that focusing on the bigger picture does no harm, but is simply an additional goal. And as we have seen above: the higher the aims, the better the performance.

Ergo: Don't fear CSR – it doesn’t replace profitability, but complements it.

Last but not least, humility helps managers to not overestimate their own strategy and underestimate competitors. In his classic book on innovation, researcher Clayton M. Christensen warned against all those leaders who tend to overestimate their own perspectives “they overlook fundamental market movements and rush towards the abyss.”56 Like the Roman empire. That egotistical blindness happens far less often to companies led by humble leaders.

Communication of Strategy

There is a second level at which a humble CEO helps the strategy to succeed. And that has something to do with communication. First of all, we must make the following very clear: Research shows that a humble CEO is in no way wishy-washy, overmodest or overcautious. Instead, they are self-confident and have a firm belief in their vision, in themselves and their people.

Professor Bradley Owens, one of the founders of humility research makes this clear: “Indeed, we have found that the humble leader bases his or her trust on the importance of the vision and on their ability to guide the collective in realizing that vision.”57

Initially I trust everyone.

(Interview No. 56, CEO, 700 employees)

Since the humble leader does not assume that he or she can handle everything on their own, they try to communicate the vision so clearly that employees and colleagues feel safe in it and are carried along. And we all know what happens within ourselves when we understand what exactly the goal is and how our own efforts contribute to it. The buy-in is much stronger, the willingness to take unusual paths grows, so that the whole organization is much more clearly moving in one direction together.

In addition, the humble manager can deal with it if the communication does not initially meet with approval.

There was a difficult situation in which it was necessary to shift staff to a new structure. Emotions were running high, people were ranting and raving about me as a manager. It was important for me to let this happen without being upset at the people. I had to allow their emotions to run through me without complaining. And also, to take responsibility. It is not the board of directors, which is far away, that has decided, but it is my decision. At the end of the day, it turned out well because we stayed “in touch”. It is all a part of understanding others, accepting them, going to the hotspots and not weighing every word on the gold scale.

(Interview No. 11, Head L&D, 300,000 employees)

Why does this kind of clear and brave communication happen so rarely? Because many managers are trapped in their own perspective and therefore underestimate how much clarity and repetition, how much time, how much venting of anger people need in order to really be on board.

In addition, they give little room and time for employees to really think through and take responsibility for understanding what the strategy or the change initiative means for themselves. Instead, many managers are easily annoyed when they have the feeling that they are once again not understood. They quickly see this as sabotage or unwillingness – while it is they that are at fault. The important thing to remember is that only the receiver can actually judge how effective the communication has been. And for the sender to understand how much the receiver has understood, there is the amazingly simple tool of asking, what has been understood.

We all know, that most managers are not ill-meaning when they communicate too little or unclearly. As we will see later, making sure, that what we say really reaches the receiver, is not as simple as it seems – but requires focus and concerted effort.

Humble managers are more easily aware of this potential pitfall and keep on communicating, communicating, communicating. Or at least hiring heads of communication. The right ones!

There are two options: You can pick a communications director who tells you that you're great, or you can pick one who says: “My impression is that the company needs the following…. I know you have everything clear in your mind's eye. But not everyone understands it. And my suggestion would be ...” The latter constellation is the most successful. As in many other relationships, it fits well if it is complementary and each has a good eye for the other's strengths and weaknesses. If the constellation is different, if the crucial advisory functions are set up like-for-like, the consequence is almost always narcissistic isolation or group thinking. That is when humility is missing.

(Interview No. 5, Head Corporate Academy, 300,000 employees)

This brings us already to the last reason why humble CEOs have a more successful strategy.

The Implementation

Humble leaders also ensure better implementation of strategies. Why?

Change requires the commitment of the entire organization and the willingness to change old processes and behavioral patterns. If the impulse for this only comes from the CEO, this typically leads to reluctance and a failure to implement changes. But if I am an employee of a humble leader, this has a statistically relevant effect on my willingness as an employee to not only initiate and support changes and improvements but also to take charge of getting them implemented in my area.58

By seeing themselves as part of a whole, employees are more likely to understand their role in this bigger picture, have a feeling for what their part might be and what influence each of them has. This room for influence, however small, is very important.

(Interview No. 7, VP Training, 22,000 employees)

The reasons for this can be found in the fact that a humble leader inspires an increased sense of being part of something bigger, as well as of self-esteem in employees in relation to their organization. They feel more called upon and more empowered to take things into their own hands.

As we know, self-initiative is worth its weight in gold. And it is not hard for a humble manager to deal with the fact that yet another idea has come not from him or her but actually from the team. Precisely, this is what humble managers relish: that others take action and they can learn from their ideas and strengths. To illustrate further, how humility empowers strategy implementation, I want to share an example from military history.

Humility at the military – the example of Moltke

Little humility is expected in the military. Not amongst soldiers, and even less amongst the higher echelons. Was Napoleon humble? No, he thought of himself as a genius and was sure that after his great successes in Europe any other conquest would be a piece of cake. Not aware of Russia’s strength, not aware of the weaknesses of his military planning, he embarked on his invasion of Russia. Worse still, he actually planned almost every action of his troops in advance, forgetting that on the battle field after the first shot is fired there is hardly a detailed plan or concise strategy that can be executed. The result: a defeated and sorely decimated army limping back to France, with the Russians celebrating their victory and commemorating it forever in Tchaikovsky’s rousing overture 1812.

Helmuth Karl Bernhard von Moltke, born in Parchim in 1800 on the other hand was an epitome of humble leadership. He recognized a fundamental weakness in the wartime planning of his age. He put it succinctly: “No operational plan reaches beyond the first encounter with the enemy main force with any degree of certainty.”

From this he deduced for himself and for the Prussian army the new principle of mission command. In other words, he recognized the weaknesses of plans while appreciating others for being able to make good decisions in any situation. Of course, this only held true when they were clear about what the precise objective was and they had learned to use their own brains

What distinguishes mission command from the former way of waging war? In the past, as with Napoleon, there had been concrete orders. “Conquer this hill there by taking position here, break out towards the forest here, take the bridge on the north side...” This order was to be obeyed. No matter what happened. Irrespective of the fact that on the Big Day the envisaged position was occupied by enemy troops or that the bridge on the north side was suddenly the most heavily guarded. Circumstances were not relevant. Full stop. The officer as well as the common soldier simply had to obey. They did not need to know about or truly understand the bigger picture. They needed to follow orders, not have freedom of choice in how to act. The brilliant commander had surely foreseen everything.

With von Moltke, something new, called “thinking obedience” entered the scene. There were no longer orders, but, instead, missions and assignments. For each mission, the larger goal was communicated “You must conquer this hill. If you fail, there is the danger that our whole left front will crumble.”

As a result, every soldier had his mission and knew his place on the larger map. Exactly how he carried out his mission was left to each officer and soldier to decide.

Von Moltke was also a strong advocate of options, none of which in themselves were better than the other – but all possible and therefore all needed to be dealt with. He thought through countless scenarios and tried to protect against the worst. At the same time, he was always ready to spontaneously exploit positive situations.

Others, he awarded room to decide for themselves, while gently pointing to the danger of the ego. Thus, he wrote to Major General Leonhard von Blumenthal:

You will be a better judge there on the spot than I am able to judge from here; I only wish to warn you not to let yourself be dragged away to a fight under any circumstances. It is, of course, much easier to advise resistance at all costs than to dodge, however necessary.

He himself remained calm and untouched throughout his wars. Since he never expected these plans to work out, he was never disappointed or dismayed.

The time he took to reflect and not judge caused him to be nicknamed “the great silent one, the only officer who could be silent in seven languages.”

No wonder that many a CEO has adopted this way of thinking: Giving a view of the big picture, handing out missions and fostering independent thinking within agreed parameters. The most famous of von Moltke’s adherents is probably Jack Welch, who held him in such high esteem that he quoted him in several speeches and dedicated himself to the concept: “Not expect a plan of operations to survive beyond the first contact with the enemy. Set only the broadest of objectives and emphasize seizing unforeseen opportunities as they arise.”59

This awareness of moving targets, this realization that something like thinking obedience within a larger framework can exist, helps not only the managers but also the employees to successfully implement strategies.

One last point as to why humble leaders have better implementation rates: they involve more of their employees already in the initial, in the idea-finding process without relinquishing their power to make decisions. That is, they get more buy-in for any change by involving more upfront.

A manager came into a new department and had a pile of instructions to change things. He took almost a year to listen, ask questions and analyse. At this point the employees were actually beginning to be dissatisfied because they wanted strong leadership in a predefined direction. Finally, in several workshops together with these already impatient employees, a new direction was shaped. Since by now, everyone felt so well integrated, they were ready to support all major changes.

Of course, the manager could have implemented the change differently, but without this positive effect. He was clearly aware that he could learn from his colleagues and his employees. If the people had not been involved and had not been part in the reorganization, there would have been massive pain and protests. Through the involvement, through this very appreciative process, the people involved were now ready to be taken on board.

(Interview No. 10, Deputy Head IT, 1,000 employees)

Viewed from a purely statistical perspective, such behavior increases the probability of good implementation. Everyone who has read that up to 90 percent of all implementations fail should take this to heart. Even if you are less sceptical as regards the implementation rate – humility as a condition for successful implementation will always come considerably cheaper than management consultants entering the scene after a failed attempt of implementing!

Take-Away: Humility leads to a more successful strategy – In times of ambidexterity, a humble leader can better exploit opportunities together with the top team. The humble leader communicates their vision more clearly, gets more employee buy-in, and achieves better strategy execution.

Better Culture

That which is exemplified by the leader is given back: what goes around comes around. Humility brings solidarity and cooperation.

(Interview No. 4, VP Digital Marketing, 50,000 employees)

Where egos predominate, a positive culture is hard to maintain. Insults, vanities, rivalries, flattery, sensitivities will be rampant.

Consider instead, the advantages of a culture in which managers and consequently many of the employees adopt an attitude of humility. This will have a huge impact on two elements of culture. On how to cooperate and how to deal with errors.

Let us look at the culture of cooperation first: A survey of 105 American companies showed that CEOs who bring humility to the company manage to create a strong culture of cooperation.60 Why? The CEO enables employees to see the bigger picture – as a consequence most realize that they have to look beyond their own noses. The practical result of this is a measurable increase of willingness to help others.61

In addition, if I know what it is that I can and in particular all that I cannot do, this will make me gentler and more understanding towards the inabilities or weaknesses of others. Gone the judgment of “Oh, my God, why does he still not get it?” or “Of course, she is late again with the presentation”. Instead: “I wonder how I may help” and “That is quite a difficult project to deal with.”

The other result of humility is that employees are more willing to share their knowledge.

In many companies, knowledge is held back, either consciously to have more power or unconsciously because there is little interest in or concern for the needs of others. What is often missing is the open and generous culture that encourages employees to proactively approach peers or employees to share their knowledge or ask what may be needed.

In companies where there are fewer fights between employees or within the group of managers; in companies where from the top down ego plays less of a role; in companies where employees speak openly about their own errors and those of the managers without losing respect; in a company with a humble culture: there is measurably more knowledge shared.62 These companies sport a culture where seekers who are willing to learn and who realize that they do not know everything, meet those who know, and who feel appreciated for their knowledge.

This positive contagion most easily starts from the top.

In my career I had a Mexican boss called Antonio. He led a team session about humility and explained how by the age of 58 he had truly understood that a team can only be successful if everyone shows humility, asks for help and is at the same time looking out for where their help is needed. Now 15 years have passed and I am known in the company as someone who always looks out for anyone who may be struggling – and then I help and assist even far outside my official role. This is better for the company and the teams. I have learnt that I am not here for myself but for our greater good and our greater success.

(Interview No.101, VP HR, 1,000 employees)

This shows once again, how important it is for leaders to bring their assumptions, their beliefs, their core values out into the open. Only then can you be sure that the whole team is on board.

Janina Kugel, former board member of Siemens, sums up her beliefs in a similar vein:

It is nonsense to make this claim at all (of knowing everything). Changes happen so fast today, there is an incredible amount of information. It is utopian to assume that one individual can collect and evaluate all the factors relevant to decision-making. So, you have to involve in advance all people whose knowledge and experience can contribute to the decision-making process. And if a factor is still not taken into account, adjustments are made afterwards. In agile contexts, it is perfectly normal to say: “We'll try it out now, and if it doesn't fit, we'll go back a bit. This works for smaller and larger decisions. As long as you communicate clearly about it, it's perfectly ok.”63

This quote is the perfect switch to the second huge impact humility has on a company culture which has to do with dealing with errors, failures and weaknesses.

I went to our Chinese factory. They asked if I would do anything different. I mentioned one thing, that did not seem to work as well as I knew it could. By the next morning it was implemented.

(Interview No.137, former Board Member, 4,500 employees)

We have all heard dozens of times that failing fast is good. Unless you run nuclear power stations, of course. But even in nuclear power stations it is vital, that errors are not hidden but brought into the open and that employees truly and honestly communicate their mistakes.

This seems to be a difficult thing: research shows that errors are only shared reluctantly and at most in small groups behind closed doors.64

What can a manager do to change this? Clearly setting an example by admitting errors, weaknesses and misjudgments. If done regularly this behavior slowly but surely becomes contagious as we saw with Olam.

Research confirms this: A study of 161 teams shows that problems and misjudgments are more admitted to and discussed if the manager is acting as a role model of humility.65 Why? The humility of the leader results in every side having “a voice.” The manager’s humility inspires greater team humility, which leads to a stronger focus on the common goal and measurably better team performance. In addition, this results in employees gaining the courage to address deeply unpleasant issues such as mistakes.66

Remember psychological safety? And the fact that employees in a humble culture identify themselves more with the larger goals of the organization? Both effects of humility come together to encourage employees to be more outspoken about their own errors as well as what errors they see in the organization at large.

One of the key figures in this area of research is Amy Edmondson, the Harvard professor who developed the concept of psychological safety.

To her one of the core problems has nothing to do with intentional deviations from established rules. Instead, she points her finger at the key hindrance for a good culture when it comes to all those errors that are made as a result of lack of clarity, pure inattention, overwork, bad structure etc.:

When I ask executives to […] estimate how many of the failures in their organizations are truly blameworthy, their answers are usually in single digits - perhaps 2% to 5%. But when I ask how many are treated as blameworthy, they say (after a pause or a laugh) 70% to 90%.67

These 70 to 90 percent are bound to contain many errors and situations that would be useful to discuss. Errors, that should be considered and not condemned since they could point a way forward. Not discussing such errors and not drawing conclusions from them is a time bomb for the company.

Humble managers end up doing something about these time bombs. A number of interview partners reported on their version of “Fuck Up Nights.”

I have run three now in my department. And there have been these amazing moments that nearly moved me to tears when I see with what the seriousness, profundity and honesty people present their mistakes.

(Interview No. 122, Board Member, 2,000 employees)

We have adopted from Facebook the idea of the so-called “Courageous Penguin Awards”. This means that an executive frankly tells where something didn't work out at all in his or her career and gives an insight what may have been the reason. We often use the original charts from back then, which still radiate a lot of enthusiasm. We present this with a certain amount of humor and self-criticism in order to show what we do differently and hopefully better today.

(Interview No. 4, VP Digital Marketing, 50,000 employees)

Soon this open sharing becomes a normal habit.

When Alan Mulally, in 2006, moved from Boeing to Ford as CEO, there was a fear of admitting those problems for which there was no immediate solution. Alan gave a color code for his top managers to report on: Green meant everything was OK, yellow designated new problems and red were problems with no apparent solution. For weeks on end all reports were a delightful green, which Mulally commented on with astonishment: The loss of $17 billion had to come from somewhere. Then one day it happened: Mark Fields, Ford’s president of the Americas had a problem with the new Ford Edge. The tailgate drive simply was not working. He halted all production and put a red flag into his presentation. All eyes went to the floor, fear went through the room. Then Mulally started clapping. And step by step, over the coming weeks, the other executives opened up, and were willing to talk about those problems, for which they had no easy solution. As a result of these and other changes, Ford managed to get back into black figure from 2009 onwards.68

Initially it may not be intuitive that the more errors are being reported, the safer and the better the organization is. Instead, one suspects that where more errors are talked about, there simply will be more errors happening than elsewhere.

Yet, here again psychological safety comes into play. When I feel safe in a meeting, when I believe that my head will not be ripped off, then and only then will I report errors. Others may then learn from them, and the number of total errors will sink. On the other hand, if I am afraid, there will be fewer official errors, less that can be learned from and as a consequence the number of errors will remain high.

One interview partner described the amazing consequence of such an oppressive culture:

In one of our markets we discovered why there never were any accidents recorded. The reason was, that we had a communicated aim of a zero-accident statistic – so if an accident happened, the person was fired and the report remained unblemished.

(Interview No. 101, VP HR, 1,000 employees)

So, in humble organizations there exists a better handling of errors which is both ritualized as well as spontaneous.

There are two other cultural elements to mention: The emotional climate in teams led by humble leaders is better. Studies show that people who are not humble tend to overreact in conflicts, withdraw and plan revenge.69 They are also less generous and more concerned with their own advantage.

This is not the case in companies with a culture of humility: here emotions do not boil over in such a way that employees are offended. Instead, the whole atmosphere becomes warmer and more generous as regards handing out resources, attention as well as knowledge.

In addition, a culture that looks at the bigger picture and pays tribute to everyone in the company gives rise to a stronger sense of gratitude among employees. And on gratitude, research is manifold and very clear.70 People who feel grateful are healthier, see themselves less as a victim and most importantly are more resilient than those who do not reflect on what one can be grateful for.

Take-Away: Humility creates a better culture – The humble leader creates a culture in which mistakes can be talked about openly. The emotional climate is better, and the connection to the big picture creates a sense of gratitude, which in turn leads to increased cooperation.

Greater Willingness to Take on Responsibility

Some of the managers like to delegate all their thinking about leadership to the Learning and Development department. “Tell us how we can lead in this hybrid world.” Of course, we are willing to help. But at the same time, it is as if they are holding back their own intelligence and not really taking responsibility for their role.

(Interview No. 88, Head of EMEA Learning, 100,000 employees)

It is like the spiderman saying “with great power comes great responsibility.” Yet not all our employees or managers are really taking on full responsibility for their role and their activities.

(Interview No. 55, Director Global Learning, 34,000 employees)

In the more than 170 interviews I held, I not only asked about humility but also about what the biggest delta was in the company culture right now, compared to what it should be like ideally.

Unprompted 20 percent of the CEOs and top managers stated that there was a lack of people taking real responsibility for what they are doing. Instead, they saw employees and managers alike, leaning back comfortably and passing the buck.

I would like to share a personal story on this, where I myself was guilty of such an evasion of responsibility.

At the management consultancy I was working at after my studies, the project leader or the partner would always look over the slides for the steering committee. Initially, I was quite happy to take the easy way out. Which was not really thinking through my slides as if I personally would need to present them to the board of the client the next morning. Instead, I stopped short and mentally as well as in real life shifted the burden for clarity and useability of the slides to the people higher up the line.

It took some time until I adjusted and learned to put myself into the shoes of the person actually presenting.

Typical examples of not taking full responsibility are the following:

Observing bad processes – and not doing anything about them, since it is out of the official scope of one’s job description.
Running a project – and not alerting others to the fact that resources, budget, manpower is missing.
Failing to influence – not thinking through what stakeholders need to be on board, not investing energy in influencing them and then blaming these stakeholders for the failure of the project.
Hogging resources – and not giving them up for the good of the company.
And, what I had done: preparing a presentation – yet not as if one had to hold it oneself thereby mentally delegating the final responsibility for the content to the presenter.

How can you nudge people into taking more responsibility and not wait for the coin to drop?

Trainer and author Jack Malcom retells the following story.71 When Henry Kissinger became President Nixon’s National Security Adviser in 1969, he brought a reputation as a demanding taskmaster. So, when a staffer was given an assignment to write a position paper for his new boss, he understandably put in extra hours and took great pains to produce top-notch work. A day after he had turned it in, Kissinger called him into his office and asked him, “Is this the best you can do?”

The staffer promised he could improve it, and went back to his desk. He canceled his other appointments, called his wife to tell her he would be home very late and worked feverishly on the report: fine-tuning it, adding information, clarifying where necessary etc. At the end of the week, he turned it in. On Monday morning, Kissinger passed by and contemptuously dropped the report on his desk. In a loud voice, he again asked, “Is this the best you can do?”

Stunned and not a little frustrated, the staffer vowed to do even better, and redoubled his efforts from the previous week, putting even longer hours and finding even better ways to express and support his position. Two days later, convinced that it was as close to perfect as he could get it, he turned it in again. The next day, Kissinger again asked, “Is this really the best you can do?” The young man had had enough, so he looked at Kissinger squarely and said, “Yes, that is the best I can do.”

Kissinger replied, “Good. Now I will read it.”

Often employees need to be nudged into actually giving their best. And this does not mean that you have to ignore the 80:20 rule. But more often than not, the 80 percent ends up being a sad 50 percent.

Is a nudge as the one above a humble one? I would say yes. All I am doing as a leader is to get people to take the role that they have chosen seriously.

Equally, many managers shy away from their responsibility of leading people. Instead of following the image of an eagle who primarily soars and only rarely swoops, many managers love to spend large swathes of time down on the ground doing work that others in their team could to far better.

Why? Because for many this is easier than having to do something less immediately obvious. What could this be? Leading your people, removing stumbling blocks for them, advertising your department’s achievements internally, acquiring resources or buy-in from other stakeholders etc.

Interestingly, it is not too difficult to get managers to realize the value of leadership if they ask themselves the following question: If regularly, instead of being with clients or digging into a report I will spend time with my people listening to them, coaching them or removing obstacles out of their way, how much better will they become? The answer usually is somewhere around 5–10 percent. Which will have its impact in measurable business results.

I remember the head of a large corporate university using this type of argument to get buy-in from the board for his extensive program plans. He asked: “How much better will your managers become if they spend two weeks a year with the world’s best business school professors?” The board became enthusiastic and talked about 10, 15 or even 20 percent. Successfully having shifted the burden of proof, he took a modest approach: “Let us be very conservative and say only one percent. How much is that at our bottom line?” And since that was far more than the cost of the executive education programs he was allowed to go ahead just as he had wished.

Back from how managers can prove the value of leadership as to why humility in leaders increases the willingness of people to take on more responsibility, to be more an owner of their tasks.

On the one hand, as we have seen, employees of a humble leaders are more motivated and see more purpose in what they do. So, they will expend more effort on what they are doing.

On the other hand, the humble manager is also more aware of his or her duties. My research in Figure 4.6 shows that those managers that employees identified as humble get a much higher score of 1.53 – well in the golden zone of agree – for seeing their responsibility for their employees, compared to only 0.68 for unhumble managers. Expressed differently, a full 97 percent of managers seen as humble are truly aware of the responsibility towards their employees, versus a much lesser 72 percent of unhumble leaders.

Figure 4.6 Responsibility in humble managers.

The more I am aware of my responsibility, the more I will spend time doing what I have to do as a leader – the soaring instead of the swooping.

This finding was strengthened by a piece of research from 2022, when I specifically asked more than 200 participants worldwide to assess their leaders on both humility and responsibility. And those that were identified as humble took on far more responsibility than the unhumble ones. 83 percent of 100 in comparison to a miserly 62 percent (Figure 4.7).

Figure 4.7 Average level of responsibility taken.

And even within the humble zone, there was an increase in humility the humbler the manager. Remember that you can score up to an average of 5 across the 12 questions. Well, as you can see in Figure 4.8, a growth in humility significantly increases the taking on of responsibility.

Figure 4.8 Responsibility taken grows with humility.

The humble leader is also a role model in showing how not to give up easily, how to focus on those things that only he or she can do and that the bigger picture often clearly demands other things from us than can be found in our detailed job descriptions.

This last point is yet another reason why in a company with humble leaders and employees there will be more accountability. The look at the bigger picture makes clear that we are not victims but that it is up to us to choose how we can respond to different situations.

That means people will not look for someone to blame but instead take control of what we can control.

The authors of the fine book: The Oz Principle72 tell a great story along these lines about an employee who only needed a small nudge to become humble and take control.

In a case that recently came to our attention, a worker was assigned to the packaging department of a manufacturing plant. Not too long after arriving she detected serious problems with products coming from the production line. When she approached the manufacturing line supervisor to complain that “you guys are sending us too many defective products,” the line supervisor replied, “On this line there is no ‘you guys.’ You are as much a part of this line as we are.” From that point on she never said the words “you guys” again. Even more important, she started looking for solutions and stopped pointing fingers because she now understood that she would be accountable for not just her function but for the manufacturing plant’s final result.

Take-Away: From humility flows responsibility – In summary, if your company needs more accountability, humility is one of the tools with which to achieve it!

More Diversity

There is little need to sing the praises of diversity: We all know the research that proves that beyond being simply a matter of fairness diversity also has numerous positive effects.

To name a few:

Mixing employees with different educational backgrounds makes companies more innovative.73
Firms with higher female board representation exhibit higher overall performance, less “dodgy” earnings management, and less excessive risk taking.74
Corporations that embrace gender diversity on their executive teams were more competitive and 21 percent more likely to experience above-average profitability.75
Companies in the top quartile for gender or racial and ethnic diversity are 35 percent more likely to have financial returns above their national industry medians.
Teams with more cognitive diversity generate better results.76

On the other hand, there are also studies that show that age diversity leads to disagreements among teams and workforces, which results in less innovation77, or that there are more conflicts in diverse teams that lead to worse results.78

The key point is that diversity is strenuous. Humans are primed to prefer people that are similar to them. Even 11-month-old babies choose a cuddly toy wearing the same color clothes as they are wearing over those with a different color.79 Biologically, we are initially hard-wired to join groups that we feel similar to us and avoid or even reject those that seem strange. This goes down to the neuronal level: Even our brain perceives in-group members far more quickly than out-group members.80

So, we all need to spend time learning that different can be good and that it is rewarding to look beyond one’s own group. This is uncomfortable and strenuous.

One piece of research illustrates this well: Groups joined by outsiders felt less sure about the decisions they had made and were far more stressed than their peers that worked in homogenous groups. Yet! Yet these groups had actually made far better decisions than the others.81

Once we accept that diversity is strenuous, it becomes simply another task to work on. And this is the reason for why humble leaders and humble employees are good at fostering and reaping the benefits of diversity.

In addition, humble people hold fewer prejudices. Fewer prejudices towards different ethnicities, backgrounds, genders and mindset.82

Why? Because they know themselves better, see how small they are in the larger picture and consequently are more open towards others. They are also aware of when they may be approaching people with a bias in mind and are able to put this bias aside.

If you are not sure how you go about opening up to diversity, here is a suggestion. First you need to face what biases you have. For this you can use one or all of the Harvard Implicit Association tests. They measure how biased we are against gender, color, religion, weight, age, sexuality etc.

Typically, we all are biased towards our in-group and biased against any outgroup. But once you have done the test, seen the depressing results, it becomes quite a simple matter of training yourself to react differently.

This requires you to reflect on positive examples for the group that you may feel as an outgroup. If your gut feeling reacts strongly to lawyers in your company and you would rather eat a moldy apple than go and talk to the legal department about the contract you want to sign tomorrow (as a lawyer by training, I hope I am allowed to use this example…), then a humble person would recognize this initial aversion, quickly conjure up a positive example of a lawyer-manager interaction from the past, reflect on how their chosen role requires a solid and good contract and then go to the lawyer with an open mind. Does this take time? A little. A blink of an eye or the think of a neuron? Yes. Is it strenuous? Of course.

But a humble person does not shy away from something merely because it costs some neuronal activity.

It is therefore not surprising that research shows that humble people are much more willing to hear arguments from what may be termed “opponents” and are less judgmental afterwards.

You can call this intellectual or cultural humility – both result in companies that have more humble leaders and employees to not only be able to more strongly embrace diversity but also get it to work.

Getting it to work requires focus, structures as well as fostering an open mindedness in the team. This goes beyond recruiting and announcing diversity as a value. Actually, it takes a considerable effort to instill structures that allow us in everyday life to perceive others as a valuable resource and not as a threat to our ego. Regardless of their gender, ethnicity or educational background.

One great example for getting people to look beyond their own ingroup comes from a large British multinational.

They instituted an internal policy of “search and spin”. Everyone had the task to share their ideas/learnings/processes with others and was rewarded, if another team of department adopted one. What was even more powerful however was that the reward was considerably higher for any team that adopted something from another team!

(Interview No. 157, Chief Human Resources Officer, 600 employees)

What a great way to wake up our brain to stop seeing others as competition and more as a resource. It also helps to calm our ego from being attacked by others having had great ideas: if I benefit considerably by this then it is of value to my ego to do so.

Take-Away: Humility serves diversity – Humble leaders who are less biased themselves and help develop good practices for diversity in action are key if you want your organization to be more impactful when it comes to diversity.

Less Turnover

One of the costliest events in the day-to-day running of a company is losing existing employees and having to train new ones. The cost is not merely about direct recruitment costs, onboarding and training, but also about the costs of the previous termination, the effect of terminations on the other employees, as well as the increased probability of errors or unseen opportunities by the new, still inexperienced employee. Costs can easily rise to $30,000 per employee.83 Other researchers calculate the costs in terms of salary and estimate them at between 90 and 200 percent of the individual annual salary.84 It is therefore not surprising that some managers see retaining employees as one of their key tasks.

As we have already seen in the research results in Chapter 3, the turnover intention is less if I work for a humble leader. A study from 2020 found that this even holds true for overqualified staff.85 The reason: Humility in the manager leads to more appreciation, more encouragement, greater chances to contribute and less emotional exhaustion. There are therefore fewer redundancies in overqualified staff, in middle management86 and in “normal” employees.87 In a humble department as well as in a company, all groups can identify more with the whole, feel more secure and motivated. One of these studies even showed this effect of a higher retention rate in a very competitive market, where in general employees were hard to hold. Keeping even a few of them translated directly into competitive advantage.

Take-Away: Humility saves costs – Since fewer employees quit when a manager is humble, there are fewer costs for recruiting and training new employees. Existing customer relationships and processes are also less at risk.

Less Investment in Loss-Making Projects

One of the key elements of success for any company is that projects that are going well are completed effectively and that projects which do not show promise are stopped as soon as possible.

This sounds so simple that one sometimes wonders how this can be an issue for any sensible manager. Experience, however, shows that many projects that lose money are continued far longer than they rationally should be. Can you not think of at least one, right now at the top of your head?

For example, keeping offices open which have been loss-making for years, merely because the pain of closing them down appears too great. Or not admitting that product B has failed to deliver what it had promised and pushing away the decision of scrapping it.

Why is this so hard? Well, when is a manager ever thanked for declaring projects as failed? When are canceled projects celebrated or linked to bonuses?

This is our very human aversion to losses. Anyone who even only once has heard the theory of Nobel Prize winner Kahneman will agree: losses hurt far more than profits delight. The reason? A purely biological one. Gains are processed in the pre-frontal cortex, a sort of less emotional CEO of the brain, while losses are experienced through the amygdala. In evolutionary terms this is a far older part of the brain which triggers far stronger emotions.88

Especially managers with an uncontrolled ego find it difficult to consciously, cognitively act against these powerful emotions. This is because their ego is strongly linked to the project, especially if they themselves have initiated it. It is almost impossible for them to stop the project merely because it garners financial losses. Instead, they use (often unconsciously) all their brain power to continue standing up for their project.89 This can even lead to an escalation of public commitment for projects that are clearly doomed.

This is different for the humble leader. Why? He or she has their ego as well as their emotions under control. And the humble manager is aware of the bigger picture which may suffer from a bad project that is allowed to continue running. Due to this humility, writing off a project does not cause the manager to suffer emotionally, since neither their self-image nor their self-confidence is tied to any project. Instead, it is far easier for them to accept sunk costs and not continue investing in disastrous projects. Management thinker Adam Grant has numerous examples in his book Give and Take which show that the key danger for sunk costs and cutting your losses is a felt ego threat.90 Remove this via humility and it is considerably cheaper for the company!

By the way, Andrew Hafenbrack from Insead discovered in 2014 that if you mediate for 15 minutes, sunk costs also lose much of their pain point.91 The mediation focuses the mind on the here and now, away from past investments, and allows easier access to the bigger picture and the future. So adding meditation to humility will make your company even safer.

Take-Away: Humility avoids sunk costs – The humble leader's willingness to see the bigger picture as well as put his or her own ego into perspective avoids corporate disasters from projects that otherwise - without humility - are often continued despite high losses.

More Customer Loyalty

Humility also has a positive effect on the customers of the organization.

A fine study from 2019 shows this clearly.92 The research subject was a bank with more than 300,000 customers. The question was, who of their clients held their credit cards longer and which of these generated more revenue?

The clear finding was that those customers were far more loyal and spent more, when the bank – before contracting – had clearly pointed out the strengths AND weaknesses of their individual offers. While they did not call them strengths and weaknesses, they were very explicit calling them “benefits” and “trade-offs.” In the case of the trade-offs, it was stated that the option X cost $A more than this option Y; or that X carried a higher interest rate than Y.

The result: 20 percent fewer terminations with 10 percent more revenue when compared to those customers who had only received strength-related marketing. The outcomes were even better among those customers who already had several years of experience with credit cards. They terminated a full 33 percent less and made almost 20 percent more revenue.

A nice and lucrative example for showing how useful it is to shows strengths and weaknesses even to the customer.

Another example comes from Favi, a French company which produces die-cast copper alloys and among other things, gearboxes for car manufacturers. The company is regarded as one of the great role models for a self-managed organization. In these a culture of appreciation and humility prevails. There is no hierarchy, only organizational circles in which employees are free to take decisions themselves. The basic assumption is that everyone is good and motivated to do the best for the company and the customers. Errors are discussed openly and not hidden. Which again has a positive effect for the customer. Let us take just one example for this exemplary customer relationship.93

An employee at Favi discovered that a product he was making for Volkswagen had a problem of quality. He immediately stopped the machine and, together with a team, went through all the products already prepared for shipment. They found nothing, but were still worried.

So, without having to ask anyone, they took a company car and drove eight hours to Volkswagen in Germany to check whether any of the products that had already be delivered showed any defects. The quality manager at Volkswagen was astounded: Usually, the process of detecting and eliminating faults was paper-heavy, long and drawn-out. And here were two Favi employees working their way through the pallets all by themselves.

Such behavior naturally leads to good customer relations. The willingness to admit errors has a strengthening effect as experienced by Wilf Blackburn, when he apologized to the clients.

Since we have seen above that the humble leader encourages independent action among employees (remember the example from the Ritz), it is not surprising that humility leads to a better, more open and long-term customer relationship.

Take-Away: Humility binds customers – Customers appreciate not only the increased transparency that humility typically brings, but also the initiative that employees can take in such an atmosphere.

Summary

All in all, humility engenders seven positive effects for the company: a more successful ambidextrous implemented strategy, a greater culture for cooperation and dealing with errors, greater willingness of employees to take on responsibility, more diversity, less turn-over, less investment in loss-making projects and more customer loyalty.

Benefits of Humility for the Leader Themselves

I had been working at the management consultancy by now for four years. I enjoyed the work, while trying to keep my outside interests alive. As an avid reader, I always had a book with me and read the whole train ride, sometimes only emerging from the book world as I entered the lobby. One day, I chatted to a colleague about his habits when going into work. He said: “I use the train rides to think through my day, think through the meetings, what the client needs, what I need to clarify internally.” That shocked me to the core – here I had someone who truly took responsibility for his performance and who invested extra energy on ensuring that he could fulfill the role that he had chosen to take on to the best. Did this humble attitude make him successful? Well, not only was he made partner at the consulting firm but at the age of 44 he became board member of a company with 1,000 employees, a few years later he changed in the same role to one of 14,000.

Does it have a positive effect for the leader if he or she is humble? The story above provides anecdotal evidence. Let us look at the quantitative research.

Better Performance

Humility arms you against the danger of no longer perceiving challenges. Instead, you develop a better sense which situations require decisions or communication. To put it bluntly: if you are humble, it is possible to remain more human. Which humanity many people lose over the years.

(Interview No. 6, Head HR, 300,000 employees)

Humble leaders are more effective and bring in better results, even if you take out the element of luck.

(Interview No. 98, GM, 13,000 employees)

If you are humble, you are more charismatic and all stakeholders will like you. That will make it easier to influence others and be successful.

(Interview No. 158, Head – L&OD and Corporate HR, 70,000 employees)

If we let the ego go and go for real impact, we would be able to achieve so much!

(Interview No. 105, Director Global Knowledge, 196,000 employees)

Why should a humble manager perform better?

I suppose you can think of some arguments straight away: A manager who is open to feedback, who is willing to listen to others, cannot help but be more successful than someone who primarily sees what they want to see and is unwilling to accept input from the outside.

Research confirms this gut feeling with the concrete challenge of technical and adaptive change.

A brief foray into this subject: technical change is the “normal” change that every manager regularly encounters in their organization and which requires minor or major adjustments, that are often strenuous but which can be mastered with the existing know-how and within established procedures. This may be the construction of a new factory or extensive product modifications. Though needing good planning as well as resources, the change is easily mastered, albeit with effort, with the existing expertise in the company.

Adaptive change is altogether a different kettle of fish. This change is about problems or changed circumstances which require that habits, behavior patterns, structures and mindsets are adapted.

It is already clear from the definition that it is vitally important to recognize the difference between the two types of change. For one thing, if I get it wrong, I may be shooting at sparrows with cannons. Imagine, developing an enormous structural and behavioral change for a normal process such as the digitalization of customer data. However, I must also not underestimate the importance of a fundamental change, say in the business model. For this I should be fully aware of the fact that I may need a new culture or a new structure for agile working.

Research shows that a humble leader is far more able to a) see the distinction between the two types as well as b) master each of the changes.94 Why?

Much has to do with being open for new things and being able to take the view from the balcony.95 Let us look at one example from the early days of memory chips.

Memory chips had made Intel great. Yet over the years, Japanese competitors had managed not only to offer the same quality but also a much lower price.

Months went by in which Intel tried everything possible in the field of technological change: they built a new factory where production was cheaper; they tried to find a niche market; they aspired to develop a chip that was fundamentally better than their competitor’s. Nothing worked.

Then finally, in 1985, Andy Grove, the President, went “out onto the balcony.” He turned to his colleague CEO Gordon Moore (exactly, the Moore of Moore's law stipulating that the performance of computers and other technical equipment doubles about every 18 months) – he asked Moore the following question: “If we were kicked out and the board brought in a new CEO, what do you think he would do?”

Moore replied without hesitation: “He would get us out of the memory chips.”

To which Grove retorted, “Then why shouldn't you and I walk out the door and do the same?” And they did – they stopped the production of memory chips and shifted all their force to producing micro-processors.

Intel had the clear insight that they had reached their limits as regards technological change. Humbly they shifted into adaptive change.

What else speaks for a higher performance of the humble? Three additional studies:

One actually showed that those with lower mental abilities can make up for much of this lack of “hardware” through humility.96 Why? Because they are open to feedback, willing to learn and so strongly aware of their own weaknesses that they know they have to do something about them. This is a lovely consolation for those days when you may feel that you are not the smartest person on the planet – humility will definitely be a good pill to take.

Another piece of research shows the consequences of the opposite of humility. The more arrogant someone is, the lower their scores for mental capacity. Again, the question is why? Because arrogant people actually often have low self-esteem which they cover up with arrogance. They will also do anything and everything to avoid asking for help.97

Thirdly, humble leaders also become more innovative themselves. The state of humility creates a “quiet brain.” The ego is given less room and so the humble leader will be less offended by blind alleys, first misses or critical feedback. In a humble brain, new associations are easier and more likely. Consequently, research shows that those tasks that require broad and flexible thinking are better solved by people with a humble mindset.98

Humble leaders know that creative thinking and the resulting innovations are a combination of fearlessness, openness, plenty of observation, stubborn grit and ample sharing. And who is better suited for this than they, who bring the best people on board because they are not afraid of being outdone, who create networks even outside the company, who can consciously take time to think without immediately knowing an answer.

So, in a nutshell – a humble manager will perform better than an unhumble one.

Take-Away: Humility makes the leader more effective – The ego free view from the balcony allows the leader to learn more, act more effectively and be more creative.

More Perceived Leadership Potential and More Promotions

Humility is also good for the reputation of the manager, because many people then want to join them.

(Interview No. 12, VP Change, 100,000 employees)

As we all know, it is often not possible to precisely measure the performance of a manager. Too seldom is clear data available on what can actually be attributed to the individual person of the manager and to his or her behavior.

What then is the key element of getting you promoted? Even if your company evaluates everyone according to some fixed leader competencies and does this by asking employees, peers, customers and bosses, a key factor in getting promoted will still be how the level above you perceives you.

Does this higher level see the potential in you that you could successfully fill a position above your present one?

The biggest fear that I encounter in discussion with executives about humility has exactly to do with this. Can I be humble and not appear weak? Will my bosses appreciate humble behavior in me or will they not prefer the more narcissistic Alpha colleague of mine? Remember the introduction in which we saw how many of us: investors and the press were quite keen on the narcissistic manager. Are bosses the same?

See at least one clear answer to this question in the following piece of research:99

The situation is as follows: An officer (a lieutenant = low officer rank) is in a military training exercise. The exercise is time-critical and the young officer is making a bundle of mistakes. Some of these are inevitable due to the situation, others could have been avoided. Among his people is an angry subordinate called Jones who repeatedly points out the mistakes and possible solutions. To be honest, he is less pointing them out, but rather cursing at the young officer. This person has the necessary knowledge and experience to help the young officer succeed and save the exercise. Now you see two different versions for a response.

Officer Number 1 says:

Sergeant Jones, there was nothing wrong with my plan. Anyone else would have made exactly the same decision as I did. I don't want your advice on how to command my platoon. Bring your soldiers here, let them bring the equipment or tools they need to repair, and do it now! I don't want to hear from you again until the problem is solved.

Officer Number 2 says:

Sergeant Jones, you are right. I am responsible and I made a bad decision. You have more experience in situations like this and I should have listened to you. Now I have the Commander breathing down my neck and you are the only one who can get us all out of this mess. I am at a loss at this point. What do you think we need to do to solve the problem? What can I do to help you and your soldiers get it done?

How do you decide? I bet that you think the second officer is more capable.

As does nearly everyone to whom I put this question. Until I ask: Whom of these two officers do you believe the American Army leaders would want to promote? Then all negative (typically unjustified) preconceptions about the army bubble up in the executives. They burst out, that, of course, everyone apart from the army would go for officer No. 2. And then they are stunned by the following result: 180 senior officers who read this case rated officer number 2 as having considerably higher leadership potential than the ego-protecting officer number 1.

In the subsequent discussion, the question also often arises if Officer 2 may not have gone a bit too far. “Maybe Jones didn't need to be told how much more he knows... and how little the Officer knows.”

But it is this extreme openness which makes it valuable. Even in such an extreme situation, where Officer 2 honestly and extensively admits that he knows little and really needs help, his leadership potential is seen as much higher.

This research should help dispel the second fear, that employees or other managers think humble leaders as being weak. If you are still not convinced, then look at my research in Figure 4.9. Participants were asked to assess how they and others in the company saw their manager. And the humble manager scores higher on all fronts!

Figure 4.9 How humble managers are seen.

Think about this. Employees think their humble managers more competent and also see the supervisors of their leaders doing the same!

And there is yet another clear point to be made: Humble leaders are seen as more charismatic than non-humble leaders.100 Does that come as a surprise to you? Would you have expected narcissists to be more charismatic? Indeed, narcissists can be good at enthusing employees about their vision, yet it typically becomes clear that he or she is primarily focused on themselves.

A humble leader on the other hand not only treats employees more on an equal level, is other-oriented and willing to invest much energy into communication but also sees the bigger picture which he or she is able to convey.

Unsurprisingly then, there was considerable charisma that I experienced in many of the interviews with the top managers that had found the concept of humility so matching their philosophy that they took the time to talk to me. (And I know that some of you will be thinking, that someone who is interested in humility does not need to be so in real life…. And you are right. Yet for quite a number of interviewees, I had the chance to talk to their employees who corroborated that humility was not merely a publicity stunt catchphrase for their bosses.)

It is therefore clear that if you act humbly – and I stress once again, this does not mean that you are incapable, overmodest or insecure, but that you perceive yourself and others clearly and accept feedback – it is precisely that others will see even more potential in you.

Also it is not for nothing that the American Army has the following requirement of a capable leader in 6.14–6.15 of the Army Leadership Manual:

As a critical element of adaptability, self-awareness enables leaders to recognize their strengths and weaknesses across a range of conditions and progressively employ strengths to correct weaknesses.
To be self-aware, leaders must be able to formulate accurate self-perceptions, gather feedback from others, and change their self-concept as appropriate.
Self-aware leaders are open to feedback from others and actively seek it.101

In most companies the same will apply: Humility, as we understand it, makes promotion more likely. Remember Wilf Blackburn? How his company had so started to treasure humility, that they chose the new CEO to also be one who believes in humility.

In companies where a culture of ostentation and showmanship prevails, it will naturally be more difficult. Sometimes even the humble person has to bite the bullet and go somewhere else where he/she is more appreciated.

Take-Away: Humility signals potential – Contrary to what is feared, humble behavior is not seen as a weakness but as a virtue that a leader requires in order to be able to take on new, unfamiliar tasks. They are therefore viewed more positively for future responsibilities than an arrogant, narcissistic manager.

Less Exhaustion

Leading is exhausting. Every day there are dozens of interactions, moments when decisions have to be made, difficult customers, trade-offs with other departments and clarifications across hierarchical levels.

Not surprisingly, around 37 percent of managers regularly suffer from stress. 30 percent even consider themselves to be at risk for burnout.102 In addition, many leaders are not in good health. US Data puts 82 percent of CEOs as being overweight, with 69 percent in a “hopelessly poor physical condition.” Almost 60 percent are unable to even touch their toes.103

Since we lack data for every country, you will have to monitor yourself and your colleagues to see how strong your relationship is with your toes!

When it comes to further research, there has been a gap for many years with academics focusing more on the effect that managers have on the health and well-being of their employees and less on the health and well-being of the managers themselves.

However, the employee perspective already gives some useful indication: If their manager is a constructive leader, employees feel significantly better and healthier.104

Recently good news also came in for you as a manager. There is one large study from 2020 that scrutinized more than 12,000 executives. The result of which should satisfy all those who strive to lead positively.

The key result? Those managers who lead destructively feel less well overall.105 What sort of leadership is meant here? For example, approaching their employees aggressively, tyrannically or negatively, being overly critical as well as shouting at them. The research shows that both suffer: the employee who is shouted at and left behind full of anger AND the manager who presumably had hoped for some positive results from his own behavior and now cannot discover it.

This is a little reminiscent of the research on catharsis. Contrary to what you might think, it is not at all beneficial for a relationship if you let go of yourself and get the person who angered you into trouble or let rip at them.106

Why? Most people do not wish to be the kind of person who yells at others. Most people actually want to like themselves. This leads to the following vein of argument in the aggressor: “I am a fair person. I usually never freak out. Only when someone is particularly incapable. My freaking out right now, means that the person I just yelled at is particularly incompetent.”

Ergo, the victim is to blame for the uncontrolled outburst by the other partner. The screamer needs this (erroneous) insight to get rid of his or her cognitive dissonance: “I am nice, but have done something unpleasant – the reason for this cannot be within me, I have been forced....”

First conclusion: negative leadership is costly for the leader in terms of general well-being.

What happens with constructive leadership behavior? The opposite is measured: Constructive leadership styles – even while demanding more consciously employed energy – lead to considerably more satisfaction and well-being amongst the managers expressing them.

This finding is even stronger for those managers who lead with humility.107 The key reason is that these suffer measurably less from emotional exhaustion.

A study of 110 managers and their employees showed that those who acted with humility felt in better shape regarding both physical and mental health. They were also far less interested in changing employers, with all the anxiety and uncertainty that entails.

Now the question is, of course, why such proactive people who consciously appreciate others, consciously look at their own weaknesses and strengths, are consciously open and receptive, consciously perceive the bigger picture, why they suffer less from emotional exhaustion? Instead, it looks as if they have far more to do than others that only focus on themselves.

Research points to two main reasons:

Firstly, the humble leader does not have to expend energy to maintain their self-image in front of their employees. After all, he or she is allowed not to be perfect.

One of the founders of humility research, Bradley Owens, describes it as follows: “Our interviews show that humility is liberating for leaders because it frees them from the tyranny of trying to be an omniscient or perfect personality.”108

Secondly, humble leaders have better relationships with their employees. They are awarded with more trust, have fewer brutal conflicts and experience less negative energy and less suppressed anger.

This is also what you hear in the interviews with the managers.

If you act with humility, you can be more yourself and drop these protective measures. With humility you do not feel the strain of having to be the expert in everything. That takes the pressure off.109

This result fits well with the long-established insight that people who assess themselves realistically feel more comfortable with themselves and their own lives.110

Looking at the dark side, numerous studies show that people who have an erroneous self-image – whether they fundamentally overestimate or underestimate themselves – are more likely to get in their own way, perform worse and feel less comfortable overall.111

As a consequence, we have the result that humble managers feel less exhausted.

Take-Away: Humility avoids exhaustion – Humble leaders are better able to assess themselves, do not have to fight to maintain an exaggerated image in front of their employees, and are less likely to face aggression.

Better Dealing with Stress

Humble managers feel good. When I feel good, I stay healthy. This also has an effect on others, who also become positive and healthier. A positive cycle.

(Interview No. 12 VP Change, 100,000 employees)

A study in 2016 finally confirmed that which had already been suspected: Humility not only brings the individual a greater sense of well-being but also greater resilience in stressful situations.

More than 3,000 Americans were interviewed for the study.112 The clear and impressive result: stress, conflicts and difficult life events had fewer negative effects on those who were categorized as humble.

There are five reasons for this:

Firstly, humble people think and ruminate less about themselves. Why? Because they are aware of the fact that they are like all other human beings. They are not perfect and will make numerous errors in all walks of life. As a consequence, they tend not to be ashamed of the situations they find themselves in and are willing to communicate with others and receive support and ideas from them.

In other words, if I am humble and have just made a bad deal, it is easier for me to ask someone for advice on how to get out of my deal than if my self-image depended on my actions. As a result, people who have a healthy (i.e., humble) self-confidence are less easily offended – that is, they also experience less stress because they do not take other people's actions personally.113 Narcissists, on the other hand, refer everything to themselves in a hurtful way, as do people with self-doubt, self-hatred and inferiority complexes (i.e., people with a faulty and unhealthy perception).

Knowing this, it is probably no wonder that the North Korean dictator Kim Jong-Un had his defense minister executed with flak fire in 2014, because he had dared to fall asleep in a conference chaired by the dictator.114

Look at this pleasant example from a less ego-driven person.

Theatre manager Matthias Lilienthal describes a potentially insulting situation:

What was funny was that during the guest performance in St. Petersburg, the director of the theatre came running to me. He was very agitated and apologized profusely for the “crap” that was on the stage. “It would disappear immediately.” That crap was our stage set.115

Secondly, a humble leader appreciates positive things. Even in difficult and stressful times, they manage to perceive that which is positive. Their larger view of the whole helps to put things into perspective.

While I could despair because our biggest customer has quit and moved to our competitor, at the same time, I a) know that this fact will probably not be etched onto my tombstone and b) can perceive gladly how the whole team is already thinking actively about how to compensate for the huge loss. Of course, this does not mean that I fall into laissez-faire and a nonchalant: “C’est la vie… that’s just the way it is.” But the awareness that my life does not end right here and now is useful for a change in perspective. As is the understanding that typically something positive comes out of most things. If only because our brain is so wonderfully good at creating sense-making stories. Just google “Prison is the best thing that ever happened to me” and you will be proud of our neuronal skill set.

Thirdly, humble leaders do not look for someone else to blame. They recognize their own contribution to the difficult situation and therefore, in crisis situations, behave in a much more socially acceptable manner compared to narcissists. These find it impossible to accept that they might have been also at fault, if even partly. In other words, humble leaders do not exacerbate the critical situation by angrily shouting at others or punishing them with contempt. This non-reaction is vital to creating an atmosphere for creative thinking and cooperation. In addition, it keeps all information channels open, which would snap shut if I had managed to offend my employees.

Fourthly, humble managers are far more aware of themselves. They see themselves neither as great heroes nor as great failures. Instead, because they know their strengths and weaknesses and also consider themselves changeable, they feel secure in their identity. As a result, they do not break apart mentally in times of crisis but are more interested in continuing to grow.

And finally, humble managers experience less stress, because they are more likely to forgive themselves. Why? A study from 2020 showed that humble people are less defensive and condemn themselves less.116 They know that all people have faults and do stupid, sometimes even evil things. The word “evil” brings us back to our earlier discussion about evil even in peaceful times. And add to that an understanding of how often each of us may have let someone take the brunt for something, or we may have let our emotions get the best of us or we may have happily blamed someone else because it seemed easier than to realize our own part in the matter. You may wish to name these actions or thoughts evil or merely mindless – only you can decide. Sadly, my experience with myself and others shows that we can be very evil at many a time!

These five reasons lead to humble managers feeling less stressed while leading others, the company as well as themselves.

Take-Away: Humility fosters good stress management – The ability to take responsibility for one's own actions on the one hand, and to forgive oneself on the other, means that difficult situations do not lead to increased stress for a humble leader.

Better Relationships

In my company leaders are not visible. They only go to the shop floor to complain or look for errors. There is no chance for a good relationship.

(Interview No. 59, Head of L&D, 33,000 employees

Those without humility are careless of the company culture – they don’t provide directions and do not stop the “monsters” as they ought to be stopped.

(Interview No. 146, CEO, 11,000 employees)

Many managers fear that if they share their weaknesses, spend much time appreciating others, are always eager to learn that then they may see their authority undermined and will also lose the ability to influence.

It will not come as a surprise to you, that the data shows the opposite. You saw above that employees generally think more highly of a humble leader. Further research shows that the willingness to point out one's own errors and even to apologize for them actually increases employees' trust and loyalty. (We will discuss the limits of this later in Chapter 10).

Leaders who apologize are also more likely to be perceived as transformational leaders by their employees than those who do not.117

Let us briefly reflect on why an apology works. It signals one key fact: I, the manager, am not overly concerned with my ego, with my greatness, with my façade. Instead, an apology which is honestly meant shows that I am all about reducing the impact of my own errors on employees, customers or the organization. The employees reward this behavior with more trust, which in turn bolsters relationships. Further analysis shows that if a manager appreciates others for what they are and do social relations with the employees prosper. This is actually a no-brainer. If I see what my employees do; if I appreciate them for what they do, then clearly, we will have a better relationship. Simply taking time to interact and not just storming in with tasks to hand around will strengthen our relationship. Also, having been appreciated, it is considerably easier for employees to forgive mistakes or ill-considered actions and still approach their leaders openly and with interest.118

One interviewee tells the following story.

I am new to this position and needed to restructure. Since it was not yet clear who would head what departments, I decided on my own, what the yearly raise in salary would be. Due to thousands of other things that I needed to do, I did not communicate this decision. When my first line managers heard this, they complained, that they should have been consulted. I realized, that I could have done this differently – and I apologized.

(Interview No. 148, Head Customer Innovation, 4,000 employees)

Do we think her the weaker for it? No. Do her employees? Well, we do not know for sure. Yet this leader was one of the 10 names that were included in answers to my questionnaire as an excellent and humble leader that I should definitely interview. N = one – but a strong one.

Looking to the military, humble leaders are also more popular with their soldiers than their arrogant counterparts. They are in particular valued for the psychological sense of safety they provide to their subordinates.119

Finally, let me also remind you that humility is helpful for relationships of the manager outside of work. As we saw in the opening chapter, relationships with humble people last longer due to more gratitude and openness. Even the start of a relationship is positively influenced – people are more willing to start a romantic relationship with a “humble” person.120

Take-Away: Humility creates better relationships – Since leaders with humility are able to admit mistakes, they are more human to their employees. This is how better relationships get built.

Better Understanding of Employees

A few years ago, three key supervisors suddenly left my firm, took away some of our key customers and established their own firm. A very painful experience and lesson! I thought I had been very nice to them: I tried my best to offer them a good salary, so I assumed I had made them happy. Later I learned what they wished was to buy a small amount of the company’s share so that they could have a different identity – as an owner of the firm.121

If humble leaders have better relationships, are they also better at understanding what drives their employees? We can affirm this on two levels, on the one hand, in terms of “wanting” and on the other hand, in terms of “feeling.”

The Wanting of Employees

The reason that humble leaders are better in this field has something to do with the humble inquiry. This is the ability to ask questions respectfully, openly and without judgment. Humble managers do this all the time in order to get a clear picture, not only of a situation, but also of their employees.

To explain why this questioning is so important, we need to immerse ourselves in the research.

Prima facie, we could assume that every experienced manager knows quite well what their employees want. Surely, with a bit of energy they will be able to put themselves into their shoes.

Let us test this assumption in the case of call center employees. Is it not the case, that any of us could adopt the perspective of a call center employee, think about what they require as motivation for work and – bingo – we know it!

Unfortunately, research shows something different.122 Experienced managers were asked to imagine what it is like to work as a customer advisor in a call center. What motivates these customer advisors and what motivates themselves?

For themselves, they quickly arranged the order within a provided list. Clearly their motivation came from direct motives such as learning, skills, feeling good about themselves and that the work is worthwhile. This was their exact order.

Learning
Skills
Feel good about yourself
Pay
Worthwhile
Praise
Benefits
Security

When answering the question about the customer advisors, there was a clear assumption that these would be very different. Surely, they would be far more motivated by indirect motives such as: Pay, security, benefits and praise. Learning? Skills? Purpose? Not needed!

Briefly stop here. What would you have thought? Which from the motives cited above are your key ones and which are the ones for the call center employees?

The managers in this piece of research were TOTALLY wrong. When the call center employees were asked directly what motivated them, the top three were: Skills, Worthwhile, Learning. Pay only cropped up in 7th place.

In other words, even an experienced manager is not able to recognize what employees truly want.

I can hear managers grumble: this is only one piece of research. I am sure that in general I get it right. The bad news follows on foot: when it comes to understanding what someone wants, we simply cannot know what it is.

FULL STOP.

In 2018, Harvard professors evaluated the impressive number of 25 studies with almost 1,500 participants to finally lay the topic to rest.123 The sad result: we humans have no idea what the other person want. Yet, once we have spent some energy to put ourselves into the shoes of others, we are very, very certain that we know exactly what they want and can hardly be shaken out of this supposed understanding.

This also happened to me – this time, I was the “victim.” As a trained lawyer, I was repeatedly told during my employment at the business school that I was surely interested in working on topics that had something to do with lawyers.

But I was a historian and management consultant at the same time, and much more interested in topics such as influencing, decision making or neuroplasticity. I can understand the assumption behind this: if, as an external person, I had put myself into my own shoes, I would also have thought that I should and would have a burning interest in law (which I obviously liked and had done well in). But I simply was not interested. Asking and listening instead of supposing would have solved this intricate problem!

Apparently, the attempted change of perspective does not have the desired effect of increasing understanding. Instead, our brain seems to follow our respective stereotypes about the person we are trying to understand.

Remember the story at the beginning? The CEO who was irritated that his people left. He had thought that in their position they should be happy with the money he offered. Yet they had wanted ownership – and his brain had not been able to come up with this, since they were managers in his mind and not owners.

That means, we focus on that which we automatically associate with this sort of position or this type of person. Want another example?

If I put myself in the role of a professor, I objectively score better on tests than if I put myself in the position of a cheerleader.124 If I put myself in the shoes of an older person, I become less competitive than if I put myself in the shoes of a younger person. This is the whole topic of priming.

This is what happened when the managers tried to take on the perspective of the call center employees. In their mind's eye, they saw the picture of a stereotypical call-center employee. This person would surely only be doing the job because they had no better education and no better options. As a consequence, their key interest would be money, security and a bit of praise. Developing skills or purpose does not play a role in such a stereotype.

But this is not the reality. Everyone – even the proverbial dustman – has an interest in making sense of their job. It is just hard for those of us who have chosen different professions to realize this. And this is why the revolutionary simplicity of what the humble executive does provides an automatic solution: Ask. Very simply, asking what the other person needs, thinks and wants. In an open, respectful, non-judgmental manner.

Open questions meet free speaking, meet open mind and result in understanding. This is the one and only way that in my role as a manager I can find out what my employees’ needs are and then, and only then, can I begin to think about whether and how this need can be satisfied.

The other solution is to listen carefully. Even when not asked, people often reveal much about their interests. Then this should be taken on board and followed wherever possible. Otherwise, you end up where unfortunately most people end up in their gift-giving: They are sure that a personalized gift is much better received than if they bought something from the wish list. And are terribly wrong! In all of the studies, the gift-givers were sure that their gift (which was not on the list), would be as highly appreciated. How could it not be? They had really invested their little grey cells into finding something that would be appreciated. But the recipient stubbornly appreciated these gifts far less than the ones they had actually asked for.125

So, the clue is not only to ask but then also to remember what people said and act on this where possible.

Getting back to the beginning of the chapter: Would the business owner have kept his staff if he had asked them, understood their need for ownership and sold them a small share? Most likely….

The Feeling of Employees

The question now is whether the result is any different when it is not a matter of wanting but of feeling. Does it work if I put myself emotionally into someone else's shoes? And here the answer is just as clear: Of course, it helps. Research shows this in many different studies, and finds the humble leader particularly strong here.

The powerful feeling of empathy or compassion does not guarantee a hundred per cent match, but gets quite close. Imagine how you would feel, if you were being nagged at for a piece of work that you spent five days on? Or imagine how you would feel, if someone does not look at you for even one second as you speak? Or imagine, you have an online meeting and everyone has their camera turned off? Or imagine, you are being shouted at for something that to you is no big thing? Immediately we get a pretty good idea of those feelings that arise from someone else's perspective.

Humble leaders are particularly successful in using empathy.126 They understand what people feel while at the same time being aware of their own response. They realize when they need to set limits, so as not to be overwhelmed by what they hear or see. And they are in charge of their own emotions and able to show only those feelings that are appropriate at the moment.

So, a humble leader will have a good idea what it is that their employees feel in any given situation.

For some researchers this raises some concerns. They are fearful that too much empathy from the humble leader, especially in a crisis, will prevent him or her from acting rationally. If, for example, the crisis demands layoffs, the worry is that the empathic leader simply will not be able to go through with it. In addition, the humble leader would more easily fall prey to false alarms by listening and favoring the group that is empathically closest to them.127

This is certainly an interesting point, but to my mind applies to any virtue that is exaggerated. Thus, one can listen too much and act too little; act too much and listen too little; pay too much attention to culture and too little to strategy; pay too much attention to strategy and too little to culture.

The whole point of humility is, that the humble manager does not lose sight of the bigger picture as well as of their own emotional reactions. If the bigger picture needs layoffs for the good of the company, then this will be done. In as appreciative a way as possible. This is called “necessary evils” and everyone can learn to master them.

Humble leaders therefore will rarely lose themselves in empathy or get stuck in one type of leadership behavior only but instead adapt to the needs of the situation.

One interview partner shows that he had learned to see the bigger picture very clearly.

It took humility to realize that my being too relational with followers was in an effort to fulfil my own needs, not theirs. It was not serving them or the business well. I saw that I needed to adjust my leadership style back toward the firmer, command-and control approach.128

If I am only led by empathy, I will not fulfil my leadership tasks as I should. And in some cases, for some time, even an authoritarian style may be the right one!

The key point therefore remains: Humble leaders understand their employees better.

Take-Away: Humility brings deeper understanding of what employees want and feel – Humble leaders know that they know very little and use open and non-judgmental questions to better understand their employees. Increased empathy also allows them to understandwhat emotions and issues are at play.

Summary

Humble leaders win for themselves on six fronts: they perform better and others see more potential in them. They are less emotionally exhausted and can cope better with stress. They have better relationships and a better understanding of other people around them since they have learned to ask and empathize.

The Upside of Humility for Start-ups

No VC wants to work with an entrepreneur who does not have the humility to accept and improve upon what is not good.

(Shubhankar Bhattacharya, VC Investor)129

Each start-up feels unique, with its ideas, its founders, its successes and its failures. Since 90 percent of all start-ups fail, it is of particular interest if humility is a useful or detrimental virtue for them.

In particular, since there is often a focus on the person of the CEO and public perception is that the glitzier such a CEO, the more narcissistically brilliant, the more successful the start-up will rake in money and be subsequently successful. Also in a smaller company, as start-ups tend to be, the impact of the person on the helm is more impactful on the culture of the company than in a large enterprise.

Let us look first at what research says about narcissism and start-ups.

Initially it shows some upsides: narcissistic CEOs have a higher entrepreneurial intention – they seem to be are even hungrier for entrepreneurial success than others.130

Yet there is a clear correlation between narcissism and overconfidence, leading narcissists to more easily branch out into the unknown – with all its dangers. Look at the example of the serial entrepreneur Badr Jafar, who needed to be shocked out of his overconfidence through numerous failures.

My first own venture in that space, which was funded through a small business loan in the UK, turned out to be a success. This gave me an almost unjustified confidence boost and made me think I could turn my hand to anything. Not surprisingly, that turned out to be far from the truth, and after some further successes – but mostly failures – I learnt some extremely valuable lessons, which prepared me well for the trials and tribulations of a diverse and often complex world of business when I joined the family business a few years later.131

In addition, narcissists are measurably less successful in crowd-funding. Why? Because narcissistic entrepreneurs tend to focus on ego-defensive behavior and therefore set less ambitious goals. Investors also “smell” the narcissism and are less willing to support their campaigns.132

Further research shows that narcissistic entrepreneurs are less able to establish good long-term relationships with their investors. The impressive front is revealed over the course of time as being just that – a front.

The same ego-defensive behavior as above also leads founders to not being able to learn from errors and failures.133 A mind that is not open to objective assessments, but feels it has to defend itself will not be able to objectively look at past mistakes and consciously learn from them. Instead, the focus will be on blaming the situation as well as others. In a narcissistic founder there is simply less motivation to learn!

So, is there then a measurable upside of humility?

You will not be surprised to discover that research has uncovered a number of them – specific to start-ups.

The first has to do with top management teams. The humility of a CEO measurably reduces conflict within the team, which in turn leads to a generally better performance of the company.134 It also increases trust in the top management team and results in a better long-term sustainable climate.135

The second one has to do with investors. Research confirms that investors see humble entrepreneurs as having higher constructive qualities and as a consequence they evaluate the venture more positively bolstered with a larger amount of funding.136 This is not surprising if you see the following quote by a partner in a VC firm.

The first question that I ask myself when I meet an entrepreneur is whether he is capable of listening and following advice. If not, I know I cannot work with him whatever the project or his other qualities.137

No room for narcissists, much room for humble founders.

VC Investor Shubhankar Bhattacharya tells the following story which also supports the quantitative research.138

The entrepreneur I was scheduled to meet (at a cafe), called me as he entered the cafe so that we could locate each other. As soon as we met, he apologized. Since he was on time, I could think of no reason for him to be sorry. When I asked him about it, he said that he should have looked me up on social media before the meeting, so that he would not have had to call just to locate me. (Since then, I have been dreaming of the day an Uber/Ola driver will apologize for calling me about the pickup location)

The second entrepreneur welcomed me into his office by saying that he enjoyed my articles and looked forward to discussing them with me (At that time, I had written only a few). During the meeting, he brought out specific examples and anecdotes I had written about and wanted to know about my upcoming posts. I could not have been more flattered.

To appreciate why I was so taken aback by these two displays of politeness and humility, here is the complete perspective:

Both these entrepreneurs had sold their respective companies for over $100 Million in deals that remain highly celebrated. Their reputation therefore, is widespread and well-established (They have nothing to prove to me, or anyone else).

They had nothing to gain from meeting me (At least nothing directly or in the short-term). Neither of these meetings was a pitch. In fact, it was I who reached out to them, requesting an audience.

I am convinced now that their extraordinary success did not happen in spite of their humility, but because of it. In fact, over time, I have observed that humility is the essential hallmark of the best entrepreneurs — The ones who are the most likely to appreciate the value of feedback, recognize the uncertainty of future challenges, and who are capable of building a work-environment that values respect and empathy.

Thirdly, there is evidence that humility and social entrepreneurship go hand in hand.139 This is not surprising when you remember that humility is other-focused and has a view of the larger picture.

And finally, research is clear on the fact that narcissism in a founder hampers innovation140 while humility strengthens it as we have seen via psychological safety and empowerment.

If you recall, that more than 50 percent of start-ups fail because they offer products that the market does not need – in order to avoid that you not only need the innovation to adapt the products to the needs of the customers but also the brave voice of employees to raise the problem. That will only be possible in a humble culture!

So once again humility is better than narcissism or simple mindlessness!

Take-Away: The gift of humility for startups – Although at first one might think that narcissists could be particularly suitable for the start-up phase of a company, this is wrong. Research clearly shows that the founders’ humility helps to raise money, build good contacts with investors and set up the company culturally in such a way that it is more likely to learn from mistakes and become more successful.

A Short Pause

In the previous section, we have seen that humility delivers valuable results at all three levels – for the employees, the organization and the manager themselves.

Now, of course, the question is how you go about achieving this humility?

What exactly does it mean to recognize and show your own strengths and weaknesses? Is that not standard for most adults, for most managers?
What exactly does it mean to appreciate the strengths of others? Should I praise everyone in the IT department for the fact that the website didn't crash today?
And am I not already recognizably open and capable of learning - otherwise I would not have this book in my hand or up on my screen?
This bigger picture – which one is mine? And is it not somewhat unlikely to be able to see it all the time?

We will answer all these questions later down the line. Before a short question to you. Which of the four elements of humility do you think people find hardest to get right?

In my qualitative interviews, I asked my interviewees where they saw the greatest difficulty. In Figure 4.10 you can see that 41 percent say that their colleagues and they themselves struggle most with understanding themselves and showing their weaknesses. The bigger picture came second with 25 percent. 17 percent said that it is at least two out of the four – many even sighed and said: “Of course, it is all four.” Appreciation came up for 11 percent. The six percent who mentioned “learning” pointed out that this deficit was typically only recognized at second glance. Everyone is “officially” keen to learn but then ends up not going to seminars or applying what they learnt in everyday life.

Figure 4.10 Which element of humility is hardest to achieve?

In the next four chapters, we will look at each element of humility in far more detail, see what they entail and what the stumbling blocks are on the way.

Notes
Merriman, Leaders are more powerful when they’re humble 2016, December 8, Washington Post.
Huynh, H. P., & Dicke-Bohmann, A. (2020). Humble doctors, healthy patients? Exploring the relationships between clinician humility and patient satisfaction, trust, and health status. Patient Education and Counseling, 103(1), 173–179.
Fitzgerald, S. (2015). Add price to the factors that shape the placebo effect, new study suggests. Neurology Today, 15(3), 1–6.
Hook, J. N., Davis, D. E., Owen, J., Worthington Jr, E. L., & Utsey, S. O. (2013). Cultural humility: Measuring openness to culturally diverse clients. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 60(3), 353.
Owen, J., Tao, K. W., Drinane, J. M., Hook, J., Davis, D. E., & Kune, N. F. (2016). Client perceptions of therapists’ multicultural orientation: Cultural (missed) opportunities and cultural humility. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 47(1), 30.
Yu, Z., Tong, E. M., Leung, C. C., Chin, E. D., & Lee, P. (2021). Humility predicts resistance to substance use: A self-control perspective. The Journal of Positive Psychology, 16(1), 105–115.
   https://sunrisehouse.com/addiction-demographics/executives/. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Summerell, E., Harmon-Jones, C., Denson, T. F., & Harmon-Jones, E. (2020). Humility is associated with less aggressive motivation. Personality and Individual Differences, 158, 109837, Tongeren et al. (2016).
Farrell, J. E., Hook, J. N., Ramos, M., Davis, D. E., Van Tongeren, D. R., & Ruiz, J. M. (2015). Humility and relationship outcomes in couples: The mediating role of commitment. Couple and Family Psychology: Research and Practice, 4(1), 14.
Wang, L., Owens, B. P., Li, J. J., & Shi, L. (2018). Exploring the affective impact, boundary conditions, and antecedents of leader humility. Journal of Applied Psychology, 103(9), 1019.
Norcross, M. A., & Manning, M. R. (2019). Humility as an enabler of organizational growth and change. In Research in Organizational Change and Development. Emerald Publishing Limited.
Oc, B., Daniels, M. A., Diefendorff, J. M., Bashshur, M. R., & Greguras, G. J. (2020). Humility breeds authenticity: How authentic leader humility shapes follower vulnerability and felt authenticity. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 158, 112–125.
Norcross, M. (2019). The power of enabling humility in teams. The Journal of Character & Leadership Development, 6(1), 102–111.
Nielsen, R., Marrone, J. A., & Ferraro, H. S. (2013). Leading With Humility. Routledge.
Eden, D., & Zuk, Y. (1995). Seasickness as a self-fulfilling prophecy: Raising self-efficacy to boost performance at sea. Journal of Applied Psychology, 80(5), 628.
Mao, J., Chiu, C. Y., Owens, B. P., Brown, J. A., & Liao, J. (2019). Growing followers: Exploring the effects of leader humility on follower self‐expansion, self‐efficacy, and performance. Journal of Management Studies, 56(2), 343–371.
Brooks, A. W., & Schweitzer, M. E. (2011). Can nervous nelly negotiate? How anxiety causes negotiators to make low first offers, exit early, and earn less profit. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 115(1), 43–54.
Langer, E. J. (2009). Counterclockwise: Mindful Health and the Power of Possibility. Ballantine Books.
   http://www.thelegacylab.com/interviews/the-ritz-carlton, https://www.forbes.com/sites/micahsolomon/2017/07/29/5-wow-customer-service-stories-from-5-star-hotels-examples-any-business-can-learn-from/#11bdb99033e6.
Nielsen, R., & Marrone, J. A. (2018). Humility: Our current understanding of the construct and its role in organizations. International Journal of Management Reviews, 20(4), 805–824.
Zhu, Y., Zhang, S., & Shen, Y. (2019). Humble leadership and employee resilience: Exploring the mediating mechanism of work-related promotion focus and perceived insider identity. Frontiers in Psychology, 10, 673.
Meneghel, I., Martínez, I. M., & Salanova, M. (2016). Job-related antecedents of team resilience and improved team performance. Personnel Review.
Chiu, C. Y., Balkundi, P., Owens, B. P., & Tesluk, P. E. (2020). Shaping positive and negative ties to improve team effectiveness: The roles of leader humility and team helping norms. Human Relations, 75(3), 502–531.
Denning, S. (2020). How the C-suite is embracing Agile. Strategy & Leadership.
   https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/28/magazine/what-google-learned-from-its-quest-to-build-the-perfect-team.html?smid=pl-share. Retrieved 12.11.2022
   https://rework.withgoogle.com/guides/understanding-team-effectiveness/steps/measure-team-effectiveness/. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Swain, J. E. (2017). Does humility make a better military officer? Investigating psychological safety as an explanatory mechanism, examining superiors’ perceptions of potential and the effect of gender, and exploring humility in west point cadets [Doctoral dissertation, Yale University].
Rego, A., Melo, A. I., Bluhm, D. J., e Cunha, M. P., & Júnior, D. R. (2020). Leader-expressed humility predicting team psychological safety: A personality dynamics lens. Journal of Business Ethics, 174(3), 669–686.
Walters, K. N., & Diab, D. L. (2016). Humble leadership: Implications for psychological safety and follower engagement. Journal of Leadership Studies, 10(2), 7–18.
Wang, J., Zhang, Z., & Jia, M. (2017). Understanding how leader humility enhances employee creativity: The roles of perspective taking and cognitive reappraisal. The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 53(1), 5–31.
Chen, C., Feng, J., Liu, X., & Yao, J. (2021). Leader humility, team job crafting and team creativity: The moderating role of leader–leader exchange. Human Resource Management Journal, 31(1), 326–340.
Owens, B. P., & Hekman, D. R. (2012). Modeling how to grow: An inductive examination of humble leader behaviors, contingencies, and outcomes. Academy of Management Journal, 55(4), 787–818.
Mallén, F., Domínguez-Escrig, E., Lapiedra, R., & Chiva, R. (2019). Does leader humility matter? Effects on altruism and innovation. Management Decision.
   https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/ihr-baut-eure-fabrik-heavy-metal-bei-siemens-im-herzen-sabine-kluge. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Baer, M., & Frese, M. (2003). Innovation is not enough: Climates for initiative and psychological safety, process innovations, and firm performance. Journal of Organizational Behavior: The International Journal of Industrial, Occupational and Organizational Psychology and Behavior, 24(1), 45–68.
Prime, J., & Salib, E. R. (2014). Inclusive leadership: The view from six countries. Catalyst, 120.
Goodwin, R. E., Groth, M., & Frenkel, S. J. (2011). Relationships between emotional labor, job performance, and turnover. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 79(2), 538–548.
Scott, B. A., & Barnes, C. M. (2011). A multilevel field investigation of emotional labor, affect, work withdrawal, and gender. Academy of Management Journal, 54(1), 116–136.
Barnes, C. M., Guarana, C. L., Nauman, S., & Kong, D. T. (2016). Too tired to inspire or be inspired: Sleep deprivation and charismatic leadership. Journal of Applied Psychology, 101(8), 1191.
Zhou, J., & Li, Y. (2018). The role of leader’s humility in facilitating frontline employees’ deep acting and turnover: The moderating role of perceived customer-oriented climate. Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies, 25(3), 353–367.
Owens, B. P., Yam, K. C., Bednar, J. S., Mao, J., & Hart, D. W. (2019). The impact of leader moral humility on follower moral self-efficacy and behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology, 104(1), 146.
Kallasvuo, O. (2007). Humility. Harvard Business Review, 85(1), 16.
Wiltshire, J., Bourdage, J. S., & Lee, K. (2014). Honesty-humility and perceptions of organizational politics in predicting workplace outcomes. Journal of Business and Psychology, 29(2), 235–251.
Darley, J. M., & Batson, C. D. (1973). “From Jerusalem to Jericho”: A study of situational and dispositional variables in helping behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 27(1), 100.
Mayhew, B. W., & Murphy, P. R. (2014). The impact of authority on reporting behavior, rationalization and affect. Contemporary Accounting Research, 31(2), 420–443.
Carnevale, J. B., Huang, L., & Paterson, T. (2019). LMX-differentiation strengthens the prosocial consequences of leader humility: An identification and social exchange perspective. Journal of Business Research, 96, 287–296.
Liao, C., Wayne, S. J., Liden, R. C., & Meuser, J. D. (2017). Idiosyncratic deals and individual effectiveness: The moderating role of leader-member exchange differentiation. The Leadership Quarterly, 28(3), 438–450.
Ou, A. Y., Tsui, A. S., Kinicki, A. J., Waldman, D. A., Xiao, Z., & Song, L. J. (2014). Humble chief executive officers’ connections to top management team integration and middle managers’ responses. Administrative Science Quarterly, 59(1), 34–72.
Chiu, C. Y. C., Owens, B. P., & Tesluk, P. E. (2016). Initiating and utilizing shared leadership in teams: The role of leader humility, team proactive personality, and team performance capability. Journal of Applied Psychology, 101(12), 1705.
Owens, B. P., & Hekman, D. R. (2016). How does leader humility influence team performance? Exploring the mechanisms of contagion and collective promotion focus. Academy of Management Journal, 59(3), 1088–1111.
Singapore Management University and Human Capital Leadership Institute. (2016). Case Study SMU-16-0008 Olam International: Sowing the seeds of humility throughout the organisation.
   https://www.glassdoor.de/Reviews/Olam-working-culture-Reviews-EI_IE1018143.0,4_KH5,20.htm?countryRedirect=true. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Gibbon, E. (1994). The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (Vol. 2, p. 509). Edited by David Womersley. Penguin, New York.
Ou, A. Y., Waldman, D. A., & Peterson, S. J. (2018). Do humble CEOs matter? An examination of CEO humility and firm outcomes. Journal of Management, 44(3), 1147–1173.
Beauchesne, M. M. (2014). CEO humility: Development of an unobtrusive measure and strategic implications.
Christensen, C. M. (2013). The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail. Harvard Business Review Press.
Nielsen, R., Marrone, J. A., & Ferraro, H. S. (2013). Leading With Humility. Routledge.
Zhang, W., & Liu, W. (2019). Leader humility and taking charge: The role of OBSE and leader prototypicality. Frontiers in Psychology, 10, 2515.
Welch, J., & Byrne, J. A. (2003). Jack: Straight from the gut. Business Plus.
Mayo, M. (2017). If humble people make the best leaders, why do we fall for charismatic narcissists. Harvard Business Review, 4, 2–5.
LaBouff, J. P., Rowatt, W. C., Johnson, M. K., Tsang, J. A., & Willerton, G. M. (2012). Humble persons are more helpful than less humble persons: Evidence from three studies. The Journal of Positive Psychology, 7(1), 16–29.
Anand, A., Walsh, I., & Moffett, S. (2019). Does humility facilitate knowledge sharing? Investigating the role of humble knowledge inquiry and response. Journal of Knowledge Management.
   https://t3n.de/magazin/janina-kugel-ueber-leadership-mehr-einmal-angebruellt-247637/. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Hagen, J. (2013). Confronting Mistakes: Lessons From the Aviation Industry When Dealing With Error. Palgrave Macmillan.
Owens, B. P., & Hekman, D. R. (2016). How does leader humility influence team performance? Exploring the mechanisms of contagion and collective promotion focus. Academy of Management Journal, 59(3), 1088–1111.
Li, J., Liang, Q., Zhang, Z., & Wang, X. (2018). Leader humility and constructive voice behavior in China: A dual process model. International Journal of Manpower, 39(6), 840–854.
Edmondson, A. C. (2011). Strategies for learning from failure. Harvard Business Review, 89(4), 48–55.
   https://www.mlive.com/auto/2016/07/alan_mulally_ralph_nader_induc.html.
Merriman, Leaders are more powerful when they’re humble 2016, December 8, Washington Post.
Emmons, R. A., & Mishra, A. (2011). Why gratitude enhances well-being: What we know, what we need to know. In Designing Positive Psychology: Taking Stock and Moving Forward (pp. 248–262).
   https://jackmalcolm.com/2013/03/is-this-the-best-you-can-do/. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Connors, R., Smith, T., & Hickman, C. R. (2010). The Oz Principle: Getting Results Through Individual and Organizational Accountability. Portfolio.
Østergaard, C. R., Timmermans, B., & Kristinsson, K. (2011). Does a different view create something new? The effect of employee diversity on innovation. Research Policy, 40(3), 500–509.
Belaounia, S., Tao, R., & Zhao, H. (2020). Gender equality’s impact on female directors’ efficacy: A multi-country study. International Business Review, 29(5), 101737.
   https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/organization/our-insights/delivering-through-diversity. Retrieved 12.11.2022
De Vaan, M., Stark, D., & Vedres, B. (2015). Game changer: The topology of creativity. American Journal of Sociology, 120(4), 1144–1194.
See above and studies quoted there.
Hu, N., Chen, Z., Gu, J., Huang, S., & Liu, H. (2017). Conflict and creativity in inter-organizational teams: The moderating role of shared leadership. International Journal of Conflict Management.
Mahajan, N., & Wynn, K. (2012). Origins of “us” versus “them”: Prelinguistic infants prefer similar others. Cognition, 124(2), 227–233.
Molenberghs, P., Halász, V., Mattingley, J.B., Vanman, E., Cunnington, R. (2012). Seeing is believing: Neural mechanisms of action perception are biased by team membership. Human Brain Mapping. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hbm.22044.
Phillips, K. W., Liljenquist, K. A., & Neale, M. A. (2009). Is the pain worth the gain? The advantages and liabilities of agreeing with socially distinct newcomers. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 35(3), 336–350.
AlSheddi, M. (2020). Humility and bridging differences: A systematic literature review of humility in relation to diversity. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 79, 36–45.
For Germany you can find a good calculation at https://headworx.net/ihr-mitarbeiter-kuendigt-kann-fuer-sie-richtig-teuer-werden/. Retrieved 12.11.2022
   https://www.payscale.com/compensation-today/2017/12/cost-losing-employees.
Chen, C., Feng, J., & Liu, X. (2020). How perceived overqualification and leader humility interact to influence turnover intention. In Academy of Management Proceedings (Vol. 2020, No. 1, p. 20534). Academy of Management, Briarcliff Manor, New York.
Ou, A. Y., Seo, J., Choi, D., & Hom, P. W. (2017). When can humble top executives retain middle managers? The moderating role of top management team faultlines. Academy of Management Journal, 60(5), 1915–1931.
Li, J., Liang, Q., & Zhang, Z. Z. (2016) The effect of humble leader behavior, leader expertise, and organizational identification on employee turnover intention. Journal of Applied Business Research (JABR), 32(4), 1145–1156.
Levin, I. P., Xue, G., Weller, J. A., Reimann, M., Lauriola, M., & Bechara, A. (2015). A neuropsychological approach to understanding risk-taking for potential gains and losses. Decision Making Under Uncertainty, 80.
Ronay, R., Oostrom, J. K., Lehmann-Willenbrock, N., & Van Vugt, M. (2017). Pride before the fall:(Over) confidence predicts escalation of public commitment. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 69, 13–22.
Grant, A. M. (2014). Give and Take: Why Helping Others Drives Our Success. Penguin.
Hafenbrack, A. C., Kinias, Z., & Barsade, S. G. (2014). Debiasing the mind through meditation: Mindfulness and the sunk-cost bias. Psychological Science, 25(2), 369–376.
Buell, R. W., & Choi, M. (2019). Improving customer compatibility with operational transparency. Harvard Business School Technology & Operations Mgt. Unit Working Paper, (20-013).
Laloux, F. (2015). Reinventing organizations: ein Leitfaden zur Gestaltung sinnstiftender Formen der Zusammenarbeit. Vahlen.
Sowcik, M. J., Andenoro, A. C., & Council, A. (2017). Addressing the biggest (baddest) and best ideas ever: Through the lens of humility. Journal of Leadership Education, 16(4), 164–179.
Norcross, M. A., & Manning, M. R. (2019). Humility as an enabler of organizational growth and change. Research in Organizational Change and Development.
Owens, B. P., Johnson, M. D., & Mitchell, T. R. (2013). Expressed humility in organizations: Implications for performance, teams, and leadership. Organization Science, 24(5), 1517–1538.
Eragula, R. (2015). Humility in leadership. Advances in Economics and Business Management, 2(8), 786–789.
Kruse, E., Chancellor, J., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2017). State humility: Measurement, conceptual validation, and intrapersonal processes. Self and Identity, 16(4), 399–438.
Swain, J., & Korenman, L. (2018). In their humble opinion: How expressions of humility affect superiors’ assessments of leadership potential in the US Army. Military Psychology, 30(6), 507–527.
Chiu, C. Y., & Owens, B. P. (2013). Exploring the relationship between humility and perceived charisma: Role of gender. In Academy of Management Proceedings (Vol. 2013, No. 1, p. 15821). Academy of Management, Briarcliff Manor, New York.
ADRP 6-22 Army Leadership.
   https://www.personalwirtschaft.de/fuehrung/artikel/burnout-bei-managern-gilt-vor-allem-als-schwaeche.html. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Treasurer, B., & Havlik J. R. (2018). The Leadership Killer: Reclaiming Humility in an Age of Arrogance.
Schyns, B., & Schilling, J. (2013). How bad are the effects of bad leaders? A meta-analysis of destructive leadership and its outcomes. The Leadership Quarterly, 24(1), 138–158. Kelloway, E. K., Weigand, H., McKee, M. C., & Das, H. (2013). Positive leadership and employee well-being. Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies, 20(1), 107–117.
Kaluza, A. J., Boer, D., Buengeler, C., & van Dick, R. (2020). Leadership behaviour and leader self-reported well-being: A review, integration and meta-analytic examination. Work & Stress, 34(1), 34–56.
Kahn, M. (1966). The physiology of catharsis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 3(3), 278.
Zhang, Q. (2019). Research on the influence of humble leader on leader themselves: Based on the theory of resource conservation.
In email to author on 23.4.2020.
Owens, B. P., & Hekman, D. R. (2012). Modeling how to grow: An inductive examination of humble leader behaviors, contingencies, and outcomes. Academy of Management Journal, 55(4), 787–818.
Owens, B. P., Johnson, M. D., & Mitchell, T. R. (2013). Expressed humility in organizations: Implications for performance, teams, and leadership. Organization Science, 24(5), 1517–1538.
Kim, Y. H., Chiu, C. Y., & Zou, Z. (2010). Know thyself: Misperceptions of actual performance undermine achievement motivation, future performance, and subjective well-being. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 99(3), 395.
Krause, N., Pargament, K. I., Hill, P. C., & Ironson, G. (2016). Humility, stressful life events, and psychological well-being: Findings from the landmark spirituality and health survey. The Journal of Positive Psychology, 11(5), 499–510.
Haller, R. (2015). Die Macht der Kränkung. Ecowin.
   https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/asia/kim-jong-un-north-korea-execute-officials-death-penalty-anti-aircraft-gun-a7215906.html. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Süddeutsche Zeitung 20.7.2019.
Onody, A. P., Woodyatt, L., Wenzel, M., Cibich, M., Sheldon, A., & Cornish, M. A. (2020). Humility and its relationship to self-condemnation, defensiveness and self-forgiveness following interpersonal transgressions. Journal of Psychology and Theology, 48(2), 118–130.
Basford, T. E., Offermann, L. R., & Behrend, T. S. (2014). Please accept my sincerest apologies: Examining follower reactions to leader apology. Journal of Business Ethics, 119(1), 99–117.
Nielsen, R., & Marrone, J. A. (2018). Humility: Our current understanding of the construct and its role in organizations. International Journal of Management Reviews, 20(4), 805–824.
Swain, J. E. (2017). Does humility make a better military officer? Investigating psychological safety as an explanatory mechanism, examining superiors’ perceptions of potential and the effect of gender, and exploring humility in west point cadets [Doctoral dissertation, Yale University].
Van Tongeren, D. R., Davis, D. E., Hook, J. N., & Witvliet, C. V. (2019). Humility. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 28(5), 463–468.
Li, H., Jones, O., Harvey, W. S., & Yang, J. (2020). A Daoist perspective on leadership: Reputation-building in Chinese SMEs. International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behavior & Research.
Doshi, N., & McGregor, L. (2015). Primed to Perform. Harper Collins, New York, NY.
Eyal, T., Steffel, M., & Epley, N. (2018). Perspective mistaking: Accurately understanding the mind of another requires getting perspective, not taking perspective. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 114(4), 547.
Galinsky, A. D., Wang, C. S., & Ku, G. (2008). Perspective-takers behave more stereotypically. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 95(2), 404.
Gino, F., & Flynn, F. J. (2011). Give them what they want: The benefits of explicitness in gift exchange. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 47(5), 915–922.
Nielsen, R., Marrone, J. A., & Ferraro, H. S. (2013). Leading With Humility. Routledge.
König, A. S., Graf-Vlachy, L., Bundy, J. N., & Little, L. (2018). A blessing and a curse: How CEOs’ empathy affects their management of organizational crises. Academy of Management Review, 45, 130–153.
Owens, B. P., & Hekman, D. R. (2012). Modeling how to grow: An inductive examination of humble leader behaviors, contingencies, and outcomes. Academy of Management Journal, 55(4), 787–818.
   https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/why-humility-unfair-advantage-shubhankar-bhattacharya/. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Mathieu, C., & St-Jean, É. (2013). Entrepreneurial personality: The role of narcissism. Personality Individual Difference, 55, 527–531.
   https://www.arabianbusiness.com/the-many-faces-of-entrepreneur-q-a-with-badr-jafar-568300.html. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Bollaert, H., Leboeuf, G., & Schwienbacher, A. (2020). The narcissism of crowdfunding entrepreneurs. Small Business Economics, 55(1), 57–76.
Liu, Y., Li, Y., Hao, X., & Zhang, Y. (2019). Narcissism and learning from entrepreneurial failure. Journal of Business Venturing, 34(3), 496–512.
Li, Y., Wei, F., Chen, S., & Yan, Y. (2020). Effects of CEO humility and relationship conflict on entrepreneurial performance. International Journal of Conflict Management, 31, 489–508.
Ren, Q., Xu, Y., Zhou, R., & Liu, J. (2020). Can CEO’s humble leadership behavior really improve enterprise performance and sustainability? A case study of Chinese start-up companies. Sustainability, 12(8), 3168.
Vilanova, L., & Vitanova, I. (2020). The power of expressed humility: Investors’ reaction to humble entrepreneurs. In Academy of Management Proceedings (Vol. 2020, No. 1, p. 18884). Academy of Management, Briarcliff Manor, NY.
Vilanova, L., & Vitanova, I. (2020). The power of expressed humility: Investors’ reaction to humble entrepreneurs. In Academy of Management Proceedings (Vol. 2020, No. 1, p. 18884). Academy of Management, Briarcliff Manor, NY.
   https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/why-humility-unfair-advantage-shubhankar-bhattacharya/.
Ratiu, C., Cherry, B., & Nielson, T. R. (2014). Humility in social entrepreneurship: A virtuous circle. In Emerging Research Directions in Social Entrepreneurship (pp. 11–31). Springer, Dordrecht.
Leonelli, S., Ceci, F., & Masciarelli, F. (2019). “I am apt to show off”: Exploring the relationship between entrepreneurs’ narcissism and start-up innovation. Sinergie Italian Journal of Management, 37(3), 39–62.

===== FILE 13/23: xhtml%2fc5.xhtml =====

Chapter 5 Willingness to Recognize One’s Own Strengths and Weaknesses (and to Show Them Where It Makes Sense)

DOI: 10.4324/9781003358015-5

It takes courage to want to show yourself as you really are.

Søren Kierkegaard (Danish philosopher 1813–1855)

Summary

In order to recognize our own strengths and weaknesses, we must avoid numerous stumbling blocks: these range from self-perception to interacting with others. It is as much about narcissism and excessive self-confidence as it is about underestimating one's own abilities. It has to do with thinking yourself too obvious to others as well as believing in too great an importance. Tools are given to analyze your own strengths and weaknesses for your current and any future job.

Carl runs the country operations for a large multinational. He is in charge of the 6,600 employees out of the global 44,000. What really impressed me was his openness. While many of my interviewees chose to speak in general about strength and weaknesses, Carl quickly focused on his own. A tall, big-framed, bald-headed 57-year-old with an air of concentration and focus about him, he held nothing back.

In my former job with a smaller company I rose very quickly through the ranks to board level. And I became reckless and arrogant. I loved the show, was vain and keen on my status symbols. I also thought lying was part of the course, overreached and actually ended up in front of court. That taught me a lot. I found a coach, whom I was willing to listen to – a psychologist who was also an actor – and discovered to my amazement that neither lying nor showing off was essential to success. So, I stopped. And the global board of my new company thought that this kind attitude was sorely needed. They call it: “Being more than seeming to be.” When they hired me, they did not want to hear about any detailed plans I had for the company, they just wanted to see if I matched their values.

What is my task here as CEO? Well, whatever one of my employees can do better, they do. What is left for me is to go where it hurts. Understand what happened, how to help, how to prevent problems in the future.

Here was an impressive CEO who was good at identifying his weaknesses as well as his strengths and was happy sharing both.

Yet for many this is a big hurdle, so it is worthwhile looking more deeply into this.

Many managers wrongly think they are the cleverest in the room!

(Interview No. 135, Manager, 50,000 employees)

Football trainer Jupp Heynckes is a great example. I found it very impressive how he actively and openly addressed his “weakness”: his advanced age. “I cannot guarantee that I will play the coach for 12 hours every day, with 120 percent commitment.”

(Interview No. 1, Board Member, 22,000 employees)

When it comes to recognizing and showing your own strengths and weaknesses, the first question is: Are we talking about absolute or relative strengths and weaknesses here? A short anecdote to better understand what I mean.

At my English girls' boarding school, I was the best at orienteering. Why? You had to read maps and I could do that very well in comparison to the others. It did not at that time matter that I wasn't a good runner – my precision more than made up for the lack of speed. Things changed when I got into Cambridge. On a sunny autumn day, I arrived at the bus an hour after the last runner. 100th place out of 100. Everyone there could easily read maps and, unlike me, the other participants were genuine runners dying to dive into the forest at top speed.

The key lesson: at boarding school, I had no relevant weakness as regards orienteering. Indeed, I could easily cope with what was required of me. At Cambridge I had a huge competition, my strength disappeared and I had a nearly unsurmountable weakness in being light years away from the other participants when it came to running.

In other words, our strengths and weaknesses are relative and must be considered for each situation anew. And since this is about you as a manager, only those strengths and weaknesses will be relevant that you need in this or your desired next position.

You will be aware that we are talking about quite a large number of skills and knowledge that you need. Moreover, the requirements are often hugely different for each position and each organization. Even within one position, there might be considerable adaptation necessary, as the situation, the employees, the superiors, the customers and society change.

One fine example for the impact that a changing situation has on your strengths is former CEO of BMW Harald Krüger. In his first years as CEO, he was very much lauded for his cooperative, consensus-building leadership style.1 Then when the years passed and the pressure from companies such as Tesla could no longer be ignored, his cooperative style began to be seen as dithering as well as lacking in clarity. Employees and investors were yearning for a clear vision and decisive communication. Krueger was not able to deliver. Instead, being CEO appeared to have become an unpleasant chore to him. He was seen as gloomy, distracted and above all unable to be at the helm of a BMW that wanted to shine and have a clear position in the market to aspire to. In 2019 he was replaced by Oliver Zipse who seems to be able to give clear directions as well as restore confidence in employees and investors alike.2

What worked well in the beginning for Krüger ended up in a changed situation becoming a liability for him. Sadly, he seemed unwilling to adapt to the changing big picture and embark on new leadership behaviors such as charismatic storytelling or being the visionary helmsman.

Now that we have seen the relativity of strengths and weaknesses, we have to answer three questions: First, what are the obstacles on the way to identifying your strengths and weaknesses? Secondly, how best to find these strengths and weaknesses in you? Thirdly, how and when to best show them?

Stumbling Blocks When Looking at Strengths and Weaknesses

It is difficult to be humble if you are not self-aware. I find many people cover up their deficiencies, because they do not want to be seen as week. But it is important to also be vulnerable.

(Interview No. 15, Head of L&D, 1,500 employees)

Humility comes from the fact that you understand yourself. If I know and accept myself and know that I am work in progress, I have a different perspective. If I see myself as a completed work of art that needs not be improved, then there will be a high chance that I will be less humble. The majority of people are not able to look inside and understand themselves. It is a very difficult thing to see how ugly you are.

(Interview No. 18, Global Head, 110,000 employees)

People who are really strong are not afraid to show their weaknesses.

(Interview No. 83, CMO, 6,500 employees)

People have difficulties on two levels: Seeing themselves correctly as individuals and perceiving themselves in the interaction with others.

We will start with the four stumbling blocks when it comes to perceiving ourselves.

Narcissism.
Overconfidence.
Imposter syndrome.
Limits of biology.
Self-Perception: Danger of Narcissism

As CEO I often had difficulties with the fact that one is courted so much. There is always the danger of confusing yourself with the office. You think that you have earned it hard, but that is not the case.

(René Obermann, former Chairman of the Management Board of Deutsche Telekom3)

You have to learn to keep yourself in perspective. When I breathe in deeply, people around me stop talking because they think I will say something.

(Interview No. 108, CEO, 3,200 employees)

In my last job I had a CEO who claimed to know within 30 seconds if an employee was a good fit. He was often wrong. But never noticed.

(Interview No. 73, VP HR, 4,100 employees, formerly Head Group HR, 150,000)

Narcissists may be more successful in the short run, pushing the numbers, but the humble ones are more successful in the longer term.

(Interview No. 156, Head HR, 1,300 employees)

The first danger is narcissism as we already saw with the start-ups in the last chapter.

First let us differentiate: There is a healthy narcissism as well as an unhealthy one. Healthy narcissism is essential. It protects the individual from attacks of others as well as from self-hatred. Healthy narcissism equips you with self-esteem and self-confidence. As academics put it: A certain dose of narcissism is necessary to function effectively.4

A useful image for this is to imagine a cat looking in the mirror. If it was an unhealthy narcissist, it would see a lion in midst of either feeble or furiously threatening animals. The healthy narcissist on the other hand would see a fit, alert and generally capable cat surrounded by all types of creatures, typically minding their own business.

Unhealthy narcissism goes to the extremes with self-love and comes in two shapes: The vulnerable and the grandiose one. Grandiose narcissism is characterized by high self-esteem, interpersonal dominance and a tendency to overestimate one’s capabilities. Vulnerable narcissism is defensive, avoidant and has a hypersensitive attitude in interpersonal relations.5 The latter person is easily wounded, cannot deal with negative feedback and needs praise at all times. The former thinks very highly of themselves and does everything to protect that image. Both types feel entitled to special treatment.

This differentiates them from “humble” managers. These know fully well what they can do and appreciate the value of their skills. But they do not expect anything from others.6 Researchers call this attitude of not seeking anything special snappily “hypo-egoic non-entitlement!” Managers who are humble and endowed with a healthy narcissism know where and how they are capable. Yet, they do not expect any special treatment in return or feel entitled to anything special.

A humble CEO, if necessary, would xerox what is needed without taking this as an attack on his or her status. He or she would also not NEED a seat in business class to feel great as the other passengers stumble past enviously into the dark back. However, it may be that he or she needs the business class seat to sleep well and be fit the next day for the big presentation.

A humble manager would also take feedback on board, when both a grandiose or vulnerable narcissist would balk at this. For the narcissists a situation like the following would be unbearable.

This manager endured that an outsider pointed out weaknesses in his field of responsibility and also questioned his expert and leadership role. He calmly accepted the results and then subsequently took countermeasures.

(Interview No. 9, Head internal Insurance, 17,000 employees)

As a result, being an unhealthy narcissist definitely harbors dangers for your own performance. If I cannot stand the idea of an external expert identifying weaknesses, I am unlikely to ever seek genuine feedback from the in or the outside.

So, what are the numbers of unhealthy narcissists out there? If you look at the recent meta-studies, you will see that what is defined as a narcissistic personality disorder is prevalent in between 0.43 and 6 percent of the population worldwide. This is a small number that allows the subsequent question whether this percentage is higher amongst leaders.

Well, there are two pieces of research to look at. Firstly, one amongst 126 CHROs: it found that these only saw 5 percent of their CEOs as truly narcissistic.7 With all the negative connotations of less trust, less cooperation – in a far worse atmosphere. Five percent is a fair number, yet not huge.

Secondly, a piece of my research with 900 employees worldwide. According to this, employees see a huge number of between 25 and 36 percent of their leaders as narcissists. Far more than five percent! Why the big gap between 25 and 36? That seems to be a matter of culture, which I will look at more deeply in Chapter 10. Let it suffice here to say that Indian and Swiss employees see narcissism “only” in 25 percent of the cases, the English, the Dutch and the American see it around 30 percent, while the Singaporeans, the French and the Germans are least happy with their leader with 43, 40 and 37 percent, respectively.

What about the other leaders? Again, it depends on the culture, India sees 65 percent of leaders as humble, the UK, US and the Dutch stand around 60 percent, with the Singaporeans, the French and the Germans with a sadder 50 percent.

The quick thinkers amongst you will have realized that this does not add up to hundred. This is the consequence of there having been a third option, namely “other.” This category hides careless leading. These are leaders that, according to their employees, either do not lead, are mindless or vacillate between different styles. A sort of muddling through leadership. Which is an interesting leadership style!

To understand if what these employees see as narcissism really is narcissism, let us look in more detail at the definitions.

The definition that leadership research uses is as follows: A narcissist is someone who is egotistical, self-focused and vain. Sounds easy to grasp. The question however is, if that is already the psychological personality disorder as defined by DSM 5? The one that comes to results of at most six percent of sufferers?

Take a moment to decide for yourself if the leaders that you would call narcissistic actually behave as defined by the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Compendiums, which is the worldwide standard reference for mental disorders.

A pervasive pattern of grandiosity (in fantasy or behavior), need for admiration and lack of empathy, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the following:

Has a grandiose sense of self-importance (e.g., exaggerates achievements and talents, expects to be recognized as superior without commensurate achievements).
Is preoccupied with fantasies of unlimited success, power, brilliance, beauty, or ideal love.
Believes that he or she is “special” and unique and can only be understood by, or should associate with, other special or high-status people (or institutions).
Requires excessive admiration.
Has a sense of entitlement (i.e., unreasonable expectations of especially favorable treatment or automatic compliance with his or her expectations).
Is interpersonally exploitative (i.e., takes advantage of others to achieve his or her own ends).
Lacks empathy: is unwilling to recognize or identify with the feelings and needs of others.
Is often envious of others or believes that others are envious of him or her.
Shows arrogant, haughty behaviors or attitudes.

If now you reflect on the leaders in your company that you know well – are there indeed so many that suffer from this pathological narcissism? Or are the narcissistic traits not strongly dependent on the culture and the system of the company and less tied to a quasi-eternal truth about the individual? This would indeed be my take: When we talk about narcissism in leaders, we do not mean the mental disorder but a self-focused behavior that is either fostered or hindered in the company at hand.

Before we look at this in more detail, let us pause to reflect, whether narcissists are actually all bad.

On the positive side, there is evidence that narcissistic leaders are seen as more visionary, initiate more mergers and expand more internationally.8 On the downside however, there is yet more research which shows that narcissists are fickle in their strategy,9 act unethically,10 more often involve their companies in costly litigation,11 lead to poor performance and higher burnout among employees (especially those with low self-esteem)12 and are far from being as successful as they claim to be.

More details on this latter point: a study from the year 2016 looked at the subjective and objective performance of 968 top managers.13 And came to the conclusion that while the more narcissistic amongst them were enormously impressed by their own performance and consequently by that of their company in terms of sales, turnover and innovation, this performance did not stand up to scrutiny – i.e. these companies were objectively simply not very good at sales, did not have high turnover compared to similar companies and were not particularly innovative. A sad result.

On top of all this, the more narcissistic a CEO, the more they are willing to fudge the company's figures in order to have them show what he or she would like to see.14 This is cleverly called earnings management.

Hearing all this, you may be worried, wish to drop this book and search the internet for a test on how far you are on the unhealthy and extreme side of narcissism. My appeal to you is: Don’t!

Firstly, because you can do the test right here and now. Either you go through the nine elements of the DSM and assess yourself. Or you decide to go for the less “disturbed” version of narcissism from leadership research. Here studies show that you do not have to take lengthy tests with 40-plus questions to find out whether you are a narcissist.15 All you have to do is assign a score to the following question. “To what extent do you agree with this statement: ‘I am a narcissist’?” (Note: The word “narcissist” means egotistical, self-focused and vain. 1 = not true at all, 7 = completely true).

And secondly, even if you should self-diagnose yourself as a DSM subject or as a 7, this is not a lethal diagnosis. Much can be learned by willing narcissists!

For example, while narcissists are seen as less empathetic than other leaders, using their employees for their own purpose without bearing their needs in mind, it takes only a slight nudge, a slight reminder of the existence of other people, to enable someone who is too narcissistic to learn how to empathize with others.16 Equally, coaches report on how narcissists can be coached out of their self-focus and become “normal” leaders.17

Clearly then, managerial narcissism is not something that is unchangeable from the cradle, but something that is strongly influenced by the situation you find yourself in.

Let me give you an example from history: CEOs who started their work careers in times of crisis ended up being less narcissistic than those who started in boom times.18 Why? In times of economic unrest, narcissism is simply not accepted by others around you. Also, if it is harder to find or keep a job, it becomes obvious even to yourself that you may not be the salt of the earth and are possibly not so important after all.

As the opening interview quotes show, unhealthy narcissism gets easily fostered by the environment, by people ascribing much to you and you beginning to believe this. If you earn 20, 40 or even 300 times more than an ordinary worker, it may be hard not to drop over to the unhealthy side of narcissism. If you work at what is considered “the” company or “the” place, this will also have an impact. That is why there are four times as many diagnosed narcissists in fiercely competitive New York than in relaxed Iowa.19

This argument of how the environment influences each and every one of us is also used to explain why researchers have found rising narcissism in young people – the economic boom and the demographic development in many countries have allowed younger people to focus on themselves and misjudge their importance in the grander scheme of things.

On the other hand, it is no wonder then that many people have observed a decrease in narcissism during the Covid-19 crisis. While the health systems are strained and millions all over the world are clearly suffering, narcissism becomes less accepted socially and is as a result less practiced.

For those who cannot imagine such a powerful influence of outside situations on their individual behavior, I recommend looking at an interesting piece of research done with Vietnam veterans.

In the 1970s, the American government was very concerned by the fact that nearly 80 percent of soldiers in Vietnam were regularly using drugs, including heroin. Yet, three years after their return to home, only 12 percent were still addicted. Why? Drugs, even if they were just as readily available in the US, simply were not a good match for everyday life. They did not fit in with the family, with the community, at work. So, most of the addicts simply stopped.20

This fine allegory when applied to unhealthy narcissism says: If it no longer fits, it will stop or at least become less!

The other way around is also true – if I am not careful, I can become more narcissistic in a flash. Look at this: Hungry people feel more entitled and are more focused on themselves than those that have eaten. In consequence, when your stomach is rumbling, you are much more likely to agree with sentences such as: “I deserve more than others,” “If I were on the Titanic, I would be entitled to be in one of the first lifeboats” or “I demand the best because I'm worth it.”21 Hunger subconsciously directs our focus away from other people towards our own needs.

So, it is vital to be aware of how situations shape our narcissism and try to engineer them thus, that they simply fail to foster narcissism. What can this look like? For example, when you are given a task that you believe only you can do, reflect on who would take on your role if you suddenly were forced to go on a three-week top-secret company project without time to connect with anyone back at the office. Immediately, we begin to see that we are not so important after all.

There is also considerable learning that happens over the course of people’s lives. A study from 2019 showed that people are less vain and feel far less entitled at age 41 than at 18.22 As if the oyster from “the world is your oyster” is still beautiful yet harder to crack. And you may have grown in understanding that other oysters also contain pearls.

Some say, that a decrease in narcissism even happened to Steve Jobs. Years after he was fired from Apple as CEO he reflected calmly: “It was a bitter medicine that the patient needed.”23 After this experience, he was said to have become more aware of his own narcissism and, if – from his point of view – the situation and the well-being of the company demanded it, he could occasionally drop it.

Everyone who has read his biography by Walter Isaacson24 knows that he never became a lamb and often enough remained a stinker, but it appeared that later on he was better able to see the bigger picture and sacrifice his narcissism on its altar.

Consequently, there are some researchers that actually postulate the following: As an underlying and trainable virtue, humility can actually go hand in hand with narcissism.25

Let us look at this apparent contradiction: “You may be able to be both humble and narcissistic.”

To some this may sound as if I am postulating that tall is tiny and bright is dark at the same time.

Yet for many people these are not irreconcilable differences. There are those who find the concept of two souls in one body quite easy to internalize. These are the people that are generally aware of a duality in themselves. They observe that they are shy in one group and extroverted in another, that they are lazy on one subject and diligent on another, that they treat most employees fairly and a few unfairly. This means that many people can see and even reluctantly accept the lazy, mean and evil inside themselves as well as the open, caring and altruistic. Because we have known for a long time that both can be found in everyone. Just remember the conclusion Alexander Solzhenitsyn came to: “The line separating good and evil passes right through every human heart.”

In addition, national culture influences how we deal with these inner contradictions. Research shows that, for example, East Asians are less in need of a positive self-image, than Westerners.26 They are both more aware as well as more accepting of the fact that there are many paradoxes and changes in life and that there is no one unified self. This means that these would also find it easier to bear a juxtaposition of a narcissistic and humble side.

In discussions, I find that this apparent contradiction is harder to accept for others than for ourselves. We find it far easier to classify someone in total as arrogant, humble or narcissistic instead of saying: “Today Peter had his humble day; today Susan put on her cloak of arrogance.” For ourselves, however, we understand that, we only had a bad day and will be different and better tomorrow.

If we accept the tenet, that humility can be learned (as we will see later) then in the learning process there will a) always be hick-ups and b) it may be that whatever we learn does not cover all areas of our life, meaning that we can stay partly narcissist even while being primarily humble.

Is there an advantage to this duality? Well, it seems to work well for some. Jack Ma, for example, the founder of Alibaba, appears to be able to do both: take a step back, allow a customer to ring the bell at the start of the company’s IPO and at the same time be on narcissistic display at the company party performing as Michael Jackson.27

Being both at the same time may actually have some advantages for the company. A survey of more than 200 CEOs showed that those who could live both narcissism and humility pushed their companies to be more innovative than those who did not exhibit both characteristics.28 The reason? Narcissism impels us towards the great goal for ourselves, humility towards the great goal primarily for others; both impel us to seek the new. Humility drives us to appreciate others, narcissism to try inspire others and be a shining torch to them.

If you seek an image for this duality between focus on self and focus on others, between narcissism and humility just look at the well-known story of the Indian who awards his grandson (and hundreds of blogs) with the following wisdom.

“There is a battle raging inside me,” the Cherokee grandfather said to his grandson. “It is a terrible fight and it is between two wolves. One is evil – he is anger, envy, sorrow, regret, greed, arrogance, self-pity, guilt, resentment, inferiority, lies, false pride, superiority and ego. The other wolf is good – he is joy, peace, love, hope, serenity, humility, kindness, goodwill, empathy, generosity, truth, compassion and faith. The same struggle takes place in you – and in every other human being too.”

Then the grandson asks, “And which one wins?”

The grandfather replies, “The one I feed.”

This is where most blogs end. They use the story to inspire us to focus on the good in us and that we have a duty to nourish it. Not a bad lesson. Yet, there is an even better one to come, since the original story goes on:

But if you feed them right, they both win. Because if I just decide to feed the white wolf, the black one will hide behind every corner, waiting for me to get distracted or weak and jump to get the attention he craves.

But when I acknowledge him, he is happy and the white wolf is happy and we all win. Because the black wolf has many qualities – tenacity, courage, fearlessness, a strong will and great strategic thinking – which I sometimes need. These are exactly the things the white wolf is missing. But the white wolf has compassion, care, strength and the ability to recognize what is in the best interest of all.

You see, my grandson, the white wolf needs the black wolf at his side.29

How heart-warming and fitting to the fact that we as humans often have both: The selfish with its strong will and the generous with its ample giving.

So, it seems that concentrating on only the good part of yourself may actually be unhealthy and contradict the view of humility as held in this book.

Instead, with a view from the balcony allowing both to be is what defines humility. If our narcissistic elements have some uses, then it is best to be aware of that, use them consciously and bolster ourselves with moments of narcissism if that leads to us better fulfilling the role that we have taken on.

It clearly comes down to being aware. Aware of where you are being overly narcissistic, where you may feel too entitled, where you forget others and think too much of yourself. Once you see the dangers, you will be able to temper them, and allow yourself small forays into narcissism that – if done well – will actually complement your humility.

Take-Away: Keeping narcissism in check – In addition to healthy narcissism, there is also unhealthy narcissism - which should be wisely contained by those who really want to know themselves.

Self-Perception: The Danger of Overconfidence

I do not employ a manager who cannot reflect and relate when something in life did not go as it was planned to. You need to have failed in order to start reflecting.

(Interview No. 32, former Board Member, 3,500 employees)

It is killer criterion in a candidate if there is no form of humility. If the person only talks about what he or she has done, without seeing what others have done or how the system has helped.

(Interview No. 41, CEO, 1,800 employees)

Hybris kills. My biggest fear is to fall for it, because people listen to me.

(Interview No. 145, Consultant to CEOs)

Everyone who understands the Dunning-Kruger effect will be humble.

(Interview No. 140, People Officer, 450,000 employees)

Is there anyone amongst you who does not think that you are a better driver than the average? Exactly. About 90 percent of us think they are better behind the wheel than those erratic people in the other cars. That this cannot be mathematically correct must be obvious to all.

Managers easily fall prey to the same bias of overconfidence. Would you like some data?

A study from the year 2020 shows that 80 percent of managers believe that they have succeeded in ensuring commitment and motivation amongst their employees. That is a great number! Unfortunately, less than half of the employees agree.30

Managers are not alone in their failure in assessing themselves correctly: if employees are asked how much their boss supports them, their answer is a depressingly low 17 percent. Given some time to reflect on what the manager is actually doing directly and what behind the scenes, the answer goes up to 33 percent.31 This is still low – and may reveal to the manager, that they often overestimate as to how useful they are seen by their employees.

Yet, at the same time, it reveals a general key point: We find it hard to correctly assess anything – ourselves or others.

By the way, groups are in no way smarter. All in all, participants set their contribution to a total group result in such a way that the result exceeds 140 percent. If they are given time to think again, to reflect on each situation and each contribution, everyone corrects downwards. To a whopping 123 percent, that is still widely off of the mark.32

Then there is the Dunning-Kruger effect, quoted above, that shows humans to have a tendency to overestimate the extent of their knowledge in most areas. In particular, those that know little seem to believe they are perfectly well equipped. The trick here is to challenge people to really explain what they believe they understand. When asked, for example, if we know how a toilet works, most of us would say yes. Once tasked to explain the mechanics we discover how very shallow our knowledge is.

And now, please reflect. How often have you read the results of a study such as: “X percent of decisions are made incorrectly” or “X percent of employees do not feel appreciated” to think immediately: “Well, that obviously does not apply to me.”

There you may have overconfidence sneaking in through the back door. Of course, there may be things that we really are sure about and can rightly be so. If you have yearly employee satisfaction surveys with well thought out questions and the employees keep on stating, that they feel appreciated and supported, then you can take this at face value and be justly proud. But for the vast majority of things, we merely assume that we know how great or useful we are to others.

This general overconfidence gets exacerbated, the longer someone has been working in the same position. Why? Because they do not get nor listen to regular feedback or spend too little time truly reflecting on themselves. Whether this reflection is possible depends very much on your respective corporate culture – yet in general there is the tendency that people higher up in the hierarchy are less likely to seek or receive open feedback.

There is also a fascinating piece of research that shows that CEOs who are in their first CEO role not only stay longer but also perform better than seasoned CEOs.33 Why? They do not believe that they already know it all – but keep on working on their mental models.

How does overconfidence express itself? Look at the quotes from these CEOs. Very little critical self-perception!

“A great scholar with high morality,” an “ambassador with grand mission and continuous contribution.” These descriptions by others about me concisely summarized me

(Member of the board)34

I help others find a coach but have never found the right one for me. But I get good feed-back from my children.

(Interview No. 36, CEO, 2,000 employees)

Interestingly, excessive self-confidence is even greater among board members of companies which they themselves have founded than among board members who join companies owned by someone else.35 The argument runs as follows: “If, against all odds, I have built something myself, then I must truly be better than others!” Whereas those board members who have joined an existing company realize that something decent has already been built without them and as a consequence manage to put their own contribution into perspective.

This means that you as a reader should look at yourself honestly and consider how you can make sure that you really know what it is that you can do and where you stand in comparison to others.

In one organization that I had the privilege of advising, the head of the department always stressed that his team was not very good and that it needed him to have the best ideas. He emphasized how hard he had to pummel and push his team towards success. When talking to the team members, they had a fundamentally different view: the head of department hardly ever listened, so none of the team members could present their ideas, and in the few cases where they did, the manager happily snatched up these new ideas for his own.

What else should you know about overconfidence to be armed against your own?

Women in management positions are statistically less overconfident than men. Full stop. A few examples: Only 43 percent of women say that they are the best in a group of four, compared to 75 percent of men.36 This is still overconfident, since the real number should of course be 25 percent but not as far off as the men.

Female top managers also take more cautious decisions and borrow less for their companies. They seem to have a longer-term vision, and try to have more financing options at hand when business opportunities arise.37 By contrast, more male managers believe that the volatility of the company's cash flow is less than it actually is. They therefore underestimate the probability of bankruptcy as well as the costs of emergencies and defaults. Those managers also have too much confidence in their own superior skills and are too optimistic about future growth opportunities and their ability to resolve any negative eventualities. As a result, they opt for less flexible capital structures with a higher debt-equity ratio and a higher share of long-term debt than women.

However, not all men tick the same way. There are differences that even seem to have some biological roots. A piece of research from 201838 revealed the following surprising finding: Men who were exposed to less testosterone in the womb had a tendency to become overconfident later in life!

First of all, you need to let this sink in.

And in the end, you have to ask yourself what exactly this means and how the researchers believe they can know how men had fared as embryos.

Researchers realized a long time ago that the length of the fingers gives an indication of how much testosterone the embryo was exposed to in the womb. If the ring finger is longer than the index finger, hundreds of studies have shown that this is an indication that the baby has been exposed to more testosterone.

With this knowledge in hand, a search for correlations started. How does this unit of testosterone, for a fetus, relate to different topics ranging from life successes, personality, diseases as well as overconfidence?

Interestingly, men with longer ring fingers seem to suffer statistically less from overconfidence and sport greater achievements than those who have shorter ring fingers. A similar result is seen in athletes where those who with more testosterone in the womb were measurably more successful.

According to one theory, this biological starting point gives rise to a kind of “defensive pessimism.” This means that those who were bathed in testosterone expect less of themselves set lower expectations, so that they consequently can manage their own fears and perform better. This defensive pessimism is said to bring with it a feeling of alertness and attention, which then results in better performance.

If you should begin now to stare at your finger and be itchy to go onto the net to measure where your finger ratio puts you in these pieces of research best to heed one piece of advice: Don't do it!

First of all, none of the many experiments show a 100 percent correlation between finger ratio and outcome. Instead, what researchers find is a mere tendency. And you have to remember that statistics is the game of large numbers and is not relevant for each and every individual.

Secondly, and more importantly, a tendency means just that – not a must, but a can. And as we will see later, when a weakness is recognized, almost everything can be learned.

I suggest that you take this research only as an additional wake-up call so that you will be prepared to look at your own strengths and weaknesses with fierce clarity as well as generous kindness.

What is the downside if you don’t? As we saw in the introductory interview remarks – people may no longer hire you for a job if all you exude is overconfidence.

Take-Away: Defeat overconfidence – To think of oneself as better without foundation obscures the view of one’s own self. Only those who know about the human tendency to place themselves above others can correctly perceive themselves.

Self-Perception: The Imposter Syndrome

I know quite a lot of managers who build up distance because they do not have a solid self-confidence. And you can do that so wonderfully with 6 doors and an assistant between you and your employees.

(Interview No. 96, Board Member, 220,000 employees)

To love others, you need to love yourself.

(Interview No. 61, COO, 5,000 employees)

The opposite of overconfidence is underestimating yourself. This is the so-called “imposter syndrome”, named thus by researchers in the late 1970s. This syndrome describes a feeling which many successful people harbor that they will not be able to meet other people's expectations. Whatever they have accomplished in terms of grades, whatever they are praised for in terms of skills, they see this entirely as the result of chance. If something goes wrong, however, they see this as a personal failure which reveals deep and unchangeable truths about themselves that cannot be corrected with practice.

Researchers assume that 70 percent of all people feel this syndrome once in their life.39 Some admit to it openly such as Sheryl Sandberg, COO of Facebook: “There are still days when I wake up feeling like a fraud.”40 Howard Schultz, CEO of Starbucks, reveals his uncertainty equally if less directly: “Very few people, whether you’ve been in that job before or not, get into the seat and believe today that they are now qualified to be the CEO. They’re not going to tell you that, but it’s true.”41

In a 2014 survey with 116 CEOs and Top Managers, the Executives said that their biggest fear was being found out as incompetent!42

Although the imposter syndrome is reported somewhat more frequently by women, it also occurs in men, who according to studies are actually more stressed by it than women.43

Other researchers have called people who suffer from this feeling an “insecure overachiever”.44 If you describe this to an audience, in particular, of lawyers and management consultants, many of them nod. First reluctantly, and then when they see the large number of heads moving in the same direction, they do so more vigorously. Why is this feeling so strong in these groups? Both jobs appear to attract people who like to strive and strive and never feel satisfied with the result – or even with themselves.

In all of these cases, the result indicates that people end up completely misjudging themselves. The consequence is that they become hyper-perfectionist, afraid of feedback and do not dare undertake tasks that anyone in their environment would consider unproblematic for them.

We would not need to worry about leaders having impostor syndrome if it meant that they also became perfectionists at leading. Yet research shows that people who underestimate themselves often find it difficult to concentrate on their leadership tasks. Leading needs a focus away from yourself and your own fears, it also entails the willingness to let go – which insecure overachievers find harder. Instead, insecure leaders are trapped in unhealthy self-reflections about themselves and are fearful of being exposed. They consequently tend to cling to those elements of the job that they can control and do not progress on their road to becoming a leader who can rise above things and see the bigger picture.

This is often coupled with them feeling tormented by the fact that, if they were to cross their hearts and look into themselves deeply, they actually do not like themselves very much. For some, this even goes so far that they end up being fundamentally critical of their own being. Interestingly, many people do not even notice this dislike of themselves but have to be prodded into noticing it by coaches.

What is an indication for you not really liking yourself? Take a good quick test by looking at your inner dialogue. If you have too many thoughts along the lines of: “Okay, I've messed up again!” or “What a dumbo, I am!” or “Bet, I'm wrong once again. No way, will this work!” – then this may be an indication that you do not really accept or approve of yourself. Or to use the really big word: that you do not really love yourself.

In many of my interviews, executives pointed out that they knew of numerous people in their teams, that seem to undervalue themselves, that do not seem to really be a peace with themselves. The result is a lack of self-esteem, which in turn prevents them from weighing themselves objectively and with professional, loving distance. Research shows that people who do not value themselves are also more needy. They require more praise from others, overrate negative feedback and therefore see their strengths too little and their weaknesses too much.45 This means that such people do not act with humility simply because they cannot perceive themselves properly. Moreover, wanting to be liked by others impairs their freedom of thought and action.

Many people who do not like themselves also end up not liking others. They are unwilling to take feedback on board, since why bother repairing that which is broken and without value. They are tough on others because they cannot generate a warmth for others that they lack themselves.

The result: these then will actually be worse leaders than your happy go lucky narcissist, from whom at least some crumbs of self-love may drop onto others.

To sum up, research tells clearly that people are better off if they are friendly to themselves and appreciate what they have achieved and the struggles they have had. If they do this, they feel better mentally and emotionally.46 And emotionally stable and happy managers are far more effective.

The task therefore is not to be too skeptical of yourself – but instead see what it is that you do well. How to start? Try and see yourself through the eyes of a good friend. What would he or she say about you? And then believe that they know you and others well enough for you to be able to believe their assessment.

Take-Away: Not hiding one’s light under a bushel – For many, a lack of self-love leads to seeing one's weaknesses as too great and one's strengths as too small. This prevents true humility.

Self-Perception: Limits of Biology

Finally, biology sets limits to the correct perception of your real self. Some of these limits are very obvious. For example, in many organizations it is considered admirable and good form to get by with little sleep.

An American survey of 35,000 executives shows that only 28 percent sleep more than 7 hours per night.47 German managers on average sleep six hours and ten minutes, an hour less than the average German.48

It would be hubris as well as overconfidence to think that with little sleep you can work and lead just as well. Research is damningly clear: Tired leaders are less effective and less inspiring.49 Why? Because they are not in control of their emotions, they cannot see the big picture, nor can they intelligently steer themselves and others, since a vital part of themselves is somewhere dozing off.

It is, therefore, a sign of understanding one’s own limits if the manager realizes and act on this. Luckily, a few have started being outspoken about this.

Jeff Bezos from Amazon admits openly that he needs eight hours of sleep, in order to make good decisions.50 Carlsberg board member Cees' t Hart sees his performance suffers when he sleeps less than 7 hours.51

Slowly this knowledge is gaining traction. The above-mentioned survey shows that the higher the position, the more sleep the manager gets. As a group, most board members end up sleeping between seven and eight hours. Why? Perhaps the visibility in the organization and to the public makes a weak performance so much more dangerous that it becomes a corporate safety measure to reach for the light switch in the evening. Would it not even be the key task of the risk officers to ensure sufficient sleep in the company leaders?

Or is it the other way round: the executive has only reached the top position, since he or she has realized the impact of sleep on their own performance and has consequently, merely rationally, decided to sleep more!

You have to check honestly – how much sleep do you need in order to perform at your best? Nothing wrong with a few short nights, but if your way of working regularly causes you to sleep too little, you actually lack humility. Humility before the task you have taken on and humility before the bigger picture. Remember how King Canute demonstrated that there are bigger forces at play when he tried to command the water to stop rising and was washed away. In the same way there are bigger forces for us humans to contend with – one of them is our basic need for sleep.

The second one is nutrition. Does nutrition have an impact on you? Well, sure – everyone in today’s age knows about healthy eating. Yet, what is less well known is that perception and behavior also change, if you get your nutrition wrong. As trivial as it sounds: If you do not pay attention to your diet, you will not be the master of your emotions.

How can you tell?

Dozens of studies show that people with too little glucose in their blood make less considered decisions.52 Bad for a leader. They also end up being in a worse mood.53 Catastrophic for a leader who wants to be well-balanced.

An experiment from 2014 demonstrates this problem of emotional control in a delightfully absurd and memorable way.54 107 couples were asked to measure their blood sugar levels in the morning and evening. They were then given a voodoo doll with the following instruction:

This doll represents your spouse. At the end of each day, for 21 consecutive days, you put between 0 and 51 needles into the doll, depending on how angry you are at your spouse. You will do this alone, without your spouse being present.

Now that' s an experiment!

The result? The lower the blood sugar level, the more needles end up in the soft doll body.

What about everyday working life? It has also been shown that experts were less positive and less ready for change when they were hungry than when they were fed. With full stomachs, they were far more open to new things.55 This indicates that our brains need to be well nourished in order to work properly.

Now the question is, of course, whether you as a rational person would not notice that you are being irrational, simply need to eat something and need not be angry at your spouse or your employees.

Unfortunately, we typically fail to get to the root cause of the problem. After all, our brain economically prefers to pick the one thing that comes to its mind most easily. And until we train our neuronal pathways enough, it appears far more probable to them that our spouse has done something silly or the employee has messed up than that we have eaten too little. It is usually only in retrospect after lunch we notice others as being quite intelligent and pleasant after all.

Not all, however, is lost. As already indicated, we can teach ourselves to notice when we are drifting off into the primary needs of our body, behaving irrationally or embarking on making bad decisions, simply because we lack sleep or food. We can learn to notice when we lose the mental grip on ourselves. We can also learn to stop and reflect on how we are reacting, and then prime ourselves into imagining how we might react differently, if this was the first day at work after a long and relaxing vacation.

Or simply go out to lunch or home to sleep!

Take-Away: Accepting biological limits – There is a danger of disregarding the signals from the body and the brain. As a result strengths cannot be played out and weaknesses become stronger. Overall: less performance.

Having now identified the stumbling blocks in our own perception, let us look at what we need to be aware of in the interaction with others. Two key areas: Firstly, thinking that we are too obvious and clear in what we do. Secondly, overestimating our own significance.

In the Interaction: Considering Yourself as Being Too Obvious

Many do not have the courage to really give open feedback and then the employee is in for an unpleasant surprise after the trial period.

(Interview No. 66, CEO, 300 employees)

Our basic assumption is that we are clear in our statements and generally understood.

This is an illusion! We need to understand how far this illusion reaches, before we can really grasp our strengths and weaknesses. Let us look at one of the key tools that you as a leader have in order to influence others: giving feedback.

Ideally, feedback works in such a way, that performance, commitment and motivation is increased while at the same time the employee has understood where things have gone wrong.

What does it look like when we openly and honestly give feedback to someone? Not only to appreciate someone's strengths – which we will cover in the next chapter – but also to highlight problems and lack of performance.

A quick reflection on why this is important in a book about humility? Because humility does not mean that a manager does not share with others the truth where it is necessary. Appreciating someone for their strengths does not mean overlooking weaknesses. It also does not mean, promoting a person who is not aware of their weaknesses and not willing to do something about those that are harmful to their role.

When it comes to negative feedback, there is a dangerous automatism in our mind. We see clearly what it is that we want to convey. Therefore, we tend to assume that the other side will equally clearly grasp what we are saying. Are we usually right in this assumption? Fiddlesticks!

First of all, employees generally give their managers bad marks for their feedback. Employees from 53 countries found that only 5 percent, indeed, only a sad 5 percent of managers are good at giving open feedback.56 This failure to communicate clearly is expensive for companies. Either because employees do not notice where there is room for improvement. Or, they end up feeling unappreciated for skills and actions, the result of which will be stubbornness and a reduction of commitment.

Secondly, we are bad at giving negative feedback in a way that the employee really sees what we mean.57 One study made this crystal-clear: managers were given the task to give clear feedback to an employee. The goal was for the employee to understand that their performance scores were a very moderate 4.6 out of 7. What did the employees really hear? A solid 5.8 out of 7.

Furthermore, the managers thought it obvious that as a consequence of the bad feedback the likelihood of promotion was a miserly 30 percent, i.e., a promotion would be quite unlikely. What did the employee see? A rosy 60 percent likelihood.

Now as a manager you may think that the reason for this big gap lies in the employee simply not wanting to hear the negative. That the employee likes to live in their own world being in self-defense fiercely dismissive of any critique.

The researchers, of course, had thought about this and included an impartial listener for control. This listener came to the same rosy conclusions as the employee. In other words, the managers were clearly focusing way too much on themselves instead of what the employee would really need to hear. Simply and plainly, the managers were shirking their responsibility by remaining oblique instead of being clear and open.

How can this be avoided? Quite easily. As soon as the managers were told to reflect on there being a danger that negative feedback might not be entirely obvious, they communicated much more clearly. The gap between what the manager said and the employee heard shrunk even further when it was the employee who asked the manager for open and honest feedback. The power of such a question is enormous: Now I, as a manager, am being asked for something. It is then my duty to spell out things so they cannot be misunderstood.

What was the biggest impulse towards clear communication? Allowing the manager to also focus on themselves. How? Once the manager's bonus was made contingent on the employee's understanding matching the manager's assessment, miraculously, the feedback became very clear and easy to understand for each and every employee!

This means that anyone can easily break the illusion of transparency... as soon as they become aware of it.

There is another famous example of how people assume that their thoughts and statements will reach the addressee as intended. In 1990, a psychology doctoral student at Stanford University named Elizabeth Newton designed an experiment. Participants were asked to tap a song with their fingers. A second group was asked to identify the song. A total of 25 well-known songs, such as Happy Birthday, were available for selection. The interesting thing was not that the guessers only recognized three percent of the songs. That did not come as a surprise – if you try it out you will realize how hard it is to guess. What came as a surprise was that the people tapping assumed that a full 50 percent of their chosen melodies would be recognized.58 In other words, they were completely wrong about the transparency of their tapping for the other side. Why: Well, they heard the melody so very clearly in their head while they were tapping. That would surely be child’s play to recognize!

To sum up: we generally believe ourselves too obvious to others and need to invest mental energy into adapting our communication in such a way that we truly are understood.

As an addendum at this juncture, I would like to share another vital point about giving feedback. Research shows that women on the whole tend to receive less honest feedback, both from men and women.59 The important study in more detail: Objective observers were asked to rate a product. As soon as it was made clear that a bad product originated from a female worker, the evaluators adjusted their rating upwards by an average of ten percent compared to the weak male performers. While this may be pleasant for the woman in question, it means that she is not made aware of how she is really seen.

Here too, the manager must be very careful not to unconsciously adjust their feedback and thereby harm the entire organization in the long run. Because if a person does not know that they have done something badly – why should they bother to learn?

Take-Away: Become clear and unambiguous – Focusing on the self, obscures the view of what reaches or must reach the other person. If you truly see your counterpart, you avoid weak and ineffective communication.

In Interaction: Overestimating Your Own Significance

There are different ways in which we overestimate our own significance. These are important to understand for two reasons. Firstly, because only once we realize where and how we are seen in an interaction with others, can we be sure that we achieve what our role requires of us. Secondly, an understanding of these limits is vital for us in order to grasp the bigger picture. I need to understand, how much space of the bigger picture I can ever begin to take up. Once I realize how limited this is, I can – as we will do later on in this book – focus on the real bigger picture.

The Spotlight-Effect

People generally assume that they are seen more by others than is actually the case. This is the so-called spotlight effect.

Let us look at one study uncovering the effect: Students were asked to wear an embarrassing T-shirt. They were worried that at least half of their peers in the lecture hall would notice this miserable piece of clothing on them. In fact, only between 8 and 25 percent did.60

Other studies have looked at how much weight we believe our contributions carry in a discussion. The upside is that hardly anyone notices if contributions have gone wrong with a stutter, a slip of the tongue or with a faulty argument.

The considerable downside is that arguments we believe to be salient and decisive are rarely seen as such by others. This also explains why quite often we do not feel credited for our ideas. We believe that when we suggested something new, it would be obvious to others that it was our idea and that it was new. And that they acted consciously and with bad intent when later they brought up the idea as their own. What is, however, the case far more often is that the listeners did not really latch on to what was being said. When they end up returning to that idea, they have actually forgotten who voiced it first.

Conclusion: We are simply not as important in the lives of others as we think.

There are ways, in which this false perception can be corrected. For example, people are better able to judge their own impact on others if they have previously carried out a short breathing meditation.61 Why? The focus on the breath, plus becoming aware of what is going on in one’s mind as one tries to focus on the breath, allows the individual to take on an outside perspective. This is like the view from the balcony we spoke of before. As a result, they are no longer stuck in their own perception and can estimate quite accurately how they are perceived.

What does this mean for you as a manager? A number of things.

In general, you cannot expect anyone to realize what you want after only a few sentences. And even more so, you cannot expect that people perceive what it is that you do when you are not talking about it.

So, if you want something to stick, you have to be clear and repeat yourself, both in words and behavior. The CEO of Credit Lyonais summed it up: “One thing I really underestimated in my job as CEO: it's all about communication, communication, communication.”62

And if you want people to see what it is that you are actually doing, because this helps the role that you have taken on (and not your ego), then you must make it obvious. How you choose to make it clear is up to you. It may be lists with ticks, flowcharts with responsibilities or other ways to show others how you keep different stakeholders on board and what you do in order for your employees to be able to focus on their tasks.

It is vital in nearly all that you do, to take an outside perspective to understand what others are seeing. This holds true, when you are fearful of having exposed yourself or when you believe that you have done great deeds. Often people will not notice as much as you expect.

At the same time, we must make one important distinction here which has to do with peers, superiors and employees. Think back to the experiments? The students were not much noticed by their peers wearing the weird T-Shirt. The employees were not noticed by their peers or bosses when they slipped up in discussions. This is a whole different kettle of fish with your employees. They will actually notice every single one of your behaviors, your quirks, your slip-ups. And then you will be surprised at how seriously your employees take you.

As one of our former bosses once put it (when reminded of a previous declaration), “Why do you pay so much attention to the specific words I use? I certainly don’t.”63

Why is there a difference depending on the relationship you are in? Perception is related to status. Anyone with a higher status will receive more attention and be better remembered. Lower status people are only perceived more if they are threatening in any way.

The other way round, there is evidence that a high-status person will be less aware of what a lower status person has said and is doing. Even something as basic as face processing is influenced by the perceived social status.64 The brain of a higher status person is simply less concerned with or interested in someone of lower status.

This is, of course, a source of danger for the high-status person and may be one of the reasons that employees often do not feel seen. A manager’s brain needs more conscious focus to concern itself with someone of lower status. It is not automatically wired into the brain to be that attentive. The survival mechanism for which our brains have been optimized gears the attention towards higher status, not lower status.

There is also a danger the other way round: Just because you may not see your employees very clearly, you may end up not thinking enough about how you appear to them. This would be a mistake. Your employees (being typically in a lower-status situation) will notice every move you make, every inconsistency and every favoritism.

In total, to really be able to look at your strength and weaknesses, you must be aware of the fact that you will be seen far more by your employees and far less by your colleagues and people higher up in the company, than you might think.

Once you realize this, you can do something about it. If you are lucky, you may find some employees to openly tell how you are being seen. And someone to point out to you, how little you are being seen by higher echelons as in this example.

I had been selected for a high potential group at my company. At the summer party, the responsible HR person came up to me and said: “I do not see you. Therefore, you should not be surprised if other people leave you behind.” I replied: “Then give me a project, so I can prove myself.” I got one and that helped my general visibility in the company.

(Interview No. 96, Board Member, 60,000 employees)

More importantly, it is less about luck than about repeatedly asking and seeking a true reflection about how you are seen and then seeing if this is as you want it to be.

Take-Away: Do not think of yourself as too much or too little present – We fundamentally overestimate how much peers and superiors perceive us. Likewise, we fundamentally underestimate how much employees are always watching and analyzing us. A humble leader must have a good awareness of this, followed by an equally clear adaptation to the situation at hand.

The Role of the Team

Often people think – or are encouraged to think, that they are far more important as individuals than is actually the case. Remember the introduction to this book, and how the business press sees a very strong correlation between CEO and company performance? We have a similar effect with so-called star performers.

Who are these star performers? They are for example the top analyst, whom everyone trusts and who brings in incredibly high profits. Or the surgeon who saves every patient with his scalpel. Or the guru who is seen to manage every turn-around, or or.

These stars are often praised, told by their organization and admiring employees how great they are. No wonder that many begin to believe this. The test comes when these great ones change jobs – because they have been head-hunted for the enormous value they appear to generate. Off they go, striking out into a new world, on their own. Without their team.

That is where they perish. Bitterly. Research shows this for analysts65 and surgeons alike66. In fact, the “Star” analysts even succeed in significantly reducing the value of their new company.

Why does this happen? Because people often underestimate how important the existing team, the current processes and the whole working culture are for their success. They typically do not realize how much this contributes.

Again, this has something to do with the larger picture, which we will talk about later. But we already have to look at it at this juncture, since we can only understand our strength and weaknesses once we see how embedded we are in this bigger picture.

To recognize the dangerous trap of overvaluing your achievements and attributing them to yourself alone, you have to reflect deeply. Which of your strengths really lies within you and which are dependent on your environment? The honest answer to this question will be immensely helpful. If it is the team, the boss, the processes, then knowing this will help you to focus also on strengthening others so that you can continue to shine.

If, on the other hand, you receive the same feedback consistently across several employers, it is still worth thinking through whether these are your individual strengths or whether your key strength is in finding and developing the right people, superiors and processes. Both are great to have – and both give you the legitimacy to lead humbly with a solid self-confidence.

Take-Away: Do not forget others – It is fatal if we consider ourselves too important as individuals and overlook how much of our effectiveness depends on the team around us. Only those who are aware of how much they owe to others can be humble.

The Role of Chance and Luck

Humbition is one part humility and one part ambition. We notice that by far the lion’s share of world-changing luminaries are humble people. They focus on the work, not themselves. They seek success – they are ambitious – but they are humbled when it arrives. They know that much of that success was luck, timing, and a thousand factors out of their personal control. They feel lucky, not all-powerful. Oddly, the ones operating under a delusion that they are all-powerful are the ones who have yet to reach their potential. So be ambitious. Be a leader. But don’t belittle others in your pursuit of your ambitions. Raise them up instead. The biggest leader is the one washing the feet of the others.

Jane Harper, IBM67

I have been so lucky to be at the right place at the right time and being seen by the right people.

(Interview No. 80, CEO, 15,000 employees)

There is another very human flaw that we must make ourselves aware of. All humans, not merely the press or investors, love to find causalities. “Because I did A, B happened.” “Because we restructured the department, we gained three more clients.” Just like the journalists mentioned in an earlier chapter: “X is CEO, the company does Y, so this is because of X.”

The reason for this can be found in our brain, which especially uses its left hemisphere to find as well as invent causalities. These uncovered nuggets the brain happily tells to itself and others. This process is often summarized under the heading of “storytelling.”

Research has been fighting an uphill battle against our love of causality and regularly tries to prove the role of chance and luck to us.

Here are a few examples for our misconceptions.

It often seems to us that it is not the most talented people who are promoted, but the mediocre ones, those who only have little to show.68 Is this a conspiracy? Is it this a weakness of upper management, who does not want to let any one good rise up the corporate ladder? Is it egocentric narcissism in the leader, not wanting to be faced with someone better than themselves?

In most cases, it is neither but simply the pure power of randomness. The one mediocre employee meets a special mentor, the other is lucky that her boss moves to another company and space for promotion opens up. In the same way, the talented one may be unlucky: No position is available, there are three other equally talented people surrounding him, etc...

As there are always fewer of the best, it is pure statistics that average people will be more favored by chance, simply because there are more of them.

This effect of how chance played a role in success was demonstrated strikingly in an artificially created market for music. 14,000 participants were split into 7 separate markets and left to their devices to listen to songs, like them, share them, rate them etc.

The result: It was mere coincidence which songs became the most popular. Although the worst never ended up at the very top nor the best right at the bottom, all results in between were found. This means that the best does not necessarily prevail, and the worst not necessarily fail.69

At least in the film industry, this randomness is recognized by some seasoned executives. David Picker, a long-time manager of a major studio, said: “If I had made all the projects, I turned down, and turned down the projects I made, I probably would have had the same number of hits and flops.”70

Management thinker Jim Collins, whom I already mentioned, also found several CEOs who were aware of the role of chance and luck:

Joseph F. Cullman 3d, the Level 5 transition CEO of Philip Morris, flat-out refused to take credit for his company’s success, attributing his good fortune to having great colleagues, successors, and predecessors. Even the book he wrote – a book he undertook at the urging of his colleagues, which he never intended to distribute widely outside the company – had the unusual title “I’m a Lucky Guy”. The opening paragraph reads: “I was a very lucky guy from the very beginning of my life: marvelous parents, good genes, lucky in love, lucky in business, and lucky when a Yale classmate had my orders changed to report to Washington, D.C., in early 1941, instead of to a ship that was sunk with all hands lost in the North Atlantic, lucky to be in the Navy, and lucky to be alive at eighty-five.71

If we accept the role of chance, the question then remains how much impact a managers’ actions actually have.

This is where there is a big battle in the literature. First of all, when it comes to the importance of CEOs for the results of their company.

There are researchers who see a CEO’s effect on company performance of almost 40 percent.72 That is huge. Other researchers set the effect at a maximum of five percent. All the rest is luck, chance and circumstances.73

Both groups of researchers use large amounts of data and all are convinced of their reasoning. This shows another human aspect of our brain: in general, it loves to search for information that confirms its own opinions. This is called the confirmation bias and is of course closely related to storytelling. In this respect, every researcher after formulating hypotheses will tend to look for evidence to prove what he or she already believes. Of course, they are aware of this bias and also try to combat it consciously. Yet the key hope for us as readers is that due to the large number of people doing research in any given area, a clarity will eventually emerge that goes beyond individual biases.

How to reconcile these extreme positions: 5 versus 40 percent? Why not take the middle ground of 20 percent? Already Aristotle suggested this as a generally good way forward. On a less spurious note, numerous other studies actually point to this result as being a good one to place trust into.74 This means that, in the game of larger numbers, the actions of a CEO explain about 20 percent of a company's results. In fast-changing industries, the effect is greater than in regulated, more sluggish industries. Likewise, there are greater effects in smaller companies.75

Is the effect at lower levels of the hierarchy greater or smaller? Does a manager influence the results of his area of responsibility more or less than a CEO?

There is no concrete data on this. However, we already know from Chapter 4 that humble leaders have a measurable effect on their employees by bringing out the best in them through psychological safety and empowerment. As a consequence, it is up to you which of the following theses you see as more applicable in your company.

Theory No. 1: In a smaller area of responsibility, there are so many influential decisions, processes, cultural elements from other parts of the company that have a strong impact. The effect of a leader in such a situation can therefore only be less than that of a CEO. This is because the manager cannot work the large and important levers of the organization, but only small ones in his or her very own area. This also fits with the research finding that a humble manager at middle level cannot make up for a malfunctioning top management team.

Theory No. 2: Particularly where there is a clearly assigned arena to the manager, the effect should be much greater than that of a CEO. In this small world, the manager will have more direct influence on his or her employees, organization and processes simply because of the smaller number of employees, so that he or she will be able to move things considerably more. Again, there is research to support this, seeing as the effect of CEOs is stronger in small companies.

Many interview partners believe that there are generally stronger effects if previously a bad leader has been at the helm, regardless of the managerial level. In addition, the impact also depends on the type of leader the CEO is trying to be.

I suppose I can influence 50 to 100 out of our employees directly. A lot depends on what you find and what the economic environment is. Look at where I have landed. If it would be less than 30–40 percent influence, I would be disappointed. What I found was simply a mess with very unfortunate leadership. That makes my life much easier with much low-hanging fruit.

(Interview No. 123, CEO, 3,500 employees)

It depends on the role the CEO choses. If he or she is the sole decider – with nearly everything going across their desk, there will be a far lesser impact than if the CEO primarily sets direction and allows subordinates to act and decide within defined parameters.

(Interview No. 151, CEO, 3,700 employees)

One additional point is worthwhile mentioning. There will most likely be less of a difference in leadership talent on the top level, as compared to lower levels – making it easier to have a greater impact in management positions lower down the hierarchy. Why? When you look at CEOs, many have a similar educational background, followed by many formative years of work in different levels at the same or at different companies. Most will have gone through executive education; many will be working with a coach. This means that, statistically speaking, their skill set will not differ as much from each other as would, for example, differ the skill set of an IT specialist and a clerk.

It is very doubtful whether this same high average standard of leadership applies to lower-level managers. Remember that most have never had any leadership training. Also, there are so many different positions that it is likely there will be a far greater variance in the ability and fit of the manager. As a result, there should be a far greater differences in performance and in effect.

In general, however, your impact will always be stronger if an incompetent manager has been in charge before you.

By the way, while chance and luck play a large role, there are different ways to prepare an organization or your part of an organization for exactly these opportunities. You can run your area of responsibility in such a rigid manner, that even the most obviously great chances will bypass you. Or you can empower your people and organize your processes in such a way that even small chances can be taken up and transformed into successes. For this, the word “serendipity” springs to mind – the ability or skill for lucky and chance events happening to you. Chance and ability – they seem to be two contradictory concepts and are yet so very often linked. Think back to people or organizations or to yourself how on some days simply everything falls into place. Typically this is the case because you, your people and the organization were open to adjust and make room for the new.

There is always some part of luck. But it is the task of the CEO to ensure that the company can be lucky and grab the chances there are. You also need to have a basic optimism at all levels – then you will also be more open for the good coming your way.

(Interview No. 119, CEO, 200 employees)

Having looked at the role of luck and chance, the question arises: What does all this mean for your own strengths?

That you should be aware of them and at the same time not underestimate the effect of chance and luck. And not to overestimate your influence on the situation or the individual.

When it comes to your impact on the individual employee, please reflect. Can you recall times when you yourself worked under a boss? During how many hours of each day was your superior actually relevant for you? Surely that will have depended on the situation. There may have been times, when you were interacting with your manager all the time. And others, particularly later in your career, where you spent most of your time simply working on your tasks, talking to your internal and external customers, taking most decisions by yourself and only keeping your boss informed at weekly meetings. There may even have been times and positions in which you had no need for a boss at all.

There are many employees that focus primarily on the set task rather than on the person of their boss. In these cases, you as a boss will surely have a lesser impact.

But before you start becoming depressed and muttering to yourself what all this leading then is actually about, remember three things.

First, that there were certainly some very important inspiring interactions with your boss that had a large impact on your work life.

I was very proud when one of my employees said: ‘I loved it, it felt like I worked with rather than for you.

(Interview No. 130, Founder and former CEO, 300 employees)

Second, there are times when a manager really matters, for motivation, purpose, fairness and transparency. If done well this can lead to motivation and a willingness to work harder, happy to run the proverbial extra mile. And equally, another leader can then “ruin it all.”

I took over a business that was one of 14 companies in a Group of similar companies spread across the UK. This was an industry where there were league tables on all sorts of things – financial and non-financial. On almost all league tables, my new business was bottom of the table, or quite near. This was not a small business as it had around 1,000 employees. I wondered if they saw the situation in the same way. In a massive gamble I decided to ask every employee to attend one of two sessions in a large conference center where I showed them all of the league tables and explained the significance of each. I told them with great passion that I didn’t want to be the bottom anymore as this was my home and I felt it very personally. The reaction was incredible. Almost all of the 1,000 people decided that enough was enough and within an amazing year we were top, or near the top, on every league table. It was an incredible turnaround and the atmosphere was upbeat everywhere you went. As often happens with managers: when you are perceived to have fixed a big problem, you get given another one to solve. This involved me leaving the business and joining another Group company. Early on, the new leader managed to upset quite a lot of key employees, and at the end of the next year the business was back to mid-table. In the space of three years, the same people had been worst, best and average.76

Thirdly, the greatest impact of leadership will always be on the negative side when the manager acts or communicates badly, unfairly or stupidly. Bad leadership costs a lot of mental energy and motivation. And often makes people wish for another leader. Let us take a closer look at this.

A survey of 10,000 jobseekers showed that an enormous 42 percent had quit their jobs because they were dissatisfied with their manager.77 And as we have seen above, the loss of employees and the subsequent search for and training of new staff has high transactional and social costs.

In addition, more than 56 percent of employees are dissatisfied with their superiors and see them as bad leaders.78 (Which does not mean that they are always right. It may be good to know that there is line of research around the topic of ‘toxic’ employees).

What exactly constitutes bad management? There are several ways to look at this. What definitely counts as bad management is anything to do with the so-called “dark triad.” This contains narcissists (whose partly negative impact we have already discussed), Machiavellians and psychopaths.

Most academics take the concept of bad management one step further and conclude that between 35 and 60 percent of employees regularly experience this type of leadership.79 Allow me to take a closer look at these types of destructive and failing leadership.

First, tyrannical leaders. Those who humiliate, belittle and manipulate their subordinates to get the job done. Since they often achieve their goal for the company, they are usually viewed positively by their superiors. This is the most extreme form of bad management and is thankfully below five percent.

Secondly, the so-called “derailed” leaders. Around ten percent are leaders who act against their employees with harassment and manipulation on the one hand and against the organization by absenteeism, fraud or other theft of resources on the other.

Thirdly, there is a group with around 15 percent. These are managers who are supportive of employees but damaging to the organization, for example by giving excessive bonuses, being inefficient, not letting employees work for the organization’s goals or even making them work against them.

The fourth is the laissez-faire group with more than 20 percent. Here we need to make a distinction between the deliberate use of laissez-faire in good, independent teams and laissez-faire, where the manager withdraws from assigned responsibilities and duties. In this context, we are talking about the latter. If a manager avoids decisions, shows little interest in achieving goals and rarely connects with his or her subordinates, even when necessary – then he or she acts with destructive laissez-faire.

Of course, even this research does not mean that every action of these managers will be bad and have a negative impact. Yet we need to be aware that bad events are remembered more clearly than positive ones – so many managers that are in total seen as bad will have good sides to them as well.

This is the key point – even if destructive leadership should happen to you only from time to time, it has a significant impact not only on individual employees but also on the entire atmosphere in the organization.

This should then be THE motivation for you. Even if your upside impact may only be around 20 percent, you must be aware of a downside potential that is far greater.

Take-Away: Do not underestimate the role of luck as well as bad leadership – Humans are prone to overestimate their importance. Yet we are often favored by chance/luck and consequently limited in our planned impact, as far as the positive is concerned. In the negative, however, we quickly have a powerful impact. The focus must be to avoid leading poorly as a manager and causing wounds that (unfairly) outweigh anything positive.

Our own strengths and weaknesses must always be measured by whether our actions leave the company, employees and colleagues better off or worse off.

We have looked at different stumbling blocks that everyone of us encounters on the path to really seeing themselves. Now we will look in more detail at how to recognize one’s own strengths and weaknesses.

Recognizing Your Own Strengths and Weaknesses

CEO Finn was irritated. Once again, he was disappointed in his leadership team. Once again, it had failed to support him in generating a more open and cooperative atmosphere. He cringed when he thought back to the meeting. There he had been with his second in command opening the meeting by sharing the individual results of their 360-degree feedback. He had been sure that this would spark of a round of reciprocal sharing. Instead, the room had fallen silent and people had looked down to avoid eye contact with him. After a few minutes, he had proceeded to normal business. In the conversation with me, he was visibly annoyed and also disheartened. “It is amazing, that the team is simply not yet ready for a new style of leadership.” He seemed personally affronted and affected by the situation and referred to it more than once when mentioning how hard it was in this family business to get things changed.

What struck me in this conversation was that Finn did not for one second reflect, that he might have been at fault. That it was naïve to expect his managers to share their 360 results being put on the spot like this. None of them had been forewarned, Finn had not framed the sharing with a general conversation about how he would like to establish a different culture. One that was more open than the old one. One in which one could even share one’s 360. Then he could have asked, what each of the others would need in order to feel safe to share. He could also have talked to even only one member of his top team in advance, about what he was planning to get her or him on board. Had only one of “their own” started sharing, the rest of the team would have found it much easier to jump on the bandwagon.

This story made me realize how very hard it is to uncover your own contribution in any situation. How can you actually manage to see your own positive and negative sides more or less objectively? How can we learn with a second and third glance to understand what it is that we bring to the table and put ourselves into perspective? With our good and bad sides? With our unintentional weaknesses?

This is what this section is about.

Let us first look at some more examples, where people are unsuccessful or successful in really seeing themselves.

In an interview with the German news magazine “DER SPIEGEL,” the following interview was conducted with the conservative politician Friedrich Merz80:

DER SPIEGEL: “Nevertheless, certain qualities are always associated with you: Vanity, ambition, selfishness – there could be a reason for this.”

Merz: “My height is, of course, a conceivable projection screen for such prejudices. I look down on many people quite literally – the assessment of ‘looking down on someone’ then is an easy one to make.”

Merz is 1.98 meters tall, so he is really a tall man. Nevertheless, no one has ever heard anything similar of famous basketball player Dirk Nowitzki with his 2.13 meters – instead, he is considered a modest and down-to-earth basketball player. The friendly world star from next door.81

A second example comes from Carnegie and his famous book How to Win Friends, where he cites the president of a Wall Street bank:

For years I have kept an engagement book showing all the appointments I had during the day. My family never made any plans for me on Saturday night, for the family knew that I devoted a part of each Saturday evening to the illuminating process of self-examination and review and appraisal. After dinner I went off by myself, opened my engagement book, and thought over all the interviews, discussions and meetings that had taken place during the week. I asked myself:

“What mistakes did I make that time?”

“What did I do that was right and in what way could I have improved my performance?”

“What lessons can I learn from that experience?”

“I often found that this weekly review made me very unhappy. I was frequently astonished at my own blunders. Of course, as the years passed, these blunders became less frequent.”82

There is a personal humility debacle to add to this above story: I had found this book by Carnegie in a box with books to take. I had looked disparagingly at the title How to Win Friends and Influence People but still took it with me, since I had heard about it. The cover, however, did not seem like a business book which I would like to be seen with. It rotted away unread on my book shelf. Only years later did I realize a) my arrogance and, thanks to reading it b) what a brilliant book it is. So, I could immediately write down in my notebook: “Unreasonable rejection of a book as junk, just because it is well-known and has a funny cover,” but at the same time pat myself on the shoulder “Arrogance understood, put aside, book read and key concepts built into teaching and own life.”

Before we dive into your concrete strengths and weaknesses, let me remind you: All your strengths and weaknesses are relative – and they are always connected to the task you are currently engaged in or would like to take on.

One recommendation for truly uncovering yourself: Get a coach! The good ones amongst them can help you best in your self-reflection, better than all discussion with friends, colleagues or employees.

Eric Schmidt, CEO of Google until 2015, reports in an interview83:

Our CEO John Doerr said: “You need a coach”. And I said, “Well, I don't need a coach, I'm an established CEO. Why would I need a coach? Something wrong?” And he said “No, no. You need a coach. Everybody needs a coach”. And so, Bill Campbell became my coach, and that served all very well. Every famous athlete, every famous performer, has someone who is a coach, somebody who can watch what you are doing and say: “Is this really what you wanted? Did you really do that?” and give the perspective. The one thing people are never good at is seeing themselves as others see them. A coach really, really helps.

However, even for these coaching sessions, it is useful to have begun reflecting on your own strengths and weaknesses as a manager.

If you are interested in your personal strengths and weaknesses outside of your leadership role, personality questionnaires such as MBTI, Strength Finder, How to fascinate, Reiss Profile, DISC and others are an option.

One caveat: My experience is that the findings of these questionnaires are not always easy to integrate in everyday business life. This is even more so the case, if your company has no overall strategy of working with them. On the other hand, they may still be of use in helping to understand that other people actually are different. That sounds remarkably trite, but is not. All too often we assume that other people need the same kind of information, communication, interaction as we do. And following this assumption we are convinced that we are doing the right thing and end up communicating and deciding wrongly.

The most important first insight in all these profiles is that there is no right or wrong. There is only “different.” These tests show you along how many dimensions people can be different.

However, I must warn you against the “mental drawers” you or others might end up in. If you have ever done an MBTI, you may afterwards have said about a colleague: “Typical INTP: great analysis, but the involvement of colleagues and the proper communication of the results is lacking once again, isn't it?”

Or someone might turn to you and say: “Well, for an ENTJ that was a surprisingly modest statement.”

These categorizations tend to lead to the negative assumption that people cannot change because they have been identified as an ENTJ according to MBTI, as a harmony person following Clifton or as an implementer from Belbin.

Yet psychology and neuroscience show us that we can adapt strongly for different situations. For example, I have had two introverted bosses who have stubbornly trained themselves to speak well in front of an audience and to communicate often and openly with their staff. Why? Because, in order to achieve their goals, they knew that they had to.

Back to your strengths and weaknesses as a manager. On the following pages you can take action and begin recognizing them.

Step 1: What Does a Manager Need in My Job to Be Successful?

Make a list of what – in general – a successful manager needs in your area, your department, your company. How can you cluster this? Below I suggest a breakdown by knowledge, skills, tools, attitudes, connections, communication patterns, leadership styles and others. This may be the right structure for you, or you may create a different one for your job.

It is best not to stick merely to what you see at the moment, but to adopt an outside perspective. How does that work? You can consider, for example, what you would say to a head hunter in a briefing when it comes to filling your position. Or think about what an ideal candidate who takes over your job in a company (like yours) should bring with them. You can, of course, discuss this with colleagues so that you are not falling prey to some blind spots. It is possible that the colleague will see that you actually should be working much more closely with the legal department. Or that you seem to have fewer meetings with your team in comparison with other departments. This insight should then be included in the list.

There is a great story from an ex-Navy Seal officer John Havlik84 about the danger of missing out vital strengths.

In his book, John describes exactly how he managed to get into this special operations force. First “Hell Week,” which is a selection week, during which candidates get to sleep a mere four hours. In the whole week! Later he became Junior Officer, Assistant Platoon Commander, Officer of 14 SEALS. This was followed by the honor of commanding a special unit. He again succeeded and was allowed to lead a team of 40 of the best SEALs. Next step: The command of a special unit of 200 military personnel abroad. The upward direction of his career was clear. John played to his strengths – he was a great leader; he could deal with his team and the tasks at hand. He never really liked the political side of things, but that was not important alongside all the other leadership aspects.

And then it happened: his next promotion was rejected. Not just once. But twice. That was the end of his career. According to the up or out principle, John had to leave the Navy and the Seals.

And don't we all feel sorry for him? He was such a great leader and failed just because of some silly politics behind the scenes.

It quickly becomes clear that there is no need to feel sorry for him. It was his own fault: John had refused to see the subject of politics as relevant for him as a leader. He neither saw political power play as a requirement nor, consequently, as an area in which he was weak. If he did anything at all, it was to see his decision not to get involved in politics as a strength. A strength in the sense of “Politics is something unclean and unpleasant – it does not suit me.” Not getting into conversation with senators, not finding out from admirals what matters to them, not getting involved, not finding supporters etc. But the Navy was, is and will be political. Dozens of politicians like Kennedy, Nixon, Bush have served there and politicians have remained permanently interwoven with it. So, for John to say that politics is not something he wanted to focus on actually showed a disregard for the bigger picture, was stubborn and immature.

As so often the story has a happy ending. John realized in the end what had killed his chances, fought his way back, learned to be a politician and worked as a high-ranking SEAL for yet 17 more years.

What are the requirements for managers? Many, and different for each job, so as I suggested it may be useful to use the following list (see Table 5.1) to think through your job and what the different stakeholders need from a manager in your position.

Table 5.1 What Does a Successful Manager in Your Position Need?

Knowledge (e.g., about products, market, competitors, political developments, sanctions, languages etc.)

	

 




Skills (e.g., problem solving, creative thinking, customer orientation, collaborative working, etc.)

	

 




Tools (e.g., generating vision, exerting influence, making complex decisions, giving feedback etc.)

	

 




Mindset (e.g., fast is better than perfect; avoid risk, culture is the key, etc.)

	

 




Connections (e.g., to other departments, beyond the company, to customers, to societal groups etc.)

	

 




Communication patterns (e.g., humor, listening, storytelling, reserved, flexible etc.)

	

 




Leadership styles (e.g., charismatic, authentic, transactional, trans-formational, authoritarian)

	

 




Other (e.g., smart clothes, good manners, small talk, mentor, coach, club affiliations etc.)

	

 

Then take a deep breath and forget the whole thing for a few days. The next time you look, it is best to mentally go through a typical day in your job and put a “perfect” manager in place. That should give you some additional ideas. Also, in the second round you may find yet even more succinct terms to describe what it takes.

Step 2: What Are My Strengths and Weaknesses as a Manager in This and Previous Positions?

Again, take the following list, this time in two parts divided according to strengths (Table 5.2), followed by the weaknesses (Table 5.3). On the left you will again find the eight fields: Knowledge, skills, tools, attitudes, connections, communication patterns, leadership styles and others. And to the right are the strengths. Here it is best to think broadly and think of all the leadership positions you have ever held – because it may be that other elements were more important in earlier situations and that you were able to demonstrate these strengths at that time.

Table 5.2 Your Strengths
 	My view	My view when I look at myself from the outside	View of superiors, colleagues, employees, customers, friends and acquaintances


Knowledge

	

 

	

 

	

 




Skills

	

 

	

 

	

 




Tools

	

 

	

 

	

 




Mindset

	

 

	

 

	

 




Connections

	

 

	

 

	

 




Communication

	

 

	

 

	

 




Leadership styles

	

 

	

 

	

 




Other

	

 

	

 

	

 

Table 5.3 Your Weaknesses
 	My view	My view when I look at myself from the outside	View of superiors, colleagues, employees, customers, friends and acquaintances


Knowledge

	

 

	

 

	

 




Skills

	

 

	

 

	

 




Tools

	

 

	

 

	

 




Mindset

	

 

	

 

	

 




Connections

	

 

	

 

	

 




Communication

	

 

	

 

	

 




Leadership styles

	

 

	

 

	

 




Other

	

 

	

 

	

 

Try and find clear, concise phrases for strengths, such as “enthusiast for people and ideas,” “creative DNA,” “THE solver of conflicts” and for weaknesses: “conflict avoidant,” “lazy preparer,” “half-hearted delegator,” “control-freak.”

The motto here is, of course, to be open and honest with yourself. Therefore, I suggest a two-step approach: First, look at yourself and write down everything as it comes out on first thought.

Then a second look, but this time from the outside. Lovingly and as objective as possible. As if you stood on your balcony and were watching yourself at work. This should aid you in becoming aware of some of the stumbling blocks that we discussed above, such as unhealthy narcissism, overconfidence, negative self-perception, limits of biology, the danger of thinking yourself too transparent or too important.

Now you should complement your own picture with the picture that others have of you. Ideally, this is done in conversations with current and former superiors, with current and former colleagues, with current and former employees. Using the eight fields or any other structure you have given yourself above.

In addition, you should also ask for former and present clients. Where do clients suddenly come from? Well, they often notice when something is not going well in the team.

An anonymized story from a management consultancy

The associate had just finished his part of the presentation, sat down and happily reached for a biscuit. The partner hissed at him: “Don't eat! Listen!” In such an authoritarian relationship, it is unlikely that the associates would ever be able to give honest feedback to their partner. The valued client might have fewer problems with this – especially once the project is completed.

Perhaps obtaining personal feedback is not customary in your company. How can you still get some assessments?

One solution is to make the whole issue bigger: In other words, you start an open feedback process in the department, division, company. For everyone. Within the normal structure of anonymized feedback for everyone: One question about the strengths of the respective employee and the respective manager. Then one question: “What should this person continue doing?” That will give you your key strengths. Weaknesses will be recorded using the eight fields, followed by these three questions: “What should the person change?” “What should this person stop doing?” “What should this person start doing?” (see Table 5.4).

Table 5.4 Feedback

What should this person change?

	

 




What should this person stop doing?

	

 




What should this person start doing?

	

 

Now you have your results and your staff have theirs. Of course, you should offer at least three external coaching sessions per person to all those involved in order to enable everyone to learn from their results.

If this is still too much for you, you can at least gather clues by talking to friends and your partner. Of course, this will never be as meaningful as the alternatives above.

Step 3: Merging and Drawing Conclusions for the Current or a Future Job

Now, once you have both lists – what a leader in your position needs and what your own strengths and weaknesses are – make a third list, again divided by strengths (Table 5.5) and weaknesses (Table 5.6). Best to do this for your current job and for any future job you would like to have.

Table 5.5 Your Strengths
 	Strengths in relation to job	Where and how do I show them now?	Where and how could I show them even better?


Knowledge

	

 

	

 

	

 




Skills

	

 

	

 

	

 




Tools

	

 

	

 

	

 




Mindset

	

 

	

 

	

 




Connections

	

 

	

 

	

 




Communication

	

 

	

 

	

 




Leadership styles

	

 

	

 

	

 




Other

	

 

	

 

	

 

Table 5.6 Your Weaknesses
 	Weaknesses in relation to job	Where and how are they disadvantageous?	Where and how may I show them?	Which ones can I eliminate now?


Knowledge

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




Skills

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




Tools

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




Mindset

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




Connections

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




Communication

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




Leadership styles

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




Other

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

For the strengths, you should note where and how you are already making good use of them and where you can yet make additional or better use. In other words, you should consider how much you can adapt your existing job according to your strengths. Most jobs have a surprising amount of room for maneuver when it comes to setting priorities, how you work and how you can involve your team or people from outside your team.

When it comes to weaknesses, you should consider which of them harm you, which ones you can show openly and which ones you should try to eliminate and how. This elimination can happen through practice, through coaching, through a different mindset etc.

You have now recognized your strengths and weaknesses. The next part will focus on how to show to show them properly.

Showing Strengths and Weaknesses Correctly

When I give feedback, people never write down anything about their strengths – only about their weaknesses.

(Interview No. 75, Group Head, 55,000 employees)

No one would define a brand only by its weaknesses!

(Interview No. 32, former Board member, 3,500 employees)

How exactly can you show your strengths and weaknesses? Without coming across as too weak? Or too strong? Can you admit to errors without it weakening your position? Can you be in charge and yet be humble?

How Do I Show My Weaknesses and Mistakes Correctly?

Brandon Black, CEO of the Encore Capital Group with 8,000 employees was experiencing a difficult phase in the company growth. Actually, he needed to close some departments and let people go. In his own words:

I needed to tell one of my direct reports, Fritz, that he was being let go. Instead of facing reality, however, I had begun to avoid him. Fritz had given me a call a few days prior to ask if there were any pending decisions about the Healthcare division. On impulse, I told him no. Upon reflection, though, I decided it was time for me to start being transparent with him. Fritz and I met for lunch at a local Chinese restaurant. I wanted to connect with him as a person instead of treating him as an issue to check off my list. After a few minutes of small talk, I told him, “When you called me the other day, I lied to you. I wasn’t prepared for the conversation.” I expected him to be angry. After a pause, however, he said, “I appreciate you being honest with me. I guess that means you’re shutting our business down?” “It does.” It was a relief to have it on the table. “I’m not surprised,” he said with a sigh. “OK, let’s talk about what needs to happen. I’ll do whatever it takes to help my folks transition safely.” I stared at him. He had just found out he was losing his job, yet he was professional enough to stay focused on our overall goals for the layoff. He expressed his desire to tell his team personally and to unwind the business in a way that lived up to the promises he had made to partners. At the end of the meeting, we shook hands. It was our first authentic conversation in a long time, if not ever.

When later Fritz was asked how he had experienced the whole situation he recalls. “In my two years at Encore, I felt closest to Brandon when he admitted he lied to me.”85

This story illustrates to me beautifully, how we as humans have the initial instinct to hide ourselves from difficult situations, not admit to others where we are fearful or off the mark and then how positively, genuine openness and vulnerability is received by the other side.

This section looks at how we can overcome this innate fear of appearing weak and how we best express ourselves.

A cool manager can always admit to weaknesses.

(Interview No. 86, CFO, 550 employees)

The old style was never to admit a mistake. Thankfully this has changed.

(Interview No. 44, Head HR, 15,000 employees)

I have never felt weak when admitting a mistake – you get rewarded by great trust and better relationships with employees.

(Interview No. 99 Board Member, 500 employees)

There are some interviews from the German Newspaper FAZ, in which famous people are asked what their weaknesses are. Here some answers:

Roland Koch, former Prime Minister of the State of Hessen: “Impatience.”
Rolf Peffekoven, Economist: “Impatience.”
Marcel Reich-Ranicki (†), literary critic: “Impatience.”
Donna Leon, author: “Impatience.”
Leander Haußmann, theatre director: “Impatience.”
Til Schweiger, Actor: “Impatience.”
Margot Käßmann, former bishop: “Impatience.”
Vural Öger, entrepreneur: “Everything here and now – impatience.”
Heiner Lauterbach, Actor: “Impatience.”
Nina Ruge, anchorwoman: “I always want everything. And I want it now.”
Roland Berger, management consultant: “Impatience; difficulty in saying no.”

Only Hans-Olaf Henkel, entrepreneur and former president of the BDI (Federation of German Industries), said with a considerable amount of anger: “Definitely not impatience, as many cowards say here – but self-righteousness, egocentricity and narcissism.”86

However brusque Hans-Olaf Henkel's answer may seem to you, research shows clearly that honest self-revelation of weaknesses (his self-righteousness, egocentricity and narcissism) is much better received than the fake answers before.

How do we know? A multi-level piece of research from Harvard delivers a solid indication.87

First step: Get people to write down what their weaknesses are. Approximately, 77 percent write an answer that is similar to the “humble-bragging” above. They write things like: “My inability not to be nice to co-workers” or “I'm too demanding when it comes to fairness.” Most write about these strengths dressed up as weaknesses for strategic reasons, believing they will, for example, get a job more easily that way. Only 23 percent own up to real weaknesses such as “I'm not always the best at staying organized” or “Sometimes I overreact to situations.”

Second step: The answers are coded either as humble-bragging or as real weaknesses.

Third step: An independent observer reads the answers and assesses how much they would like to hire the person.

The outcome is very clear – on a scale of 1–5, the humble-braggers are doing middling at 3.03 while the genuine answers have a nearly one-point higher chance of being hired – at 3.93. And we must not forget that the independent observers did not get a full profile of any of the candidates but merely this sentence about weaknesses!

Look at this example.

I have not invested enough time in team building, but this can be done step by step... My biggest obstacle is therefore time. I believe that my knowledge is sufficient, but not yet the time to use it.

(CEO 117)88

This CEO is not truly humble, when talking about his lack of time. Ultimately, he is saying that other things are far more important than team building – he is actually trying to turn a weakness into a deliberately chosen priority. Which means that he is trying not to show any weakness at all.

Yet, how can I show them correctly? From the animal kingdom we know all kinds of inferiority gestures that signal that you are weaker than the other party. Be it the presenting the throat, making oneself smaller or even slinking away.

All of these are not behaviors that make you feel good as a leader or that promise success for subsequent leadership.

What to do instead? Here is a good example.

Our new CEO recently presented the new strategy. The company had been extremely successful for over ten years, but the last two years had been more difficult ... The CEO ... looked to himself for the errors of the past. He said: “I myself was involved in the decisions of the past years as part of the management and made the mistake of not listening to my gut, but only looking at the returns”. That was the first time I had ever seen a CEO openly admitting his own errors to thousands of online participants. ... this was very well received, as we could see in our online discussion tool.

(Interview No. 4, Head Digital Marketing, 50,000 employees)

In this company, admitting errors gave credibility to the CEO and visibly brought employees on board for the coming change process.

Here is another example

In one training, I announced to my direct reports, “I am not a good listener. I just charge ahead. And so, that’s something that I need you to help me with because I’m just not good at it. When we’re in these meetings and we’re being collaborative, help me to remember to just be quiet and shut up for a bit and let people hammer out ideas.”89

That sounds open enough to get the buy-in from employees, and at the same time strong enough that employees do not lose respect.

For many, this is the golden rule: be open without losing respect.

Some hints on how you can achieve this:

By asking for support in areas of communication, as in the example above. In the case of interpersonal weaknesses which are obvious to everyone, it is probably quite easy to state: “I often speak too fast,” “I have to learn to listen more,” without losing respect. Why is this easy? Because everyone already notices it. If you do not address it, it will be the proverbial elephant in the room. And that elephant will cause eyes to roll anyway. So, it is far better to address the issue directly.

If you have the feeling that there is no right moment in your everyday leadership life for addressing such weaknesses – you can create one. What about a meeting in which you launch a general discussion on how to communicate within your team? And employees are asked to say where they think they do something well and where they find something difficult?

That sounds a bit like a silly game, but in most companies, it can be done quite easily. If you are afraid of running it yourself, there are excellent coaches out there who can moderate such a “day of culture”.

What do you do, if it is not about a weakness but about a concrete error? Research shows clearly that employees need you to admit your errors. In the 2016 Dale Carnegie Global Leadership Study, 84 percent of the 3,300 employees surveyed emphasized that it is important to them that their managers admits when they did something incorrectly. This was even more important than other topics such as “listening properly,” “appreciation,” “showing genuine interest” and “trying to put yourself in my shoes.”

I not only allow mistakes. I also admit them – “sorry, I did not intend this to be like this’. But I also know CEOs of larger companies that say: ‘Never admit to an error.”

(Interview No. 28, CEO, 14,000 employees)

How many of the managers dare to share their errors? A full 50 percent. Which at the same time is only a sad 50 percent.90 Yet, if the admission is not forthcoming, employees register negatively that the manager throws himself protectively in front of his ego instead of openly acknowledging and admitting what has gone wrong.

The conclusion for you: Simply learn to admit your errors. “Here I was wrong.” “I changed my mind based on the information you gave me.” “I'm sorry I didn't trust you.”

Look at this fine example.

A plant manager, we’ll call him George, was becoming frustrated at the lack of progress shown by his managers in terms of workstation organization. So, one day he simply went out and put little red “reject” stickers all through the factory floor on objects he felt were misplaced. That very afternoon, two of the managers came to his office to let him know just how furious everybody was. “Why?” he asked. “It was so demeaning,” they explained. “It made us feel like we were little kids being told to clean our rooms.” George asked them whether that was the general perception. “Yes,” they answered, at which point he realized he’d made a mistake: “Oops. It sounds like I blew it.” The next morning, without telling the managers, George went to every single operator on the floor and apologized personally. “Hey, I guess I offended everybody with these reject stickers yesterday,” he admitted. “I’m sorry. I screwed up.” The employees had never seen anything like it before—from George or any of his predecessors. In the words of one manager, “It blew everybody away,” not just because George was willing to face up to a mistake but also because he was willing to accept corrective feedback. Looking back, George realized, “I wasn’t trying to get any mileage out of it. I was just feeling like I screwed things up. But it was a real turning point. From that day on, the whole plant of over two hundred people and myself were truly one. … It was a truly cementing event for all of us.”91

Can you talk too much about an error? Figure it out for yourself: Suppose you are sitting across a competent person whom you experience as honest and open and they repeatedly tell you how shocked they are about their error and how nearly unforgivable it is, how unpleasant and how embarrassing. What would you start doing very quickly? Exactly: Say “It’s not so bad… everyone makes errors… I myself...” And you are already in a reciprocal exchange as equals and the error at stake is almost forgotten.

Emphasizing a fault should, of course, not mutate into a diversionary tactic. But if you have experienced first-hand how you almost wanted to comfort in the example above, you will see that an error on your part will probably have the same effect on others.

And if you still do not believe this, then I assume that you underestimate your competence and are probably hiding your light under a bushel. If that is the case, remember the “imposter syndrome,” take a few breaths, begin to look at yourself with affection and prepare yourself for sharing errors.

You should also look at the research of vulnerability. Brené Brown, who developed this field, defines vulnerability as uncertainty, risk and emotional exposure. If in the last sentence, you replace the word “vulnerability” with “leadership” you already get the sense that the two are closely connected. Vulnerability has to do with not knowing, with getting things wrong and of being in this together. Vulnerability is not about oversharing. It is not about hashing out all your weaknesses with the team, but it is about taking a step back from professional distance and cool and instead dare to be – actually – human. And from vulnerability stems a lot of courage. The courage to have open conversations with a mentor, the courage to ask for and receive feedback, the courage to not define your self-worth by status or productivity and the courage to admit to errors and weaknesses. The reward from teams and superiors alike is trust and a feeling of psychological safety.

Leaders need to role model vulnerability. Without shifting into the role of a victim, without being helpless or using it as a manipulation.

(Interview No. 65, Group HR Director, 70,000 employees)

We bring in vulnerability to help managers build connections with their teams, generate psychological safety and a sense of belonging to the culture – shifting from I to We.

(Interview No. 88, Head EMEA Learning, 100,000 employees)

The results of being vulnerable and admitting a mistake in many cases also work well when you share your errors with the level above. Like Bob Montgomery who had made a mistake that cost Southwest Airlines $400,000. CEO Herb Kelleher did not dismiss him, but said: “Bob, I am glad that you have finally learned from this.”92

Or like James Burke, who later became CEO of Johnson & Johnson, when he met the Chairman of the Board and expected to be fired for a failed chest rub for children.

“Are you the one who just cost us all that money?” asked Robert Wood Johnson. “Well, I just want to congratulate you. If you are making mistakes, that means you are taking risks, and we won't grow unless you take risks?”93

Another example from a medium-sized business: The production manager had overlooked that the customer magazine A still bore the claim of its sister brand B: “A new world every week.” Printing costs for this error: a whopping €200,000. He hurries to the managing director, offers his resignation and the latter says: “You messed up, but if you think I'm going to let you go, you're wrong. Just make sure it never happens again.” As a result, another correction loop was installed, respect for the managing director shot up and the story became known as a story of loyalty – not one of errors.

There are even some companies that go one step further and literally celebrate the failure of a project, i.e., the error of having embarked on an unsuccessful venture.

One of them is X The Moonshot Factory, an independent research laboratory of Alphabet. The CEO, Astro Teller, called Captain of Moonshots, summarizes their in-house error culture as follows:

Failure, seen properly, is just a recognition of fast learning. So, when someone raises their hand and says, “My project looks really good but I've discovered I don't think it's going to work out because of this subtle but important issue,” and those ten people now need to find a new jobs. If we say, “Sucks to be you,” no one at X will ever again raise their hand and say that. But if we say to them, “Hey, that was awesome. What incredible intellectual honesty you just displayed and good critical thinking to have discovered this. We're going to work super hard to find all of you new jobs somewhere at X or at Alphabet. We're going to give you all bonuses for having ended your project so thoughtfully. Take long vacations and then when you're done come back and join another project here and get going again with extra levels of passion because you're now working on something that you don't secretly know is going to fail at some point in the future, which is how you would have felt if you had stuck on your old project.”94

Life, of course, may be different, when you have a superior who never admits their own errors and slams down on those of others.

What do you do then? Or let me ask you differently? How well do you sleep during the time, when you have not reported a relevant error? Typically, not well. The anxiety will also make it more likely that you will not be your best at work, but instead will be prone to other mistakes. The only way out will be to bite the bullet and address the issue even with an unhumble boss. Will this damage you? Possibly. Can you make sure that is does not kill your standing with your boss? Well, you can decrease the likelihood by being aware of a concept called “Hedonic Editing.” This shows that we humans like to optimize our emotional state by having more positive emotions than negative ones. Or would you rather have 365 presents in one day instead of one a day? In the same way, we try and bundle negative pieces of news into one day. So, if you want to make sure that admitting an error or a weakness does not ruin your ability to continue fulfilling your role, the idea is to own up to all-in-one day and take the full brunt for it. Then a few days later, you come with a piece of positive news. A few days later with yet another one, and again… This way your boss will have ONE negative day – possibly consisting of a number of errors, and THREE positive interactions with you. And most likely he or she will be able to put you more into perspective – seeing you fully and not just as Jack or Jill who has messed up or is weak.

Is this manipulation? To my mind no! You will be doing most things well and only a few things will go wrong – focusing only on these is actually unhumble, giving a skewed picture of your work prowess.

Let us return to your employees. If I admit a mistake, will they not lose respect and my leadership subsequently become less effective? Will people not label me as a failure once I admit to one? One interviewee pointed to the following issue:

People are worried, that if you admit to a mistake or weakness, people will refer back to it. “You yourself said, that you could not do this well…”

(Interview No. 93, Head Talent Management, 36,000 employees)

Especially younger managers with older employees, fear that they will be seen as weak or as not meeting expectations. People also doubt that it is possible to admit errors in very hierarchical companies or in the military.95

Research, as we have seen above, clearly says otherwise. Just to remind you of Officer 2 who not only impressed his superiors but also made his Sergeant happy when he started listening to him. Or do you worry, that the Sergeant would now think worse of the officer? Well, from the description of the case, the Sergeant thought the worst possible of his Officer already during the exercise. Now not being given a chance to assist but also being ignored or chided would add injury to insult and alienate the Sergeant fully.

Take it as set in stone: employees can deal with errors. But what about the label you have been given, when you admit to a weakness or an error? Sure, it may happen in immature companies: “He’s the guy who messed up X,” “She lost that project by making that stupid mistake.” Yet if you as a leader model growth and change and more importantly openly appreciate growth and change in others your employees will not define you by the past but by the present.

What are the positive results of admitting mistakes?

Firstly, research shows that if a team knows from its leader that he/she admits mistakes, this strengthens the team's “psychological capital” and results not only in increased self-confidence of the team, but also in increased trust in the leader.96

Secondly, admitting mistakes leads employees to perceive the leader as more honest, warmer and more cooperative.97

Thirdly, admitting to errors lays to rest the “too-much-of-a-good-thing-syndrome.” If you as a manager are always perfect, your employees see you as too far removed from them, fail to be able to see you as a role model and subsequently struggle more with their own moral identity.98

Nevertheless, I must not conceal the fact that there are some downside effects when you reveal your errors. As a result of your honesty, the employees see you as somewhat less in control. They see you as slightly less effective, influential and autonomous.99 Now, as a professional and humble manager, you should not care how exactly you are perceived, as long as that perception does not in any way impact your effectiveness. After all, the goal of leadership is to create better employees, not to be mistaken for Superman or Wonder Girl. And if your error increases the psychological safety and thus the performance of the team, and only you are no longer seen as being most powerfully in control, so be it.

Again, you should be less afraid of what the employees think of you when you show a mistake than what they think of you when you hide a mistake! You should also ask yourself how willing employees are to show their faults when you hide your own!

So, it is not surprising that a manager told the following with great satisfaction.

This [humble leader’s] mantra was “Failure finds its grace in adjustment.” This phrase has impacted me and my work a lot. If I were to tattoo something on my body, that phrase would probably be it.100

For those of you who are still skeptical, let me put this issue of weakness even more into perspective. Admitting errors or weaknesses is not about presenting yourself as weak, but of addressing “one error” or “a weakness.” These are two different things.

All you are doing is to show in the overall context that errors can happen to anyone and that nobody is perfect.

Yet, I am fully aware of the fact that there may be times when it does not feel right to show a weakness or to address a fault. What can you do then?

Quite simply ask for advice. If you are not sure how best to solve something or how to make up for a mistake, you can go to a member of staff who is experienced in this field and just ask.

If you have not grasped a technical issue you can say: “Lars, you are our IT expert. Our proposed system has so many requirements – from your point of view, which of the many offers we have been sent is the best for us?”

If you have slipped up: “Layla, we have ended up in this unfortunate situation. How do you suggest we fix it?”

Including others and asking for advice firmly puts the focus on the action needed for the future, not on the past with errors or the present gaps in your knowledge.

People who are asked for advice actually feel honored.101 This is especially the case if the situation is tricky, which it will typically be in those areas where you as competent manager have weaknesses or commit errors.

The icing on the cake is that the person asked for advice ends up regarding the questioner as more competent and wiser thanks to the question. The inner working goes something like this: “If someone comes to ME with this complex topic, they must be clever.” This has positive payoffs both as regards how appreciated people feel and how you are evaluated.

My task as a leader is not to know things better. Instead, it is to give employees the feeling that they know more than me. This way, they feel more successful.

(Interview No. 131, CEO, 3,000 employees)

People are happy when they can help me – so sometimes I let them think that I am really struggling with technology. We laugh and joke together about it.

(Interview No. 104, CEO, 200 employees)

From my own experience: There is hardly a phrase that will be better at getting you a higher bonus than the following: “I have realized, there are some things I cannot not do on my own. During the next year, would you be willing to help me with X and Y?”

Asking for advice impresses the other party – with some amazing results beyond the bonus round. Research shows that executives who ask the CEO for advice are much more likely to be appointed to other bodies, such as supervisory boards where this CEO is a member. This shows that asking for advice works both upwards and downwards. Instead of triggering something negative, it results in a positive assessment of you as someone who appreciates the other and is willing to learn.102

Of course, in a book on humility, I am not going to suggest that asking for advice should be used as flattery – because that is not what it is for. But I put it to you that if the extreme version “I flatter the CEO and influence him/her with my many questions” works, then there is room for “normal” questions and advice seeking both to people above and below you.

Ergo: Getting opinions on a failure or a weakness is a powerful instrument.

Is the fear justified that your error or weakness will persecute you and never be allowed to go away? And I know, I am repeating myself here – yet the topic crops up again and again.

Well, on the one hand, as we already saw, you can simply point to the change and improvement in an area where you used to fail – and hence be a good role model for learning. On the other hand, you can agree that there may still be something in that area which you cannot do – but that is why you are glad to have Mrs. Y or Mr. X at your side. Easy-peasy!

As a final straw taken of your back: Research also shows that getting ideas and feedback, creating an open atmosphere for all levels, is perceived as a positive strength of the manager. Not only are people who ask questions seen as more competent – they also appear as more congenial and are liked more. One limitation: This effect is only valid in the dyad – an independent observer is not influenced.103 Asking questions seems to be about the specific attention that is given to the other person or your team. Then something relational happens which leads to mutual respect and greater liking.

Take-Away: Showing weaknesses makes you stronger – You can show your weaknesses or reveal errors in many more situations than you might originally think. It is actually not an option to hide your errors and weaknesses. Employees need you to show both. In some situations, it may be sufficient to resort to asking for advice. This is perceived positively and the person asking the question even gets a competence bonus.

Showing Strengths Correctly

Markus Sontheimer had just been nominated as CIO at DB Schenker, a company with 76,000 employees. The first Global Leadership meeting took place a few weeks later.

I went around the room, introducing myself. Then, when it was my turn to address the whole group, I said amongst other things: “I am not your slave. IT has to be on par with business. We are not there to simply implement – but we can bring something to your table, the same way as you with your business units can bring something to our table.” Some of my people were at the meeting and were shocked. No CIO had ever spoken as clearly as that. But I had to position myself strongly for the sake of the department and the greater whole.

Here was someone who had understood that he had taken on an important role and that he needed to make sure that both he as a person as well as his function in the company was seen in the correct light. Only once Markus was perceived as strong would his department be able to truly support the other teams and with it the whole company. (There is a clear indication that this clarity in behavior pays off – Markus is now CIDO (CIO and CDO) at ISS, a company with more than 250.000 employees!)

This is a good example of how you can show your strengths properly.

Let us look at another situation. A real, anonymized situation, one in which the relationship between a team leader and the divisional manager is at stake. So, two managers, but at different levels.

In order to be promoted from team leader to department head, Nikki had to complete two interviews. One purely personal and one professional. Both were to be conducted with the present supervisor, divisional director Sandeep, who was known to be reluctant to promote employees. In the second interview, a departmental manager for technical issues was also to be present. One hour before the first interview started, Nikki received a call that Sandeep had fallen ill and would conduct the interview from home via Skype.

In the Skype call, Sandeep was sitting in front of a bare cupboard door with a wilted bouquet of flowers in the background. After a short introduction to the meeting, he said: “Well, Nikki, I already know all about your strengths. Why don't you tell me about the learning fields that you see in the new position?”

Nikki responded over the next hour with clear and intelligent points regarding her learning fields.

In the second interview, for the technical discussion, department head Clare was also sitting at the table, hardly taking part in the conversation, but typing most of the time on her mobile phone.

Sandeep started the interview and said:

We know all about your strengths, yet, we need to talk about your development. You are still a very reserved person. You are not really prepared to talk about yourself and share things. You simply need to loosen up. I have already told you about my coach. He is great. You will be in a room with 300 other people. It's a great atmosphere and everyone is relaxed. I mentioned before that you can call my wife to get in touch with this coach. I like to see this as missionary work – it is very important to me.

Nikki was amazed by the course of the conversation and courageously answered where she could. She showed a willingness to open up in some future situations, but left open the question of whether she would ever go to the coach.

She did not get the job.

What went wrong here? Had she not “humbly” faced the process, answered questions, reacted wisely and sometimes wittily? Yes. But in both conversations, she had simply reacted, not acted; she had put her light under a bushel and allowed irrelevant topics to dominate the conversations.

What would a conversation with humility have been like – a conversation in which weaknesses AND strengths were properly acknowledged?

What if she had reacted differently from the very beginning?

Thank you, Sandeep, for mentioning my strengths. I had listed them in my letter of application. It would be important for me to understand which of these are particularly appreciated by you and which in your mind are the most important for the new position. Could you share with me the strongest three from your perspective, please?

That way, Sandeep would have had to consciously call the strengths to his mind and express them. Is this important? Yes, since research clearly tells us that something is more present and we remember something better when we say it out loud.104 Likewise, we feel more committed to what we assert publicly than to what we do not say.

This means that Nikki must consciously remind the boss of her strengths and get him to name them – only then will he duly appreciate these and have them present when he makes his decision. The way the conversation went, Nikki allowed her “learning fields” to dominate Sandeep’s brain. Who of us would be able to think a person strong who has just spent the last half hour talking about their learning fields? Remember the hedonic editing from above? Same thing here – Nikki is in charge of making sure that the brain of her boss is not only focusing on the negative.

Next step – what should she have said about this almost impudent term “learning fields”? How about something like this?

What you say about learning fields.... “Fields” are huge plains; I see something like gigantic yellow rape fields in front of me. I do not have anything resembling this. I have no learning FIELDS. I have individual learning POINTS, like the ones that are part of the course in every new job. And as you know from your personal experience and from watching me, we all grow by doing. As I have grown in my present tasks, I will grow with my new tasks.

Completely different! A clear positioning with a focus on strengths and an alert and calm approach to possible weaknesses. How on earth could Nikki know exactly which of her weaknesses would potentially be an issue for her in the new job? She can guess but really knowing requires the full situation to be at hand.

Humility also has something to do with the courage to get the attention you need. This is connected to bigger picture. If we assume that Nikki thinks that she will improve the company by being promoted, then it is humility to ensure that she is seen and perceived for what she can do. If the bigger picture shows that she would make the company worse of or only the same by being promoted, then she should not even apply for the new position.

Can people really do this and take a step back? Two examples:

The first actually comes from my own experience: At the management consultancy, the question arose as to whether I should be promoted to project leader. The situation was somewhat shaky, since at that time, I had not yet fully taken response for my working life – preferring to feel victim of the tremendously long working hours. I was simply not hundred percent engaged. I realized that being promoted would, of course, be pleasant for my ego – but that it would actually make the company not better by one iota. That realization helped me search for and find a new job in which I ended up finally taking full responsibility for my every day actions and behaviors. (Every time I read through this admission of mine; I feel a twinge. That the reader will see me as failure. But then I remember the sentences I wrote above about vulnerability and impostor syndrome and let it stand.)

The second example comes from one of my interviewees. He told the following story:

I was in charge of the company operations in one country. Now a global role was offered – increasing the number of employees for whom I would be responsible from 10,000 to 80,000. I was happy to accept, believing that I could indeed be effective in the new position. Later in the week, however, I encountered a colleague from another country, younger and more visionary than myself. So, I went to the CEO and suggested that this person should be promoted to the global position.

Impressive! Both the ability to see the bigger picture of what the company needed and being able to keep the personal ego reined in.

By the way, there is a lovely end to the second story: On the day, that the person who had been chosen, started the job he rang up my interview partner and asked him, whether he would be able to be his mentor. This also clearly shows that this new boss did not think the other weak for having stepped back, but instead felt that much could be learnt from him

Getting back to Nikki – in her case we assume that she thought she could make a positive impact. As a consequence, she has to make sure that the other side sees her in all her strengths as well as weaknesses.

In addition, Nikki has to be aware that the other side may actually not be interested in promoting her at all. This is neither evil nor unfair, but simply often the case. In other words, if you want something, you have to make clear why you can do it and take control of the conversation.

That would have been equally possible in the second interview. What would have been wrong with the following reaction?

Sandeep, I sense a feeling of surprise in me. What you are basically saying is that people in your department only get promoted if they work with your coach and behave in the same way as everyone else on your team. I find that strange and expect that the works council would as well. I would therefore prefer – as planned for this interview – to focus on technical issues. Let me describe a difficult case to you and Clare, on which I would love to receive your advice....

And now a technical discussion begins, which involves the boss and colleague as counsellors.

With this sort of example, it becomes clear that we may easily hide our light under the bushel without even noticing. The result? Our strengths, which we believe relevant for the bigger picture are not properly seen.

What does that mean for you? Do you have to think before every meeting with superiors and employees briefly about what the issues might be and which of your strengths fit best and how you can use them for the best of the company, the employees and yourself as part of the whole? Yes. Exactly. You must!

If there is a critical discussion with the board in a crisis situation and you want to make sure that you can support them with your strength of “calmness,” you must first consider how you can do this without appearing dispassionate or as if you are not taking the situation seriously.
If a staff meeting is about brainstorming and you yourself have a lot of ideas, you need to be aware beforehand that if your ideas are expressed too early, they will frame the others or prevent them from putting forward their own. You need to prepare yourself mentally to first listen quietly and openly, to secondly be prepared to throw your own ideas overboard and thirdly to have confidence in your own creativity so that you can play a good part in the subsequent discussion.

This sounds as if you always have to plan how you will perform at work and that you can never relax.

Exactly: that is the way it is! You have a special role as a manager. You are a permanent role model, so you must ALWAYS stay in your role. In the same way that you do not scratch your stomach or pick your nose in front of your children or on a train. As soon as you leave the bathroom in the morning, you take on one of your many daily roles, just like everyone else. Most of us realize this – the few exceptions shake us up severely.

Unfortunately, working life is sometimes not seen as a metaphorical train, where you have a public role, but as a place where you do not have to exert yourself, but can merely “be.” This is inappropriate. After all, you always have to be aware that all your actions have a powerful communicative effect on employees. An example for this.

Paul Anderson, then CEO of the Australian BHP Group, an Australian-British raw materials group with around 30,000 employees, was concerned. Ever since he had started as CEO, the company’s safety record had bombed. In comparison to the year before he took charge 2,000 more accidents had happened. And this despite the fact that Paul saw safety as a key topic. He had tried to position himself as a real proponent of safety.

He asked the head of safety to come to talk to him. He urged him repeatedly to tell him the reasons for this catastrophic result. The head of safety skirted around the issue; he prevaricated; he evaded. Pushed by Paul he finally burst out with the following:

You are to blame! Everyone knows you prefer to ride your Harley-Davidson motorbike without a helmet. The speed limit in the garage is 5 miles per hour. Everyone knows your car and everyone knows that you drive much faster. During factory visits, you don't follow safety regulations such as holding on to the handrail or wearing safety glasses at the right time.

When you visit a factory, safety is never the first thing you ask managers about – you ask about the cost, reliability and quality of production. Only then do you come to safety.

There were yet more examples and Paul sat back amazed and shocked. He realized that he was being closely watched in all his actions and that his behavior as well as his questions inadvertently had sent the signal that safety was after all not important to him. As a result, no one paid attention to it.

As for many stories in this book, there is a happy ending. Anderson took the subject so seriously that he started to behave in a conscious manner, and in a few months, he had turned the statistics around.105

There is no happy ending to the following story.

It was the company's summer party. There were benches in the garden, a barbecue and a volleyball court. On the way to the garden, two employees were surprised to see how one of their managers, who liked to think of himself as cool and not wanting to show his age of 50, stood by his car and was just changing from suit and shirt into T-shirt and jeans. In public!

Here we have an issue of a presumed strength. The managing director wanted to be cool, something which may at best be a strength in start-up – if at all. But in this company, he had misjudged – it was not a strength, but instead a weakness: not understanding what the company needs from its leader and not thinking through how his actions might be perceived by different employees. As we have seen, managers are by far not the only reason for good performance, yet they are one of the core shapers of company’s atmosphere. They quickly become the yardstick for both good and bad. Their actions cause employees to react positively or negatively.

As in this example. Suddenly employees start to reflect on how professionally their boss behaves – in general. At the next customer meeting he will be observed much more closely. Does he adhere to social standards in this case? Is it correct that he does not wear a tie to a meeting with VIP customers? Is it okay that he jokes with his Chinese customers about Chinese cooking? Any other unprofessional behavior is registered by the employees who have a sense for this kind of thing and discuss it with others. And organizations have a long memory.

That is why for showing your strengths you should instead take as a role model this senior manager. He told me that he thought through every action, every conversation and every meeting as if it was a chess game. In other words, he looked at his own position, the position of the other side, and how that other side would see themselves and him. And only once he had understood this picture, did he take action or go into the meeting. Not surprisingly he has now been made Executive Vice President of one of the largest conglomerates worldwide.

All in all, this means that you should show your strengths in such a way that they have the greatest possible benefit for your employees, the organization and for yourself.

Why “yourself.” Humility does not focus solely on the other person, but also takes into account your own life. That which is good and strong in you is also valuable and where it fits in the bigger picture it should be brought to the fore in such a way, that you can help making where you are a better place.

That means, no one is served if you are weak. To fulfill the bigger role that you have, you must be able to show your strengths just as much as your weaknesses. In fact, you also need to know what represents the currency of power and strength in your company.

What do I mean by this? In one company information might be key, in another realized profit. In yet others, the most important currency may be closeness to the CEO or the power to staff projects.

Whatever it is, it will have an influence on the bigger picture as well as on your position and your humility.

One anonymized example, that is hotly discussed when I bring it up in teaching is the following:

Let us call her Jo. She is head of HR for a large midsize company of 20,000 employees. During her tenure she has already introduced some fundamental cultural changes: She has moved from the plush Executive Office into a normal one where she sits with her assistant. That move raised many eye-brows. Yet she spends so much time on the road that for her it is vital to be with her assistant on the days that she is in the office. As a result, she is also seen as easily approachable compared to her predecessor who used his assistant to shield himself from too casual an interaction with his employees.

There is in her view, however a limit to what cultural topics she can address right here and now: One of the internal pieces of currency, one of the sources of power is the outward display of just that power via company cars. All the top managers drive large BMWs. She, personally, would rather not have a large company car. Why? What is your guess as to why? Because privately she drives a Jaguar. (I love this bit, because most people catch themselves having thought – “typical woman, does not value a cool car” – and now she drives an even cooler one….) Yet, in order to have her employees see their department on par with others, for the other top managers not to feel judged by her by choosing another car, as well as for them not thinking her weak, which in turn will weaken her clout in the company she has decided to go with the BMW.

Some managers see this negatively and regard it as opportunistic. Some say, this has nothing to do with humility but is a general power move.

My view differs: To my mind, she has truly understood the bigger picture: There are some rules she has to accept for the moment in order to be able to get through her more important changes. And it is humility to recognize that she cannot change everything at one go.

This argument does, of course, not hold, when the company is doing something against fundamental values. To go along, for example, with criminal behavior at Enron, so as to not endanger a planned culture change is not be an option. Yet here, where it is something that does not concern fundamental values, to my mind it is humble not to start a fight about the car, but instead concentrate on the other issues at hand. I see her taking the BMW as a strength and not a weakness.

Take-Away: A duty to show strength – It is up to every manager to show both – strengths as well as weaknesses. If the manager hides their weaknesses and errors, the workforce will notice and judge negatively. If they hide their strengths, they will rob themselves and others. No one benefits from this.

Managers must be aware of their role. They are role models every moment of a working day: they influence the culture of their team and must therefore neither let themselves go nor forget to check whether their behavior is in line with what they want to achieve.

Notes
   https://www.autonews.com/article/20150518/OEM02/305189971/consensus-builder-krueger-takes-the-reins-at-bmw. Retrieved 12.11.2022
   https://www.sueddeutsche.de/wirtschaft/bmw-zipse-vorstand-krueger-1.4529920. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Harvard Business manager SPEZIAL 1/2019.
de Vries, M. F. K., & Miller, D. (1985). Narcissism and leadership: An object relations perspective. Human Relations, 38(6), 583–601.
Zajenkowski, M., Maciantowicz, O., Szymaniak, K., & Urban, P. (2018). Vulnerable and grandiose narcissism are differentially associated with ability and trait emotional intelligence. Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 1606.
Banker, Chloe C., & Mark R. Leary. (2019). Hypo-egoic nonentitlement as a feature of humility. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 46, 738–753.
   https://www.hrmagazine.co.uk/article-details/the-prevalence-of-narcissist-ceos.
Braun, S. (2017). Leader narcissism and outcomes in organizations: A review at multiple levels of analysis and implications for future research. Frontiers in Psychology, 8, 773.
Chatterjee, A., & Hambrick, D. C. (2007). It’s all about me: Narcissistic chief executive officers and their effects on company strategy and performance. Administrative Science Quarterly, 52(3), 351–386.
Blair, C. A., Helland, K., & Walton, B. (2017). Leaders behaving badly: The relationship between narcissism and unethical leadership. Leadership & Organization Development Journal.
O'Reilly III, C. A., Doerr, B., & Chatman, J. A. (2018). “See you in court”: How CEO narcissism increases firms’ vulnerability to lawsuits. The Leadership Quarterly, 29(3), 365–378.
Nevicka, B., De Hoogh, A. H., Den Hartog, D. N., & Belschak, F. D. (2018). Narcissistic leaders and their victims: Followers low on self-esteem and low on core self-evaluations suffer most. Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 422.
Guedes, M. J. C. (2017). Mirror, mirror on the wall, am I the greatest performer of all? Narcissism and self-reported and objective performance. Personality and Individual Differences, 108, 182–185.
Lin, F., Lin, S. W., & Fang, W. C. (2019). How CEO narcissism affects earnings management behaviors. The North American Journal of Economics and Finance, 51, 101080.
Konrath, S., Meier, B. P., & Bushman, B. J. (2014). Development and validation of the single item narcissism scale (SINS). PLoS One, 9(8), e103469.
He, N., & Zhu, Y. (2016). Self-love and other-love: Research on the relationships among narcissism, empathy and implicit altruism. Acta Psychologica Sinica, 48(2), 199–210.
De Vries, M. F. (2014). Coaching the toxic leader. Harvard Business Review, 92(4), 100–109.
Bianchi, E. C. (2014). Entering adulthood in a recession tempers later narcissism. Psychological Science, 25(7), 1429–1437.
   https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/health-science/narcissists-are-everywhere--but-they-may-not-be-the-people-you-think-they-are/2016/10/07/175d79ee-867d-11e6-a3ef-f35afb41797f_story.html. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Robins, L. N. (1993). Vietnam veterans’ rapid recovery from heroin addiction: A fluke or normal expectation? Addiction, 88(8), 1041–1054.
Zitek, E., & Jordan, A. (2014, January). I need food and i deserve a raise: People feel more entitled when hungry. In Academy of Management Proceedings (Vol. 2014, No. 1, p. 14357). Academy of Management.
Wetzel, E., Grijalva, E., Robins, R. W., & Roberts, B. W. (2019). You’re still so vain: Changes in narcissism from young adulthood to middle age. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 119, 479.
   https://news.stanford.edu/2005/06/14/jobs-061505/. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Isaacson, W. (2011). Steve Jobs. Simon & Schuster, New York.
Owens, B. P., Wallace, A. S., & Waldman, D. A. (2015). Leader narcissism and follower outcomes: The counterbalancing effect of leader humility. Journal of Applied Psychology, 100(4), 1203.
Spencer-Rodgers, J., Peng, K., Wang, L., & Hou, Y. (2004). Dialectical self-esteem and East-West differences in psychological well-being. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30(11), 1416–1432.
   https://nextshark.com/jack-ma-officially-hardest-mf-ceo-time/. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Zhang, H., Ou, A. Y., Tsui, A. S., & Wang, H. (2017). CEO humility, narcissism and firm innovation: A paradox perspective on CEO traits. The Leadership Quarterly, 28(5), 585–604.
   https://danherr.com/2015/05/27/two-wolves-the-real-cherokee-story/. Retrieved 12.11.2022
   https://sciencenorway.no/employee-relations-leadership-and-organization-management/managers-believe-they-motivate-employees-more-than-they-actually-do/1613167. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Ross, M., & Sicoly, F. (1979). Egocentric biases in availability and attribution. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37(3), 322.
Caruso, E. M., Epley, N., & Bazerman, M. H. (2006). The costs and benefits of undoing egocentric responsibility assessments in groups. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91(5), 857.
   https://www.spencerstuart.com/research-and-insight/predicting-ceo-success. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Ou, A. Y., Tsui, A. S., Kinicki, A. J., Waldman, D. A., Xiao, Z., & Song, L. J. (2014). Humble chief executive officers’ connections to top management team integration and middle managers’ responses. Administrative Science Quarterly, 59(1), 34–72.
Lee, J. M., Hwang, B. H., & Chen, H. (2017). Are founder CEOs more overconfident than professional CEOs? Evidence from S&P 1500 companies. Strategic Management Journal, 38(3), 751–769.
van Veldhuizen, R. (2017). Gender differences in tournament choices: Risk preferences, overconfidence or competitiveness? (No. 14). Discussion Paper.
La Rocca, M., Neha, N., & La Rocca, T. (2019). Female management, overconfidence and debt maturity: European evidence. Journal of Management and Governance, 24, 713–747.
Dalton, P. S., & Ghosal, S. (2018). Self-confidence, overconfidence and prenatal testosterone exposure: Evidence from the lab. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience, 12, 5.
Sakulku, J. (2011). The impostor phenomenon. The Journal of Behavioral Science, 6(1), 75–97.
   https://www.inc.com/melissa-lamson/dont-let-impostor-syndrome-damage-your-career.html. Retrieved 12.11.2022
   https://hbr.org/2016/07/everyone-suffers-from-imposter-syndrome-heres-how-to-handle-it. Retrieved 12.11.2022
   https://hbr.org/2015/02/what-ceos-are-afraid-of. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Badawy, R. L., Gazdag, B. A., Bentley, J. R., & Brouer, R. L. (2018). Are all impostors created equal? Exploring gender differences in the impostor phenomenon-performance link. Personality and Individual Differences, 131, 156–163.
De Vries, M. F. R. K. (2005). The dangers of feeling like a fake. Harvard Business Review, 83(9), 108.
Morris, J. A., Brotheridge, C. M., & Urbanski, J. C. (2005). Bringing humility to leadership: Antecedents and consequences of leader humility. Human Relations, 58(10), 1323–1350.
Zessin, U., Dickhäuser, O., & Garbade, S. (2015). The relationship between self‐compassion and well‐being: A meta‐analysis. Applied Psychology: Health and Well‐Being, 7(3), 340–364.
Hougaard, R., & Carter, J. (2018). The Mind of the Leader: How to Lead Yourself, Your People, and Your Organization for Extraordinary Results. Harvard Business Press.
   https://www.n-tv.de/wissen/Deutsche-schlafen-kuerzer-article17636761.html. Retrieved 12.11.2022 https://www.absatzwirtschaft.de/schlaf-cheflein-schlaf-warum-dauerhafter-schlafmangel-fuer-koerper-und-geist-fatale-folgen-hat-150424/. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Barnes, C. M., Guarana, C. L., Nauman, S., & Kong, D. T. (2016). Too tired to inspire or be inspired: Sleep deprivation and charismatic leadership. Journal of Applied Psychology, 101(8), 1191.; Nowack, K. (2017). Sleep, emotional intelligence, and interpersonal effectiveness: Natural bedfellows. Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research, 69(2), 66.
   https://medium.com/thrive-global/jeff-bezos-sleep-amazon-19c617c59daa. Retrieved 12.11.2022
   https://hbr.org/2018/02/senior-executives-get-more-sleep-than-everyone-else. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Orquin, J. L., & Kurzban, R. (2016). A meta-analysis of blood glucose effects on human decision making. Psychological Bulletin, 142(5), 546.
Mantantzis, K., Maylor, E. A., & Schlaghecken, F. (2018). Gain without pain: Glucose promotes cognitive engagement and protects positive affect in older adults. Psychology and Aging, 33(5), 789.
Bushman, B. J., DeWall, C. N., Pond, R. S., & Hanus, M. D. (2014). Low glucose relates to greater aggression in married couples. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(17), 6254–6257.
Danziger, S., Levav, J., & Avnaim-Pesso, L. (2011). Extraneous factors in judicial decisions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(17), 6889–6892.
Mercer. (2013). Global Performance Management Survey Report. New York, NY. https://www.mercer.com/content/dam/mercer/attachments/global/Talent/Assess-BrochurePerfMgmt.pdf. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Schaerer, M., Kern, M., Berger, G., Medvec, V., & Swaab, R. I. (2018). The illusion of transparency in performance appraisals: When and why accuracy motivation explains unintentional feedback inflation. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 144, 171–186.
Newton, E. L. (1991). The rocky road from actions to intentions.
Zayas, V., & Jampol, L. (2020). Gendered white lies: Women are given inflated performance feedback compared to men.
Gilovich, T., Medvec, V. H., & Savitsky, K. (2000). The spotlight effect in social judgment: An egocentric bias in estimates of the salience of one's own actions and appearance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78(2), 211.
Golubickis, M., Tan, L. B., Falben, J. K., & Macrae, C. N. (2016). The observing self: Diminishing egocentrism through brief mindfulness meditation. European Journal of Social Psychology, 46(4), 521–527.
In a master class at ESMT Berlin.
Manzoni, J. F., & Barsoux, J. L. (2002). The Set-Up-to-Fail Syndrome: How Good Managers Cause Great People to Fail. Harvard Business Press.
Mattan, B. D., Kubota, J. T., & Cloutier, J. (2017). How social status shapes person perception and evaluation: A social neuroscience perspective. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 12(3), 468–507.
Groysberg, B., Nanda, A., & Nohria, N. (2004). The risky business of hiring stars. Harvard Business Review, 82(5), 92–101.
Huckman, R. S., & Pisano, G. P. (2006). The firm specificity of individual performance: Evidence from cardiac surgery. Management Science, 52(4), 473–488.
   https://www.leadershipnow.com/leadingblog/2011/07/footwashing_for_leaders.html.
Pluchino, A., Biondo, A. E., & Rapisarda, A. (2018). Talent versus luck: The role of randomness in success and failure. Advances in Complex Systems, 21(03n04), 1850014.
Salganik, M. J., Dodds, P. S., & Watts, D. J. (2006). Experimental study of inequality and unpredictability in an artificial cultural market. Science, 311(5762), 854–856.
Mlodinow, L. (2009). The Drunkard’s Walk: How Randomness Rules Our Lives. Vintage.
Collins, Jim. Good to Great: Why Some Companies Make the Leap and Others Don’t. Instaread, 2016.
Hambrick, D. C., & Quigley, T. J. (2014). Toward more accurate contextualization of the CEO effect on firm performance. Strategic Management Journal, 35(4), 473–491.
Kim, S., Eberhart, R., & Armanios, D. E. (2017). What makes a winner? Toward resolving the role of luck and skill in sustained CEO performance. Toward resolving the role of luck and skill in sustained CEO performance (May 2017) und Fitza, M. A. (2017). How much do CEOs really matter? Reaffirming that the CEO effect is mostly due to chance. Strategic Management Journal, 38(3), 802–811.
Rönkkö, M., Maheshwaree, P., & Schmidt, J. (2018, July). The CEO effect and performance variation over time. In Academy of Management Proceedings (Vol. 2018, No. 1, p. 16480). Academy of Management, Briarcliff Manor, NY. Quigley, T. J., & Graffin, S. D. (2017). Reaffirming the CEO effect is significant and much larger than chance: A comment on Fitza (2014). Strategic Management Journal, 38(3), 793–801.
   https://bcghendersoninstitute.com/leadership-matters-when-how-much-and-how-183e61139371. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Fishwick, I. (2020) The street-smart MBA: Mastering business acumen without going to school, Independently Published.
Bhattacharya, S. (2008, March). Why people quit. Business Today. http://www.businesstoday.in/magazine/trends/why-people-quit/story/1542.html. Retrieved 12.11.2022
   https://www.focus.de/finanzen/karriere/berufsleben/tid-23711/unzufriedene-mitarbeiter-stoerfaktor-nummer-eins-der-chef_aid_668002.html. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Aasland, M. S., Skogstad, A., Notelaers, G., Nielsen, M. B., & Einarsen, S. (2010). The prevalence of destructive leadership behaviour. British Journal of Management, 21(2), 438–452.
Der Spiegel Nr. 10, 29.2.2020.
   https://web.de/magazine/sport/mehr-sport/dirk-nowitzki-40-freundliche-weltstar-33018132. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Carnegie, D. (2010). How to win friends and influence people. Simon and Schuster, Page Xxiii.
   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PclmUyPqqpo. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Treasurer, B. (2018). The Leadership Killer: Reclaiming Humility in an Age of Arrogance. Little Leaps Press, Inc. Kindle-Version.
Black, B., & Hughes, S. (2017). Ego Free Leadership: Ending the Unconscious Habits That Hijack Your Business. Greenleaf Book Group Press.
brand eins 08/2007 (Questionnaires from "Frankfurter Allgemeinen Zeitung", "FAZ Magazin" and "Frankfurter Allgemeinen Sonntagszeitung").
Sezer, O., Gino, F., & Norton, M. I. (2018). Humblebragging: A distinct—and ineffective—Self-presentation strategy. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 114(1), 52.
Ou, A. Y., Tsui, A. S., Kinicki, A. J., Waldman, D. A., Xiao, Z., & Song, L. J. (2014). Humble chief executive officers’ connections to top management team integration and middle managers’ responses. Administrative Science Quarterly, 59(1), 34–72.
Owens, B. P., & Hekman, D. R. (2012). Modeling how to grow: An inductive examination of humble leader behaviors, contingencies, and outcomes. Academy of Management Journal, 55(4), 787–818.
Dale Carnegie Global Leadership Study 2016.
Manzoni, J. F., & Barsoux, J. L. (1996). Set Up to Fail: How Bosses Create Their Own Poor Performers. INSEAD.
Vera, D., & Rodriguez-Lopez, A. (2004). Strategic virtues: Humility as a source of competitive advantage. Organizational Dynamics, 33(4), 393–408.
Reader’s Digest, October, 1991, p. 62.
   https://bigthink.com/videos/astro-teller-on-failing-fast-at-x. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Owens, B. P., & Hekman, D. R. (2012). Modeling how to grow: An inductive examination of humble leader behaviors, contingencies, and outcomes. Academy of Management Journal, 55(4), 787–818.
Rego, A., Owens, B., Yam, K. C., Bluhm, D., Cunha, M. P. E., Silard, A., … & Liu, W. (2019). Leader humility and team performance: Exploring the mediating mechanisms of team PsyCap and task allocation effectiveness. Journal of Management, 45(3), 1009–1033.
Zapata, C. P., & Hayes-Jones, L. C. (2019). The consequences of humility for leaders: A double-edged sword. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 152, 47–63.
Ete, Z., Sosik, J. J., Cheong, M., Chun, J. U., Zhu, W., Arenas, F. J., & Scherer, J. A. (2020). Leader honesty/humility and subordinate organizational citizenship behavior: A case of too-much-of-a-good-thing? Journal of Managerial Psychology, 35, 391–404.
Zapata, C. P., & Hayes-Jones, L. C. (2019). The consequences of humility for leaders: A double-edged sword. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 152, 47–63.
Owens, B. P., & Hekman, D. R. (2012). Modeling how to grow: An inductive examination of humble leader behaviors, contingencies, and outcomes. Academy of Management Journal, 55(4), 787–818.
Brooks, A. W., Gino, F., & Schweitzer, M. E. (2015). Smart people ask for (my) advice: Seeking advice boosts perceptions of competence. Management Science, 61(6), 1421–1435.
Stern, I., & Westphal, J. D. (2010). Stealthy footsteps to the boardroom: Executives’ backgrounds, sophisticated interpersonal influence behavior, and board appointments. Administrative Science Quarterly, 55(2), 278–319.
Huang, K., Yeomans, M., Brooks, A. W., Minson, J., & Gino, F. (2017). It doesn’t hurt to ask: Question-asking increases liking. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 113(3), 430.
MacLeod, C. M., Gopie, N., Hourihan, K. L., Neary, K. R., & Ozubko, J. D. (2010). The production effect: Delineation of a phenomenon. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 36(3), 671.
   https://hbr.org/2013/11/the-ceo-who-led-a-turnaround-without-wearing-a-helmet. Retrieved 12.11.2022

===== FILE 14/23: xhtml%2fc6.xhtml =====

Chapter 6 Appreciating Others

DOI: 10.4324/9781003358015-6

Praise often. Admire rarely. Chide never.

(Walter Serner, Austrian writer, 1889–1942)

Summary

The consequences of appreciation are enormous in terms of performance and motivation in the appreciated. Appreciation of others is very much about perception. It is initially difficult to perceive others properly, although this can be trained. It will be discussed how appreciation can be demonstrated and which models can be followed in order to position not only the positive but also the negative or that which needs to be changed.

In his book The Listening Leader1, the former head of communications of the insurance giant Allianz, Emilio Galli-Zugaro (one of the most appreciative people I know), tells roughly the following story: If you were invited by the Chairman of the Board of Directors to a beautiful Allianz property in Bavaria together with up to nine other top-level employees, this could be your ticket for the way up. Several days were spent there, with plenty of time for relaxation, excellent food and good conversation. The last evening was a superb dinner with the CEO.

Oh, that must be the famous “fork test” of whether one can behave well at the dinner table. In other words, not merely using the right cutlery, but also being able to hold a good conversation.

Wrong! That was not the test at all. After the meal, it was not the CEO who evaluated the 10 potentials, but the gardener, the waitress, the chambermaid and the rest of the staff. Only those who had treated them well, not treated them arrogantly or derogatorily were considered for the really high posts.

With its recruitment test, Allianz ensures that it only recruits high-level managers who look beyond their own ego, who perceive and appreciate other people as human beings. Even if this sounds obvious, we often forget this in our everyday hassle.

Employees are human beings too. It is important, not to see them as different.

(Interview No. 18, VP Global Head, 110,000 employees)

You need to meet people symmetrically. I am neither their victim nor their judge.

(Interview No. 125, Group CEO, 1,200 employees)

When a new employee joins my team or we have a guest then I make the tea. I may have a different job but am not different from them in any real sense.

(Interview No. 130, Founder and former CEO, 300 MA

When working for Amazon, it was great to realize that I do not always have to talk in order to be noticed or appreciated.

(Interview No. 24, CDO, 6,000 employees)

I call myself the Chief Ignorance Officer. Others know their topics so much better, so I can only get things done with their support.

(Interview No. 26, CIO, 68,000 employees)

No one had expected much from us during Covid 19. We got so much appreciation for enabling everyone to work online that it was simply wonderful.

(Interview No. 58, CIO, 5,600 employees)

Appreciation is a vital skill in top managers, and one which Allianz sees as a prerequisite: do not think only of yourself but realize that you are in a permanent relationship with others. If you want to be effective you must be aware of this and learn to interact in an appreciative manner.

The amazing thing about appreciation is that we get it so easily wrong. Not because we are bad but simply because we are inconsiderate and often do not see what is needed by the other party.

It is therefore not as frequent as many wish that you see people feeling appreciated or being out there to appreciate others.

What do the numbers say about appreciation?

First of all, 14 percent of the interviewed managers saw this as an issue for themselves and others. And as we saw in Chapter 4, 78 percent actually believe that they often compliment others on their strengths, even more – a grand 91 percent say that they appreciate others for their contributions.

What do employees see? Those who have humble managers feel significantly more appreciated as you can see in Figure 6.1. On a scale of 1–10, they are at an okay 8.3 versus employees of non-humble leaders who stand at a miserly 6.2. If this was seen as an NPS score, all these employees would be detractors. And even the employees of the humble leaders cannot yet be counted as promoters (which only starts at 9). This shows that there is still room for more appreciation even by humble leaders. Possibly not in quantity but in quality? We will see later, how in everyday life we may fail in appreciation, even if we have the very best intentions!

Figure 6.1 More appreciation from and under humble leaders.

Interestingly, the appreciation by the leader also seems to have a positively infectious impact – those who feel appreciated, consciously also try to appreciate others more.

So, what happens when people feel appreciated?

The Consequences of Appreciation

We have a culture in which too little is appreciated. To my consternation I have discovered that I fare better, if I only do precisely what is asked of me instead of being proactive. Sadly, in my company at the moment, it is better not too be too good or too active.

(Interview No. 106, VP HR Strategy, 90,000 employees)

Appreciation is fundamentally important for the employee. Expressed in figures: if they lack appreciation, only 31 percent of employees manages to motivate themselves and work with commitment; if they are appreciated, the figure shoots up to 67 percent.2

So more than double the motivation! And since motivation in a well-run organization in turn results in better performance, this is a huge lever.

Yet, the 67 percent also shows one other key point: You as a manager cannot make up for everything. Even with the highest level of appreciation, you still fail to get the remaining 33 percent. Why? Perhaps the job is the wrong one for the employee. Possibly he or she does not fit well with the company or their colleagues. Or it may be that the employee simply does not like themselves and how they behave in their job. Whatever it is – from time to time you may allow yourself the calming thought: The whole world does not rest on your shoulders!

Other positive effects of appreciation?

The more the manager appreciates the strengths of their employees, the more the employees are convinced of their self-efficacy and once again the more motivated they are.3

In addition, the famous Pygmalion effect sets in. Named after the eponymous Greek sculptor who according to legend created a statue called Galatea whom he fell in love with. And it was this love that brought the statue to life.

The same happens with people you believe in.

Two examples: If teachers are convinced of the cleverness of some children – because they have been told that these are the smartest according to an IQ test – these children will objectively become better in the course of a year and end up the best in class.4 While, of course, the children were chosen purely by chance and there is no truth in the story that they had a high IQ.

The same applies to soldiers who also perform better on tests, think more positively and show stronger leadership skills, if their training officers fundamentally expect more of them.5 Remember the sea cadets who do not throw up because their officer told them that this will not happen to them – same principle.

Why does that happen? Research has identified four reasons. The one who is convinced that his/her teachings/thoughts/ideas fall on fertile ground due to the person being so smart, interested, good or great, firstly creates a “warmer” interpersonal climate, secondly entrust them with more and harder material, thirdly demands more feedback in the learning progress and fourthly gives more helpful feedback.

Dozens of studies show that this effect also works in organizations. One from 2017 documents that the appreciative behavior of the manager, who also communicates high expectations to the employee, increases employee's confidence in the manager and the company, as well as the motivation and trust in their own performance.6

An important point here is that the Pygmalion effect works at a subconscious level. In other words, teachers, officers and managers do not even notice that they treat people differently.

Interestingly therefore, this Pygmalion effect initially appears to be difficult to teach.7 Why? If I believe a staff member to be a total goof, I will have a hard time changing my perception of him/her and to treat them as differently as the Pygmalion effect requires. Since I will not be able to behave differently towards the employee, I will fail to pass on a new and positive view. Instead, I will then be stuck in my perception.

This is where the basic attitude of humility comes to the rescue. Since a humble person sees themselves with all their own weaknesses, and knows that all humans are like that, they will typically be able to develop a general kindness towards others. It then becomes easier to see what others already can or might be able to do. Where your own ego shrinks, there is room for goodwill and the willingness to see the positive in others. And when you communicate this belief, you act as with the Pygmalion effect. Consequently, in turn, the employees become just as they would if someone thought they were great.

In this respect, humility is the perfect attitude for making the Pygmalion effect work. And on the other hand, to banish the golem effect from the company. What is the golem effect? Pygmalion the other way round. Based on legends from the Middle Ages according to which rabbis created “stupid” creatures out of clay that acted at their will, managers create stupid employees if they do not expect anything from them and think they are no good. This happens especially when managers only throw themselves at the weaknesses of employees – then the employee soon loses sight of their own positive sides. As a consequence, the positive elements disappear not only from perception but also from the behavioral repertoire.

Research confirms this: If, for example, a working group does not consider itself to be good, its performance will be worse. And this is not because the group really consists of incompetent people, but because they do not believe in their own abilities as a group and therefore show less commitment and performance.8

Again, the attitude of a manager who leads with humility helps here. When briefing groups, they will point out the strengths and communicate high expectations, which will then be transmitted to the employees.

There is yet one other powerful effect that lies in appreciating the strengths of others. People feel committed to what they say. This means something positive happens when a manager says: “I'm sure you can do this because of your xxx” (it could say: creativity, discipline, perseverance) and additionally asks: “Do you see it that way too?” As soon as the employee replies: “Yes, I agree with that,” the inner doubts become quieter, the willingness to get involved increases and the probability that the employee will deliver exactly what he or she is aiming for increases.

It has also been proven that an increased sense of commitment has positive effects on interaction within the organization: More employee satisfaction, fewer redundancies and better performance.9 And if the humble leader verbalizes her own commitment from time to time, she will “infect” the employees so that they will do the same.

Take-Away: The more employees feel appreciated, the more they grow – Appreciation is a powerful motivation tool.

Stumbling Blocks in Appreciating Others

Most managers think that appreciation is a no-brainer appreciation, easily said and easily perceived. What do you think?

Well, in my programs we often discuss how actually to appreciate an employee. So, when I ask: Okay, so please say something appreciative out loud as if you were speaking to the employee, you just mentioned.

And then I get the following sentences:

“Generally, your work is seen.”
“On the whole, I think you are doing okay.”

None of you will have a problem in seeing what has gone wrong here. Qualifiers such as “generally” and “on the whole” immediately alert the listener to a point of criticism hiding behind the corner. Typically, the manager had not intended anything negative, and simply used the word in a non-thinking manner. But you can imagine that if an appreciative conversation starts like this, it typically does not go well…

The trick to avoid this stumbling block is indeed quite an easy yet tedious one: Walk yourself through the conversation in your head and initially – for some important ones - even in front of a mirror. Yet better, you write some sentences down and look at them before the meeting, so that you do not actually let the words lead you down the garden path.

I make no difference as to whether I am meeting the supervisory board or the toilet lady.

(Interview No. 86, CFO, 500 employees)

For me, it's all about being amongst equals. This means not talking down to anyone, whether working student, graduate student or board member. Anyone can talk to me; I have no receptionist to stop others. We're all on a first-name basis, from student to executive.

(Interview No. 11, Deputy Head IT, 1,000 employees)

At the beginning of the chapter, we saw that 91 percent of employees as well as leaders believe that they appreciate others. Yet, we also saw earlier on that between 25 and 51percent of employees do not feel appreciated. And in another study, employees said that more than 50 days have passed since they were last appreciated.10 That is too much even for the most well-meaning employees.

So why does this happen? Everyone seems to be well-meaning and still does not get it right. How come?

Well, in order to appreciate others, we must first notice them. Correct? So please go to https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wBoMjORwA-4 (or google “Daniel Simons Movie Perception Test 1997”)

Here you will find a very short video that I suggest you watch it with the following question in mind: What would I find to appreciate in this employee? Ideally stop at 0.23 seconds, and reflect if you saw something to appreciate. Be free to watch it again and again, until you find something.

(Spoiler Alert)

Most managers when they watch it comment first on the smile the person has and the untidy desk (hard to see how that can be turned into an appreciative comment). The second time round they notice a nice picture on the wall, something different with the shirt, possibly something different with the trousers. It is only at the third or fourth or fifth try that they notice that we actually have two different people here, wearing a different set of clothes and a different pair of glasses!

What an amazing lesson this is with a clear conclusion: we find it very hard to notice others, unless we really take time to look.

Instead, we are typically grounded only by that which we notice and that is only a small part of what there is. Remember the research about team members adding up their contribution to the team effort and coming to a total of more than 140 percent? We typically only see what it is that we personally are doing and find it hard to really appreciate what others do. Unless we ask. And listen.

Not surprising then, that if next to our human lack of awareness we throw in a pinch of narcissism, things even get worse. Researchers analyzed how different CEOs spoke about the company and about themselves. The more narcissistic they were, the more they talked about themselves. Indeed, they mentioned “I” or “Me” in four out of 10 sentences. They also did not mention other people – and following our findings from above, we can assume that they probably do not even notice that there are other people around let alone any relevant achievements!11

Look at this CEO of a company specializing in office furniture as a prime example. He said to the press: “I am the biggest farmer in the region with most pigs in the barn.” Meaning his employees! Who, we can expect, will not feel seen or appreciated by their boss.12

Okay, so we are not that good at noticing others and what they do. But surely, we notice what they feel? We saw above that the humble leader is good at being empathic, that must surely mean, that we as humans are generally good at recognizing emotions. Or? Well, we are definitely good when others clearly express emotions, such as sadness at being fired, anger at being shouted at, joy at being appreciated, we can read easily.

Yet, if we do not know the context, and the person does not really want their emotion to be noticed, we are rather helpless.

Take the great Micro Expressions Tool developed by Paul Ekman.13 Ekman had shown in his research that – all over the world – seven emotions are expressed facially in exactly the same way. This means that a North American uses exactly the same muscles to show fear, anger, disgust, sadness, contempt, joy and surprise as a Polynesian or a North Japanese. His research on this and on involuntary micro-expressions inspired the American television series “Lie to me.” He has also developed a tool for people to train recognizing emotions even when the other person is trying to suppress them. And these emotions only very briefly flash across the face. You have to imagine this suppressed emotion like a lightning smile of less than half a second, a frown, a look of disgust brought as quickly under control as the person can manage.

Within an hour, most managers in my programs become quite good at this. However, even the best ones have the highest error rate when it comes to sadness. In most cases, even after practicing in detail, most participants still confuse sadness with anger.

This effect is probably caused by a sort of biological self-protection – it is safer for me as an individual to think of someone as angry and hit them first in a defensive action, rather than mistakenly thinking they are sad and then being bopped on the head.

This highlights the point I am trying to make: Even after practice, we are good at perceiving some things, but bad at perceiving others. The danger is then that we will misjudge the other party and react on autopilot to what we believe their reaction to be.

What are the consequences if the humble leader knows about this innate human weakness of not being able to perceive others? Well, they realize that there is much that they do not perceive and that that which they perceive need not be taken at face value.

This means that they will try to really and consciously observe and afterwards carefully follow up by asking and listening, and asking and listening and asking and listening. And then react to what people really need and not with what you would want if you were in their place.

Managers often fail to appreciate as the other party needs it. Instead, they praise as they would like to be praised. But it is easy to find out what the other party really needs. Either you ask or you simply listen, then you know it.

(Interview No. 14, CEO, 1,000 employees)

Our next problem is that we often confuse the person with the situation he or she is in. This means that if someone is stern and brusque with us, we see this as his or her (unpleasant) character trait. If, on the other hand, we ourselves are stern and brusque, it is obvious to us that this is only because of the stressful situation we are in.

This is the famous fundamental attribution error – we see our negative patterns of behavior as owing to the situation, the positive ones as owing to our character. With other people it is the other way round.

This error goes into both directions. On the one hand, employees like to attribute actions of the manager to the manager as a person and not to the situation. Just think of cutbacks or restructuring. Here, employees often see the manager as being the decider and having freedom and choices. All of which may not exist at all. Instead, the manager may be trapped in a situation engineered from the powers above and may even be unable to point this out.

In the same way, problems arise in relation to the employees. Why? Because it is very human for the manager to attribute a lost pitch to the employee and not to the situation. Or to attribute a lack of politeness to a colleague not returning a friendly wave. While he may simply have forgotten his glasses or be – without me realizing – having a blue-tooth conversation with a bad piece of news.

Laszlo Bock, when he was Senior Vice President of People Operations at Google, recognized the problem:

Successful bright people rarely experience failure, and so they don’t learn how to learn from that failure They, instead, commit the fundamental attribution error, which is if something good happens, it’s because I’m a genius. If something bad happens, it’s because someone’s an idiot or I didn’t get the resources or the market moved.14

This means you also need to be humble enough to recognize what in your employees, your peers and your superiors is only due to the situation and what is really in and about the person.

A final problem arises in what research calls the “Set-Up-To-Fail-Syndrome.”15 It happens, when for whatever reason the manager believes their employee to be underperforming even ever so slightly. As a result, the manager actually slightly changes their behavior, becomes more directive, sets more precise targets, takes away decision-making autonomy and gives more routine projects. This has a hugely demotivating effect on the employee who soon finds himself or herself actually performing worse, thus confirming the bosses’ assessment of being a low performer.

Since our brain is so effective at providing us with reasons for our behavior, it is hard for a manager to realize their contribution to the bad performance of employees.

Those of you who are skeptical of this ever happening to you look at this piece of research to shudder and reflect.

166 new employees and their direct supervisors were asked to assess their expectations for their relationship during the first 5 days of working together. This very brief period with the expectations shaped during it was a predictor of how the relationship would fare six months later. That means, not having seen any piece of work, no project, no presentation, the expectation of the leader shapes how he or she would relate with the new employee after half a year.16 This is a self-fulfilling prophecy in the purest form.

You need to be aware that typecasting an employee as a strong or a weak performer will immediately have an objective impact on this person’s work. The way managers treat employees of whom they do not think highly projects underappreciation and low confidence, which in turn causes the employee to do exactly this: underperform.

A humble manager therefore will need to consciously analyse situations and learn to see the employee as he/she really is. The following questions may be useful to run through in your head:

Am I thinking less of this employee in comparison to others? What objective data do I have for this? What would the employee say to my assessment? Could it be that my behavior contributed to their weaker performance? What can I find to see positive in this employee?

It is your task as a humble manager to try all that you can, to really see your employees as they are and not as you think they are or as you have made them become due to your behavior.

Take-Away: Failure to perceive as a default human setting – People are not good at recognizing what it is that people do or feel. It is also easy to confuse the situation with the person and to change a person’s performance by the way we perceive this person to be. This means that you have to concentrate and work intensively on your own perception in order to be truly able to recognize the individual achievements of others.

How to Get Appreciation Right?

The managing director presented our business to the workers (blue-collar) on a flipchart. He was very calm and well prepared. It was really important to him that the employees understood the market and his strategy as well as why and how he acts. The whole thing took place on a very equal footing.

(Interview No. 8, VP People Development, 15,000 employees)

Our CEO actually manages to approach you with a personal touch, to listen attentively and not react with hollow phrases.

(Interview No. 7, VP Training, 22,000 employees)

I have a fairly new member of the team who is still quite young. She had a politically difficult task. Her job was to produce an information brochure and coordinate it with the works council. That is a tricky business in our company. She offered to write this brochure. Actually, I'm pretty good at formulating and writing these brochures myself. This is my home turf. I gulped, thought okay and then said: “Well, do it.” And it turned out exceptionally well. I was totally surprised; I couldn't have done it better. I learned something from this: even if I think I have humility on my radar, there's still something more I can do.

(Interview No. 2, Head of Talent Management, 10,000 employees)

Every time when I see something that merits feedback, I write it down in a structured way and give it to the person.

(Interview No. 67, Head of Learning, 49,000 employees)

How can appreciation be manifested? A good start is to simply take employees seriously, take the time to communicate with them or allow them to take on new tasks, as in the examples above.

In addition, you should definitely always be on the lookout for what employees do well. That is why one of the interview partners collects everything that merits feedback and a managing director regularly takes notes of good performance, whenever he is with his teams or when he sits in meetings. Then, come the time of performance review, he knows exactly who is sitting in front of him and can be rightfully appreciative.17

Want an example for a lack of appreciation? Then look at Huawei boss Ren Zhengfei. He asked an employee who had resigned for family reasons: “Why resign? You can get a divorce instead.”18

It follows almost directly from the Pygmalion effect that status is of course also an instrument of appreciation. In general – and up to a certain point – status has a positive effect on performance. This can be formal status, with a title and special bonuses, or informal status that is communicated verbally: “You are our expert for...,” “Without your expertise we would not be able to get anywhere.”

In other words, your status evaluation puts a sort of label, a stamp on the other person, which again becomes a kind of self-fulfilling prophecy. A number of studies have shown how powerful this label or stamp is and how it allows people to act accordingly.

One example outside the business world is the following: Participants are told that they are participating in a study about healthy eating. They are divided into two groups. The first is told: “If you are tempted, say to yourself ‘I can't do X.’” The second group is told: “If you are tempted, tell yourself ‘I don't do X.’” Different tests are taken and at the end the participants are allowed to choose between a chocolate and a muesli bar.

Lo and behold: 61 percent of those who said to themselves “I can't” grab the chocolate. Of those who categorized themselves as a type who simply does not give in to temptation, only 36 percent go for the unhealthy.19 In other words, through clever labeling of myself, I double the likelihood that I will do what I objectively would like myself to do.

Research also shows that you can just as effectively label others. If smokers are told that they were picked for their willpower to join a seminar on how to quit smoking, a whopping 67 percent managed to quit. While only 28 percent succeeded when they were told that they were picked by chance.20

There is another good story for successfully labeling others from Steve Jobs.21 For the first iPhone he decided that the screen should not be plastic but glass. For this he needed a very special type of glass. In search of a solution, he met a company called Corning and its CEO Wendell Weeks. Once Jobs was convinced of the product, he said he wanted as much gorilla glass as Corning could produce within six months.

Weeks replied: “We don't have the capacity, none of our plants are making the glass now.” “Don't be afraid,” Jobs replied. “Yes, you can do it,” he said. “Think about it. You can do it.”

When Weeks told this story, he shook his head in surprise. “We did it in less than six months,” he said. “We made a glass that had never been made.” Corning's factory in Harrisburg, Kentucky, which had made LCD screens, was converted almost overnight to make gorilla glass full time. “We put our best scientists and engineers on it, and we just made it work.”

And that is exactly what happens when I make employees feel that I believe in them. This belief generates the psychological safety which in turn leads to measurably better performance.22

How strong this effect is, depends on the company. If the hierarchy and the organization is stable and reliable, any status that is awarded leads to better performance, as shown above. But if the hierarchy is unstable and my status is endangered, performance will be measurably worse.23 This is related to pure biology in shape of the hormones: cortisone and testosterone. In uncertain times, more of these hormones are released, and that has an effect on performance. Amateurishly illustrated – when my body gears itself to flee from a lion in the savannah, my capacity for a well-structured excel sheet, customer-centric sales conversations or data analysis goes out the window!

Now the question is, how such an appreciation of strengths is best achieved?

Would you be pleased if your boss told you that “You make the best coffee” or “You always wipe the whiteboard so beautifully” or “As always, you've formatted the back-up slides superbly”?

In recognizing strengths in others, there should always be an element of a larger meaning. To the person above one could say the following: “You are our social glue! You simply see what needs to be done to make us work together as a team and to ensure that the customer always has the perfect product in his hands.”

Of course, for some people it may take time, until they manage to believe in the positive that you are saying.

The first time I was told that I was doing a great job, I thought my boss was being sarcastic – in my job before there simply had been no appreciation.

(Interview No. 48, Global Head Diversity, 16,000 employees)

This means the manager has to be aware of what the strength of the other person means for the work product, the colleagues, the customers, and give recognition for exactly that.

This is why it is not enough to merely say: “Great presentation” but instead “Thank you for this. I was especially impressed by slide 9 – you have really made the implementation gap so much clearer.” This sort of precision, of course, takes energy and focus.

You also have to be the one doing more of the appreciation if you see that there is too little going on around you – if the whole culture is not yet up to scratch.

The people on the shopfloor do not feel appreciated by the “pencil pushers” in home office and the other way round. Both groups feel not seen.

(Interview No. 108, CEO, 3,200 employees)

You need a lot of courage to say that someone has been doing something well – there is some softness involved in doing this. And in our industry, we feel that we have to be tough!

(Interview No. 62, Head of Learning, 27,000 employees)

If you share meaning and purpose, it incidentally has an enormous effect on work performance. A fine study on this was conducted in 2008 at an American university.24 The subjects were employees whose job it was to collect donations from alumni. These were then converted into scholarships for students.

For the study, the employees were divided into three groups. One group received … actually nothing. The second group was given four real stories to read about how the job of fundraising had been very helpful for former employees to set them on a good path for their future career. The third group read four stories from scholarship recipients who detailed how they had benefited from the scholarship, what they experienced and what they were able to achieve as a result.

The staff now went back to work. Nothing changed in groups 1 and 2. Group 3, on the other hand, shot up from an average of about $1,300 raised per week to more $3,100! Merely because the employees had understood more clearly what their endeavors were achieving. In other words, the appreciation came indirectly by allowing them to see the results of their work.

Transfer this to your company and it means that a trainee who sets up the conference room will feel appreciated if told that the atmosphere in the room was so good that a deal was struck. It means that an IT specialist will feel appreciated if the manager shares how clients were enthusiastic about the online registration process. And it means that an employee will feel appreciated if they are shown a bit of the larger picture. Some more positive examples in this vein.

I regularly remind our clients to thank their client officer if they have solved something – that is really motivating for them.

(Interview No. 37, CEO, 3,000 employees)

I write myself a reminder to thank for what has gone well – otherwise appreciation gets lost so quickly.

(Interview No. 49, HR-Director, 45,000 employees)

My boss started criticizing the candidate for not being able to make our preferred date and time for the interview. But to my mind appreciation already starts in accepting that a candidate also has a life outside of us.

(Interview No. 76, Head of Corporate HR, 7,500 employees)

I speak to every employee who has been with us for more than ten years and ask them to tell me about their time here, what was the worst and the best moment for them.

(Interview No. 87, CEO, 7,000 employees)

I have a nice example of appreciation. When we were setting up a meeting, a colleague said: Why does not Susan open the meeting, otherwise she does not have a part to play. And we want her to be seen.

(Interview No. 31, Head of HR Strategy, 300,000 employees)

When we talk about transformation, we think too little about the strengths of the past. We must remember to appreciate what has gone before.

(Interview No. 32, former Board Member, 3,500 employees)

It is clear then that appreciation demands time, focus and concentration. Something that we often fail to consider in our everyday hectic.

One important point, though. It must be clear that you as a leader appreciate all your employees and not just one employee in particular. Why? There is research that shows that if employees think that their manager acknowledges and praises them not because he or she appreciates everyone but because they themselves are unique individuals and unusually great, they end up feeling more entitled. The expensive consequence: They adhere less to internal rules and feel superior to others.25

That means, you need to make sure that you are generally seen as appreciative for all and not merely for the select few.

A question that often comes up at this point is what to do with the weaknesses of my employees. If I only see their strengths, this is surely not a complete picture. Not talking about weaknesses and not working on them can be dangerous for my company or my department.

To put it very clearly: Focusing on strengths does not mean that you do not see weaknesses and do not support your employee in mitigating them. We already looked at this before. Yet, the weaknesses are seen in the context of strengths and the focus remains on the strengths. If you only give negative feedback then research shows, employees lose their creative drive and focus mainly on what that negative feedback means for their relationship, their prospects, their self-image etc.26

Some researchers therefore stress that around 80 percent of the feedback should be positive.27 A similar ratio, namely 5:1, is known from the research on relationships. After decades of research, John Gottman was able to show that such marriages stay strong that typically have five positive interactions versus every negative one.28 Now if you see work as a form of marriage, that should also be your ratio…. Or at least follow a 3:1 ratio.

Focusing on the positive also gets rid of negative cultures in the company.

There was a toxic atmosphere in our company. So, I began every meeting by talking about the positive. What was achieved, who had done what. We congratulated each other. After a year all managers got it, we focused on the positive and where we may be hindered in achieving this – and stopped talking negatively about ourselves, the company and other people.

(Interview No. 16, General Manager, 160,000 employees)

Positive feedback helps improve performance. Especially for those employees who are only a little better than average. A database of more than 50,000 employees and managers shows that the majority of a group that was between 55 and 80 percent in terms of performance and received positive feedback improved on average by a whopping 24 percentage points29 (of course not beyond the 100).

But there remains the question of how to give negative feedback. In feedback discussions, it is easy to fall into the trap of starting with one positive thing and then piling on the negative ones. No wonder that people end up feeling unfairly treated and demotivated. In fact, statistically one third of feedback talks generate negative effects on subsequent performance and motivation.30 It is therefore no wonder that managers often avoid giving feedback at all.

Since it simply is not an option to shirk their duties, what should humble managers do?

Negative feedback must be seen as fair, otherwise the employee will immediately mentally shut down.31 For example, it is not considered fair when managers refer to something they have been told. “I heard from X that he quit because of you.” Even if a small element of this may be true, the employee will find it difficult to accept something like this if he or cannot be present at a meeting with X.

Hearsay simply has no place either in the courtroom or at work. Therefore, I am always surprised how frequently managers in role plays decide to share all the negative hearsay which they find in their confidential information. In the debriefing process, they say “you must not take everything you are told at face value” and on the other hand laughingly admit that the employee could have said almost nothing to fundamentally invalidate the hearsay.

A humble manager, therefore, would go through the information that they have about an employee and first look at what is actually known and what is hearsay. Then he or she would think about the bigger picture – what is to be achieved. Mentioning hearsay or even saying: “Max told me the following about you” will lead more to opposition and a feeling of having been betrayed by Max rather than to a change in behavior.

The managers who end up succeeding in their role play and motivate the employee actually pick mainly positive elements and limit their negative feedback to those issues that can be objectively measured. And then they focus on where the employee already successfully in the past managed to solve these sorts of problems. That is, switch the brain of the feedback receiver into active mode, remembering where things have gone right and how that can be repeated again and again.

What other tricks are there to give negative feedback? It is clearly not rocket science if the managers are aware of a few things.32

The feedback has to be given personally – this is the easiest part of the exercise because it makes no difference whether you do it sitting at a table or digitally.

Feedback must be based on objective standards instead of hearsay. For example: “In your position, you are expected to visit 15 customers a week. In the last quarter, you averaged only 5 clients.”

Where possible you should speak from your own perception: “At the last meeting I observed how you felt very offended by colleague Y. As a result, you raised your voice and started an argument.”

It is important that the feedback is not directed against the person, but against a precise behavior or performance.33

During the conversation, you should always listen to the employee how he/she sees the situation and be consciously prepared to change your mind. This is hard and takes a lot of focus.

And last but not least, it is helpful if you show your concern for the employee and spend time developing ideas together on how improvements can be achieved. The more the employee is involved in visualizing the steps that need to be taken, the better.

Of course, it is up to you to decide how exactly you want to run the feedback talks. Many find the following options very helpful.

Option 1: The BET model: It has the steps: Behavior, Effect and Thanks. It is suggested to use this model for positive feedback in the vast majority of cases.

Positive feedback: The BET model


Behavior




Effect




Thanks

You mention the behavior, you talk about the positive effect it had and you thank the employee for it. And just before you object to the word “Thanks,” and say that in your culture this is not really done, please note, actually every manager worldwide takes issue with this part. Thanking an employee for work that he or she is paid for is something that nearly everyone struggles with. Initially. Yet, it can be trained and leads to a deepened feeling of appreciation.

The model for difficult and often negative feedback is called BEAR: Behavior, Effect, Alternative, Result. This means that a concrete behavior is addressed (with measurable and objective standards) and the negative impact is explained. Now the desired alternative behavior is presented, which leads to the desired result. This result does not always have to be positive, but can also be made up of clear ramifications for the case that the behavior is not changed.

Critical feedback: The BEAR model


Behavior




Effect




Alternative




Result

As we have seen above, real appreciation demands that you perceive the employee as he or she is. But since you have grown aware of all your biases: the fundamental attribution bias, where you confuse character and situation and the set-up-to-fail-syndrome, where your very own skepticism worsens someone’s behavior – since you have become aware of how hard it is to perceive someone as they really are, it is far safer for you to focus on giving positive feedback and do this regularly. For those moments when you have to give negative feedback, you should also not forget that you can usually find more positive than negative feedback and that you should make the negative feedback not only as clear but also as warm and caring as possible. The aim should be to jointly develop a proposed solution.

For me a useful image is of a circle with space for more than 365 lines. Typically, most days of the year I would not find anything critical to say about the employee. More likely than not, if I could observe everything that my employee was doing, I would color in the greatest part of the circle with a shining green of things well done. Now say, I have three negative things – while they loom large in my mind, I can quite easily remind myself that most of the circle will still be green, even when I add three red lines.

One company that after numerous struggles has managed to institute a good culture for giving positive and negative feedback constructively is Netflix.

First, look at the experience of a new employee on his first day who had observed what to him seemed a surprising exchange.

A guy four levels below him hierarchically stopped (the speaker Ted) in the middle of his point: “Ted, I think you’ve missed something. You’re misunderstanding the licensing deal. That approach won’t work.” Ted stuck to his guns, but this guy didn’t back down. “It won’t work. You’re mixing up two separate reports, Ted. You’ve got it wrong.”

Later I ran into Ted in the men’s washroom. He asked how my first day was going so I told him, “Wow Ted, I couldn’t believe the way that guy was going at you in the meeting.” Ted looked totally mystified. He said,

Brian, the day you find yourself sitting on your feedback because you’re worried, you’ll be unpopular is the day you’ll need to leave Netflix. We hire you for your opinions. Every person in that room is responsible for telling me frankly what they think.

Secondly, see how feedback is organized:

Netflix managers invest significant time teaching their employees the right and wrong way to give feedback. They have documents explaining what effective feedback looks like. They have sections of training programs where people learn how and practice giving and receiving it.

These are the four key elements of what Netflix calls the 4A feedback:

Aim to assist.
The feedback must be actionable.
People should appreciate the feedback.
The feedback can either be accepted or discarded.

In general, feedback takes place in most one-on-one meetings and also in so-called Live 360 dinners every 6 to 12 months in the whole team.

At Netflix, it is tantamount to being disloyal to the company if you fail to speak up when you disagree with a colleague or have feedback that could be helpful. After all, you could help the business – but you are choosing not to.34

Finally, let's talk briefly about what many see as a problem in overpraising. Is it not silly, if every email, ever uttering, every presentation is praised? The appreciation could lose value and people may have no idea what it is they are actually doing well.

This is a valid point, but my fear is that too often we are simply too lazy to look for something constructive to praise. Sometimes we remember that we have appreciation on our To Do list, come out with a feeble “Well done” and are surprised that the engagement survey gives us bad scores.

Why do we find it hard to look for something positive? This is the negativity bias again – it is far easier to remember the times that someone barked at you or forgot to deliver their presentation in time compared to the many more times that there was a fine performance.

Yet knowing this, you, as a humble executive, need only take a few minutes per person to remember what it is that they do well. Even if you've known this for years, there's no harm in thanking them again for some details of a job well done. Just as you would like to hear a “thank you!” after every single meal which you have prepared. It does not have to be a eulogy; a few words of appreciation are enough.

It is also important to realize that appreciation not only lies in words. But in numerous other parts of our behavior and presence. A fine example comes from one of my seminars.

We had a whole day practicing presence and projecting yourself as a leader. The task now after lunch: simulate a real work situation in which the participants in the room represent the employees. The first participant on the stage was someone who up to then had always engaged fully, being very outspoken and active. He shuffled into the middle of the room with his eyes lowered, both hands in his trouser pockets and began to mumble something in our direction.

After a few minutes of this, the faculty and the audience gave some positive feedback plus some very clear negative points, regarding the presence, willingness to engage etc.

Five minutes later, we all found ourselves in a different universe. There walked into the middle of the room an upright person, making eye contact using his hands to get us all engaged. And very quickly we all were on board.

What does this have to do with appreciation? Is this example not simply about acting? No. In the first “performance,” the manager had only focused on himself, had allowed himself to develop an aversion to this exercise and had only wished to get off the stage as quickly as possible. In this situation, he did not care one whit about us being in the room and having to spend our time with him. In other words, in the first situation, he did not even notice us as relevant beings, which is the absolute opposite of appreciation.

In the second attempt, we became the center of his attention – he had remembered why he was up there: To bring us on board. The way he now structured his talk we were willing to sit up, listen and be enlisted in the cause.

To put it succinctly: Appreciation lies in perceiving that leading is always about the others. Not about yourself. As a consequence, all your actions must be tailored accordingly. If not, your employees will notice and judge accordingly.

This also entails not checking your phone while others are speaking, looking up when you are spoken to, taking time to listen to your employees, keeping your face under control, making an effort to be presentable to others.

Regarding dress code, there is, of course, quite a difference between companies. Said bluntly, in my view, a key point of appreciation lies in not making life harder for others. If I have a scowl on my face, so that people do not dare to ask me a question; if my dress code is prohibitively distancing or too familiar; if I mumble or clearly wish myself away from where I am, then I am not being appreciative.

Let us see some more examples of a lack of appreciation.

It is amazing how little managers appreciate both their colleagues from HR or their employees when once again they make their employees cancel their trainings for something they think is more important.

(Interview No. 53, VP HR, 800 employees)

He said, look this guy has been working in the same position for seven years – he needs to go. And I said, no way do you fire my people simply because you want a change.

(Interview No. 96, Board Member, 200,000 employees)

My boss held a meeting before Christmas. He spoke for 2 hours and never once acknowledged that people had been sick and dying from Covid 19. At the end, he said: “I have been told to reassure you and also ask you how you are. Since I cannot do this in this virtual setting, I will tell you how I feel. You know that I love to go out at night and party. Since I cannot do this now, I feel sad and tired.”

(Interview No. 139, Head Digital Learning, 100,000 employees)

There is also appreciation in being transparent. It is very easy for employees to feel that they are not being taken seriously, if too much information is kept from them. For many managers information is a source of power. Yet sharing is actually a sign of appreciation.

I got this team during a restructuring. Half of them were to be let go and this was not meant to be communicated. I decided to treat them like adults and share this information. It was a huge relief – they felt treated like adults and fairly at the same time.

(Interview No. 88, Head of EMEA Learning, 100,000 employees)

We have no personal office space. This is part of our value system. We also eat the same food as the employees and we all use the rest rooms on the shop floor. Our philosophy is truth, performance and love.

(Interview No. 97, Board Member, 2,500 employees)

The middle management is often frightened to pass up bad news – so we end up with little transparency throughout the company and people do not feel appreciated.

(Interview No. 54, Head of Global Training, 36,000 employees)

Being open is a powerful tool. If you cannot reveal something, then stating that already helps. And offering others a format in which to be open is another step towards generating an appreciative atmosphere.

One manager actually uses a team health status slide for this. Each employee gives a color code on dimensions such as Health, Stress, Workload, Manager Support, Colleague Support, Leadership, being valued. One week, all employees set the leadership dimension on red. Did the manager fume or rail? No, he admitted to having failed to deliver on what he had promised and allowed the feedback to stand just as it was. What a powerful tool of appreciating your employees by letting them vent in a safe environment!

Being really present, taking the other party seriously and giving feedback in a structured way ensures that the other side feels properly appreciated and recognized. It takes both time and focus to develop a consistent skill in appreciating others. Stepping out onto an internal balcony is the first step to take.

Finally, what about you yourself being appreciated? How can you ensure that you are not being left out of the equation?

Firstly, the research at the beginning of the chapter shows that the more appreciation you give, the more you also receive as a leader.

Secondly, being humble allows you to focus less on yourself. As a consequence, you will actually need less direct appreciation. If you do your job right as a leader, this already will give you the appreciation.

Thirdly, others will seek you out which many leaders also feel as great appreciation. Look at these two examples.

I get a sense of recognition from the greater responsibility and accountability that I have, as well as from you quoting me in a book.

(Interview No. 40, CEO, 24,000 employees)

I feel enriched and appreciated when employees from a former job call. When it is time for the last journey and the whole village is there, then have I achieved something!

(Interview No. 25, VP and Head Global Services, 31,000 employees)

Often, however managers themselves feel unappreciated. Have a look at this example.

I sometimes get angry – here we are very close to the employees, we spend a lot of time going round and talking to people. Then when I write my Thursday E-Mail about the bigger picture, there is for many this weird ritual of celebrating their distance to the CEO and claiming that their department is so very different. Then I get comments such as: ‘Do you even know what is going on here?’ How much more do I need to role model understanding and proximity?

(Interview No. 114, CEO, 14,000 employees)

While we do not know enough about his communication style to know if the CEO is actually doing as well as he is hoping for, he clearly feels unappreciated. Would it hurt the employees to first point out where the CEO had hit on their needs precisely? Before adding extra information on how their situation may be different? No, not at all.

Research shows that energy, vigor, well-being of a manager also depends on him or her being appreciated.35 Yet, they sadly receive it even less than employees do.

In one survey, 74 percent of employees say that they never or rarely express appreciation to their boss.36 This may have something to do with a fear of not wanting to be seen as ingratiating yourself or as flattering, in order to get something.

If you remember, how real appreciation works – concretely valuing an input, a presentation, a project, it becomes clear that appreciation upwards needs have neither of these negative connotations. “Thank you very much for your support in this.” “I appreciate, that you gave me the freedom to run this project independently within the parameters you set.” “Thank you for having collected all this feedback about me – this is an arduous task for which I am grateful.” “Great presentation – I finally understood, how this project fits in with the bigger picture!”

Nothing sycophantic in any of these utterances.

So, this is the final takeaway from this section – never forget to also appreciate upwards (and sideways, while we are at it). There can never be too much appreciation! And you will also reap the benefits of it as in this example.

I've prescribed myself a little personal program called SYP: Swallow your pride. This is how I endured when an older advisory board member tried to explain my business to me. Instead of being skeptical or irritated, I had everything recorded and every suggested change reviewed and partially implemented. Since then, he has been completely supportive of me.

(Interview No. 161, COO, 4,200 employees)

To round of this chapter, let us look at a final case to see how appreciation can be missed and what negative emotions it generates. It is a real case, though anonymized.

You, Alexander, are in charge of Business Development at Clarity, a supplier of special glass. You, your direct boss, Division Manager Diego, and CEO Kim have jointly visited an important potential client called Dias. After the interview, you prepare a proposal and send it by e-mail to Diego and Kim. This draft contains a placeholder for a recommendation (“______________”) from the CEO of one of your biggest clients, which the client wanted to see some comments from. CEO Kim has offered to obtain this reference. To be better able to imagine the situation, think of an enthusiastic quote about your company from someone as well-known and powerful as Satya Nadella, CEO of Microsoft, or Lawrence Culp, the CEO of GE.

No one thanks you for the draft, which you wrote late at night. Your boss Diego adapts the draft in numerous places and among other things takes out the placeholder for the recommendation. A misunderstanding, since he missed one of the last e-mails on the subject. CEO Kim sees that the space for the quote is gone and asks about it. Diego writes that it is not necessary.

You are very concerned that you are now sending exactly the kind of general gibberish that the customer hates and that you will not win the offer. You write an email to both of them and point out that there must have been a misunderstanding and that the quote is very important after all. CEO Kim leaves it up to Diego and you and is ready to approach the CEO for the quote after all.

You call Diego and explain once again the reasons for the quote – that everyone had agreed on it and that he had probably forgotten about it. Diego says curtly: “Thanks for the discussion, but no, we're not changing anything.” You angrily hang up and write a message to CEO Kim that in Diego's view the quote is no longer needed. Thus a “waffly,” weak offer goes to the customer.

Please reflect on where appreciation was lacking.

The vast majority of participants with whom I discuss this case are firmly on Alexander's side. There he was writing a draft late at night, and nobody thanks him for it. Then Diego messes it up with the quote and neither apologizes nor allows his mind to be changed. And CEO Kim just lets everything happen. No appreciation for Alexander – and actually no appreciation for the client.

Only after a bit of thinking does it become clear that Alexander is actually the main problem. Why exactly does he send his first draft not only to his direct boss, but also to the CEO? By doing so, in many companies he would be seen as passing over his direct boss, not appreciating his status. Why does he not send it directly to Diego? Okay, you may say, but if Kim was at the meeting, then surely addressing both in one email may be fine. Indeed, your company culture may allow this for the first joint mail. But what about the second one, in which Alexander actually exposes Diego and blames him for having made a mistake? Surely here you would agree that an email to Diego AND Kim is in bad taste.

Also, when Diego adapted the draft in numerous points, does Alexander thank him for this? Not one iota! He only focuses on the one single mistake of taking out the quote. And he goes at it in the most aggressive manner – by writing an e-mail to his boss as well as the CEO! With this he indirectly portrays Diego as a fool. Of course, Diego is also not acting in a particularly adult manner. Neither does he thank Alexander for the draft, nor is he able to admit his mistake in taking out the quote.

But! It is Alexander, with his focus on himself and his lack of appreciation of Diego's position as his boss who has brought this on himself. Why on earth did Alexander not call Diego directly after he had adapted the draft? Mere automatism, lack of awareness and mental laziness!

And during this call, he could actually have apologized for not making the placeholder more obvious. One way to ensure that bosses, many of whom have to work through hundreds of emails and dozens of documents every day, do not have to think too hard and do not make errors accidentally is to really make things obvious. Alexander might have added a big comment in his draft to (“______________”): “This is where we agreed the quote from X to be added where he tells how great we are etc.”

That would have been a much wiser thing to write, and quite an easy thing to apologize for missing….

Instead, Alexander looks at things only from his perspective: The need for the quote was obvious to him, so it should clear be to everyone else.

How long do you think it took Alexander (whom I know personally) to understand that the blame for the situation lay squarely with him? It was only when he talked to his coach at the end of the year after a bad feedback session with his boss Diego, that he realized that he had brought all this on himself.

Why? Because, he had not paid attention to what Diego needed in his role. Instead, he found it easier to feel victim of a thoughtless boss. Alexander was caught in his desire to win the customer. He found no time or room for humble behavior; he fully failed to perceive anyone outside himself.

And, of course, they lost the client!

Take-Away: Those who want to be master of appreciation practice – Being truly present, taking the other person seriously, and giving structured feedback where appropriate ensures that the other side feels properly recognized and appreciated.

Notes
Zugaro, E. G., & Zugaro, C. G. (2017). The Listening Leader: How to Drive Performance by Using Communicative Leadership. Pearson UK.
Harter, J., & Adkins, A. (2015). What Great Managers Do to Engage Employees. Harvard Business Review, p. 64.
Diao, H., Song, L. J., Wang, Y., & Zhong, J. (2019). Being passionate to perform: The joint effect of leader humility and follower humility. Frontiers in Psychology, 10, 1059.
Rosenthal, R. (1994). Interpersonal expectancy effects: A 30-year perspective. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 3(6), 176–179.
Eden, D., & Shani, A. B. (1982). Pygmalion goes to boot camp: Expectancy, leadership, and trainee performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 67(2), 194.
Kim, M. S., Kim, S. H., Koo, D. W., & Cannon, D. F. (2019). Pygmalion leadership: Theory and application to the hotel industry. International Journal of Hospitality & Tourism Administration, 20(3), 301–328.
White, S. S., & Locke, E. A. (2000). Problems with the Pygmalion effect and some proposed solutions. The Leadership Quarterly, 11(3), 389–415.
Leung, A., & Sy, T. (2018). I am as incompetent as the prototypical group member: An investigation of naturally occurring Golem effects in work groups. Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 1581.
Shahid, A., & Azhar, S. M. (2013). Gaining employee commitment: Linking to organizational effectiveness. Journal of Management Research, 5(1), 250.
   https://hbr.org/2016/05/recognizing-employees-is-the-simplest-way-to-improve-morale. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
Grant, A. M. (2013). Give and Take: A Revolutionary Approach to Success. Penguin.
Story mentioned in interview No. 14 by the new CEO, 1,000 employees.
   https://www.paulekman.com/resources/micro-expressions/ Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. V. (1971). Constants across cultures in the face and emotion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 17(2), 124.
   https://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/23/opinion/sunday/friedman-how-to-get-a-job-at-google.html. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
Manzoni, J. F., & Barsoux, J. L. (1996). Set Up to Fail: How Bosses Create Their Own Poor Performers. INSEAD.
Liden, R. C., Wayne, S. J., & Stilwell, D. (1993). A longitudinal study on the early development of leader-member exchanges. Journal of Applied Psychology, 78(4), 662.
   https://www.wiwo.de/erfolg/management/werte-4-tugend-keuschheit/19165178-4.html. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
   https://www.sueddeutsche.de/wirtschaft/china-valley-kopf-oder-zahl-1.4445835. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
Patrick, V. M., & Hagtvedt, H. (2012). “I don’t” versus “I can’t”: When empowered refusal motivates goal-directed behavior. Journal of Consumer Research, 39(2), 371–381.
Blittner, M., Goldberg, J., & Merbaum, M. (1978). Cognitive self-control factors in the reduction of smoking behavior. Behavior Therapy, 9(4), 553–561.
Isaacson, W. (2011). Steve Jobs. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Kundu, S. C., Kumar, S., & Gahlawat, N. (2019). Empowering leadership and job performance: Mediating role of psychological empowerment. Management Research Review.
Knight, E. L., & Mehta, P. H. (2017). Hierarchy stability moderates the effect of status on stress and performance in humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(1), 78–83.
Grant, A. M. (2008). The significance of task significance: Job performance effects, relational mechanisms, and boundary conditions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 93(1), 108.
Qin, X., Chen, C., Yam, K. C., Huang, M., & Ju, D. (2020). The double-edged sword of leader humility: Investigating when and why leader humility promotes versus inhibits subordinate deviance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 105(7), 693.
Kim, Y. J., & Kim, J. (2020). Does negative feedback benefit (or harm) recipient creativity? The role of the direction of feedback flow. Academy of Management Journal, 63(2), 584–612.
Berry, D. L., Cadwell, C. M., & Fehrmann, J. (1995). Leader’s Guide. Human Resource Development Press.
   https://www.gottman.com/blog/the-magic-relationship-ratio-according-science/. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
Zenger, J., & Folkman, J. (2013). The ideal praise-to-criticism ratio. Harvard Business Review, 15.
Kluger, A. N., & DeNisi, A. (1996). The effects of feedback interventions on performance: A historical review, a meta-analysis, and a preliminary feedback intervention theory. Psychological Bulletin, 119(2), 254.
Aguinis, H., Gottfredson, R. K., & Joo, H. (2012). Delivering effective performance feedback: The strengths-based approach. Business Horizons, 55(2), 105–111.
Fong, C. J., Williams, K. M., Williamson, Z. H., Lin, S., Kim, Y. W., & Schallert, D. L. (2018). “Inside out”: Appraisals for achievement emotions from constructive, positive, and negative feedback on writing. Motivation and Emotion, 42(2), 236–257.
Rettger, M. B. (2018). Finding the silver lining: How positive psychology can help you use critical feedback to flourish.
Hastings, R., & Meyer, E. (2020). No Rules Rules: Netflix and the Culture of Reinvention. Penguin Press, New York, NY.
Sheridan, S., & Ambrose, M. L. (2020). My Cup Runneth Over: A Daily Study of the Energy Benefits for Supervisors Who Feel Appreciated by Their Subordinates. Journal of Management, 48, 440–471.
Gratitude Survey, Conducted for the John Templeton Foundation, June–October 2012, Report by Janice Kaplan, https://greatergood.berkeley.edu/images/uploads/JTF_GRATITUDE_REPORTpub.doc. Retrieved 12.11.2022.

===== FILE 15/23: xhtml%2fc7.xhtml =====

Chapter 7 Ability to Learn and Openness to New Ideas and Feedback

DOI: 10.4324/9781003358015-7

Wise people don't judge – they seek to understand.

Wei Wu Wei (English philosopher 1895–1986)

Summary

While it appears a simple matter for all of us to be willing to learn, it does indeed require courage to expose yourself to many and partly uncomfortable learning experiences. It is important to understand that most things can be learned, that errors can be a great help in this process and that what you can learn depends on your own mindset. Exercises help open your own brain for learning as well as creating a culture of learning in your own team or company.

Professor Tom Hubbing, in his mid-60s, is a world-renowned professor of leadership. He teaches at numerous business schools and for large corporations. He spends whole days with board members or teaches in halls packed with executives. He regularly receives awards as a speaker, and dozens of executives send him thank-you emails for his inspiration.

I had the opportunity to work with him in a leadership development program. The group was a small one of only 15 participants. A day of lessons and a day of group coaching was planned. Then one of the coaches dropped out. I asked the professor if there was any chance that he could take on a group of five participants, as no one else was available at such short notice for the location we had chosen. Prof. Hubbing immediately said yes and stayed on for a second day. At the end of this day, the highly decorated professor turned to me and said: “I would like to thank you very much for the opportunity to work as a coach with your participants. I enjoyed this new format and have learned a lot from it”.

This struck me as the most open attitude I had ever seen in a person. While other professors kept away from anything that was not standard, Prof. Hubbing embraced all that was new and integrated it into his lessons. No focus on his own status, no arrogance – simply an enormous willingness to always be learning.

Yet there are many who act differently. Let us look at one negative example.

The three managing directors had made up their minds – they wanted to strengthen the whole team. Instrument of choice: A structured feedback process. Each of the 20 employees, as well as they, would give each other anonymous feedback answering four questions: What should this person continue doing? What should this person do differently? What should this person stop doing? Any other comments? A budget was allocated for everyone to have three sessions with an executive coach after the feedback.

Mark Peters, one of the employees, had just finished his three coaching sessions and was satisfied with the results. He had been able to put some of the comments into perspective, two had simply been spiteful, four had confirmed what he already knew and was working on, but six were new topics that he was able to discuss intensively with his coach. Now he would try out some new approaches.

On the way to the canteen, he met the three managing directors and they started chatting. Mark mentioned that he found the coaching useful and asked about their experience. The answers astounded him.

Managing Director 1: “Oh, at 50 I already know what I can and cannot do – I don't need any coaching.”

Managing Director 2: “I discussed the results with my best buddy in the pub.”

Managing Director 3: “I rang a coach, but we couldn't find a time slot, so I discussed the results with my wife.”

A few years later, the three managers were dismissed. The business results were still good, but the supervisory board had lost confidence in a future with the three at the helm.

The third core element of humility is the ability to learn, be open to new ideas and feedback.

While only six percent of interviewed managers saw this as a hard element of humility to embrace, this may be due to a faulty understanding of what true openness and willingness to learn actually entails.

Willingness to Learn

It is shocking that people in our times of change believe they can be successful with what they have learned years ago. This attitude transforms into a lack of openness as well as a foolish resistance to trends.

(Interview No. 52, CEO, 1,100 employees)

I offer learning in form of seminars etc. – and people simply do not take me up on this!

(Interview No. 100, CFO, 10,000 employees)

You should not force anyone into learning if they do not want to.

(Interview No. 74, 1,000 employees)

Some people do not want to really learn – they only want the certificates.

(Interview No. 78, Head of Talent Management, 200 employees)

Are there managers who live the first two elements of humility (i.e., who are good at assessing and appreciating their own abilities and those of others) but who are not capable of learning nor open to feedback and new ideas?

Yes: unfortunately, this is only too common. For example, I had a colleague who said smugly of himself: “I simply cannot remember birthdays. Not even those of my wife and children.”

The attitude “I just can't...” is widespread, is readily put forward and often masquerades as humility.

The following sentences sound both humble and appreciative:

Anne, why don't YOU call this difficult client – you're much better at this than I am. With me, it always ends in a fight... In return, I'll take the three customers in Paris off your hands.

Peter, you are such a great organizer – can I leave the team event to you? Sure, that is officially my job: but remember what happens when I work with Excel. We don't want that, do we?

And one more example from an interview:

An engineer came up to me and said how he admired me how I was connecting with people. He said, he wished he could also do what I had done. What had I done? Written a thank you email to an employee!

(Interview No. 96, Board Member, 300,000 employees)

Everyone knows: it is very comfortable not to have to change – and to say that there are some things that you simply cannot do. However much you would like to. After all, nobody blames an Arabian stallion for not being able to climb a tree.

What is really behind this attitude? Certainly, at times a solid self-knowledge. But often also defiance, laziness – and even arrogance: “It’s just the way I am….”

Like the managing director from the case study at the beginning of the chapter, who thought that at his age – a mere 50 – he didn’t need coaching.

Sounds like the CEO of a company who said to his CDO: “Sure you can take a coach. I don’t believe in it – it will be money thrown out of the window, but please go ahead” (Interview 24, CDO, 6,000 employees)

Well, any managing director should be aware of the research showing that outside perspective is invaluable – at any age. That outside perspective may come from colleagues, employees, bosses – or coaches.

The positive experience Google CEO Eric Schmidt reported on earlier is supported by a meta-analysis of almost 2,000 managers from 2016. It confirmed that coaching has a significant effect on the manager's performance and also a measurable effect on the company in which the manager works.1

What a sad time for any company when its leaders refuse to take up an offer of coaching.

To distinguish between correct self-assessment and lethargy or laziness, everyone has to honestly analyze themselves. After all, as we have seen, it is no mistake to concentrate on your strengths. Look at how in recent years recognizing and promoting strengths has become increasingly popular in management theory.

Why? It is seen as unhelpful to spend hours painstakingly identifying your own weaknesses and then trying to correct them. Better to focus on your strengths and play to them more effectively. Instruments like the Clifton StrengthsFinder help to uncover what the individual employee is particularly good at and what he/she likes to do. The goal is then to strive to use these competencies even more. The assumption is that someone who, for example, tries to compensate for his weaknesses in customer acquisition will never be as good as someone who loves nothing better than cultivating relationships, with all the ups and downs that it entails.

This approach clearly finds its limits when someone takes on a specific role in the company. To professionally fulfill any role, especially in these rapidly changing times, an individual will need to develop certain skills. In other words, if you get a job in customer service, you have to learn how to deal with difficult customers. If you are responsible for team events, then you should learn to master Excel to the extent necessary. By the same token, if you are a husband, you should remember the birthdays of your wife and children!

Last but not least: if you are a manager who has just received comprehensive feedback, you should try to learn something from it, no matter how old you are!

I have known very few who are truly open to learning. Many like to focus on the past. And if you want to learn, you have to admit that in the past there was something that you could not do or that you did wrong.

(Interview No. 82, CFO and CDO, 500 employees)

People do not ask for trainings. And when I order business books for me, they just pass them on to me and never ask to borrow them.

(Interview No. 83, CMO, 6,500 employees)

In professional roles, a willingness to learn is essential: new roles almost always require skills that go beyond those that employees or managers already have. Even if you have been in the same position for a number of years, you will need to acquire new skills as the role or the organization evolves. Remember the CEO of BMW, who just continued leading the same way, even though the situation had changed. He was actually unhumble in not wanting to adapt and learn a new way of leading.

Here are just a few of the competencies that a manager must have.

Different leadership styles for different employees.
An understanding of the company's strategy and how your own area fits in.
The ability to make good decisions under uncertainty.
The skill to communicate well with stakeholders, both internal and external.
For times of change, charismatic leadership and storytelling.
Have a positive impact as a role model (in concrete terms: team meeting without mobile phone, ability to keep facial expressions under control, concentration and posture).

As a result of having understood that their role requires more of them, some managers attend a management seminar once a year. They recognize that there is always something new to learn due to changes in the company, the employees or simply the situation. Some even book the same seminar repeatedly. Since they and their environment have changed, they find new lessons in the same cases and materials.

Others use the seminars as a disciplinary measure to really take time to reflect on their strategy, leadership or change challenges.

 

Take-Away: Learning not laziness – Despite the fact that people pay lip service to being open to learning – 99 percent saw themselves as willing to learn from others – many hide behind the fact that they simply cannot do some things.

Knowing That Something Can Be Learned

People become micro managers because they do not know what to do as managers. Instead of learning for their new role, they fear becoming redundant and cling to their old one. Yet the only thing I can work on is myself!

(Interview No. 21, Head of Sales Start-up, Former VP, 10,000 employees)

I think you can learn all – even how to appreciate others.

(Interview No. 115, CEO, 300 employees)

I will meet my coach this afternoon. I am nearly 62 but can always learn.

(Interview No. 45, 2,500 employees)

In my company, everyone can take a coach nowadays. It has lost the stigma of being a “repair”-measure.

(Interview No. 72, Head L&D, 14,600 employees)

The interesting question, of course, is whether everything you need for your professional role can be learned. Are there not elements in your own being that are fixed and cannot be changed? The most important personality traits, your core leadership style, the way you speak, how you make decisions?

Before we dive into this – I would like you to take a short questionnaire (Table 7.1). It takes about five minutes to fill in and to score afterwards (Table 7.2).

Table 7.1 Questionnaire
 	 	Strongly disagree	Disagree	Agree	Strongly agree


1

	

Anyone can fundamentally change their own intelligence

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




2

	

Either you are a “maths person” or you are not

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




3

	

One' s own intelligence is fixed from birth and can hardly be influenced

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




4

	

If you are really smart, you don't have to make an effort

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




5

	

You can always substantially change how intelligent you are

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




6

	

Personal charisma cannot be learned

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




7

	

Regardless of who you are, you can significantly change your level of intelligence

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




8

	

If somebody really wants to learn something, she/he can do it

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




9

	

Everyone can learn to be a great leader

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




10

	

You cannot change the most important elements of your personality

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




11

	

Anyone can develop a musical talent

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




12

	

You can learn new things, but you cannot change how intelligent you are

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




13

	

You have to be born to be an athlete

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




14

	

You can always change how intelligent and talented you are

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




15

	

You can always become smarter

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




16

	

Either you have a talent for painting or you do not have it

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




17

	

You can substantially change your personality at any time

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




18

	

If you want to master something, you can do it

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 

Table 7.2 Scoring: Please Give Yourself the Points for Your Answers
 	 	Strongly disagree	Disagree	Agree	Strongly agree


1

	

Ability Mindset – Growth

	

0

	

1

	

2

	

3




2

	

Ability Mindset – Fixed

	

3

	

2

	

1

	

0




3

	

Ability Mindset – Fixed

	

3

	

2

	

1

	

0




4

	

Ability Mindset – Fixed

	

3

	

2

	

1

	

0




5

	

Skills Mindset – Growth

	

0

	

1

	

2

	

3




6

	

Personality/Character Mindset – Fixed

	

3

	

2

	

1

	

0




7

	

Ability Mindset – Growth

	

0

	

1

	

2

	

3




8

	

Ability Mindset – Growth

	

0

	

1

	

2

	

3




9

	

Personality/Character Mindset – Growth

	

0

	

1

	

2

	

3




10

	

Personality/Character Mindset – Fixed

	

3

	

2

	

1

	

0




11

	

Ability Mindset – Growth

	

0

	

1

	

2

	

3




12

	

Ability Mindset – Fixed

	

3

	

2

	

1

	

0




13

	

Ability Mindset – Growth

	

3

	

2

	

1

	

0




14

	

Ability Mindset – Fixed

	

0

	

1

	

2

	

3




15

	

Ability Mindset – Growth

	

0

	

1

	

2

	

3




16

	

Ability Mindset – Fixed

	

3

	

2

	

1

	

0




17

	

Personality/Character Mindset – Growth

	

0

	

1

	

2

	

3




18

	

Ability Mindset – Growth

	

0

	

1

	

2

	

3




 

	

Total

	

 

	

 

	

 

	

 




 

	

Total sum

	

 




 

	

Strong growth mindset

	

43–54 points




 

	

Growth mindset with some fixed elements

	

31–42 points




 

	

Fixed mindset with some growth ideas

	

19–30 points




 

	

Strong fixed mindset

	

0–18 points

We will look at the questionnaire and the implication of your result later on in this chapter.

Now I want to share some of the research with you as to what can actually be learned. Researchers have been working on this for decades, with results getting clearer by the day.

Let us take a fairly recent example and look at it more closely: Charisma. Charisma is the legendary ability to take up space, to inspire, to move and to motivate. Surely such an ability cannot be learned. To act like an Obama or a Jacinda Ardern, the Prime Minister of New Zealand, that is surely innate. Isn't it?

Three researchers from Lausanne, led by Professor John Antonakis, took the bait. They first investigated what exactly this famed charisma consists of. What patterns of behavior are displayed, what tactics are deployed by those who are perceived and celebrated as charismatic leaders?

The answer is surprisingly simple. The researchers identified twelve critical skills, nine verbal and three non-verbal. These are strongly reminiscent of what you learn in a course on leadership rhetoric or story-telling. Is that surprising? No! Leadership, after all, is a matter of communication.

The nine verbal charismatic leadership tactics:

Use of metaphors, parables and analogies (“We are worrying away at this project like pit-bulls. Can we become slyer like foxes?”)
Use of stories and anecdotes (“This reminds me of the time, when I went rafting and the current pushed me against the wall of the canyon….”)
Setting contrasts (“I don’t want you to think about what you can do for me; I want you to think what I can do for you.”)
Asking rhetorical questions (“Who wants to continue feeling like a victim of these budget cuts?”)
Three-part arguments and lists (“We have the budget for this. We have the people for this. And we have the will for this.”)
Demonstrating ethical and moral conviction (“Our goal: Never harm the client or give less than we could.”)
Recognizably sharing the feelings of the collective (“We are all tired and demotivated.”)
Having high expectations for themselves and their employees (“By 2030 our technology will be in every second household.”)
Communicating conviction that high expectations can be met (“Many others would be fearful whether their team was capable of achieving so much in such short time. I am not!”)

The three non-verbal charismatic leadership tactics:

Animated and modulated voice.
Active facial expressions: eye contact, showing emotions – smiling, frowning etc.
Use of gestures such as symbolic hugging, underlining, enumerating, conscious pointing, tapping

To test if and how this charismatic leadership can be learned, the researchers invited 34 managers from a large Swiss corporation (average age 42) to a five-hour-long training course.2

At the start, the researchers explained the 12 charismatic leadership tactics. They then asked participants to demonstrate them, right here and now. This was followed by feedback, tips and clips from films including “Dead Poets Society” and “’Any Given Sunday” so that the participants could observe and analyze how people put the tactics into practice. Finally, in groups of two, the participants drafted a speech for a situation that required charismatic leadership. After the training, the researchers had a short phone conversation with each participant to discuss how they wanted to develop over the next few months, especially with regard to charismatic leadership, and each manager drew up a plan accordingly.

After three months, ten employees per manager were asked a second time (the first time had been before the training) to assess the charisma of their managers. The result? Although it was only a short intervention of five hours, and although the employees were unaware of the intervention, the managers had moved up on the charisma scale from 2.45 to 3.00 (out of 5). The employees perceived 65 percent of the managers to be “better than the average,” while only 35 percent from the control group (that had not received the training) were thus rated.

Do people get even better with more training? The result will not surprise you. A second group of participants (41 MBA students, average age 35, with at least 3 years of leadership experience) received a significantly longer training – 20 hours over 7 weeks – with more film examples, role plays and feedback loops. In addition, the participants were filmed while speaking and received the films for discussion and feedback.

This photo example shows the fundamental difference the training made (Figure 7.1).

Figure 7.1 Example of improvement of non-verbal behavior: Before and after the intervention. (From Antonakis et al. 2011; with kind permission of © Academy of Management Learning & Education 2011. All Rights Reserved).

As with the first group, after the training the managers were subsequently perceived as considerably more charismatic.

The conclusion is clear. You do not have to be born with charisma; you can learn it. And if this is true for something as legendary and apparently intangible as charisma, how much more so for all the other skills that a manager needs?

Let us look at one other thing that we can learn – which may initially come as a surprise to you. This goes back to a great story that James Clawson, Professor Emeritus at Darden Business School at the University of Virginia, tells in class:

I played basketball regularly at noon.A fellow player turned out to be teaching sports psychology and invited me to his lecture in front of 500 undergraduates. In the middle of his lecture, he asked: “Does how you feel affect your performance?” Every hand shot up. Wait a minute! What? The logical and next question was, “How do you want to feel?” That question dumbfounded me. I couldn’t sleep that night.How do I WANT to feel? No one had ever asked me that. Not my mother, not my father, nor any of my teachers. It was always “What have you done?” Since then, I’ve learned that how one feels has a big impact on performance, not only for athletes, but for others as well.

Jim then goes on to reflect on how he discovered how he wanted to feel.

It took me 18 months and multiple drafts to figure that out. “Happy” isn’t good enough, it’s too general and non-differentiating. Reviewing my historical high-performance moments, I realized that when I felt “light, unhurried, engaged, and connected to others”, good things happened. I wrote those on a note on my bathroom mirror and on my check book; I wanted to overcome half a century of habitually focusing on results rather than the feel that produces results.

So let me put the question to you. How do you want to feel? One hint: look at how you feel when you are “in Flow. Or when you are “the best of you.”

Clearly then, one can not only master charisma but also learn to develop those feelings that lead to good things and good performance in your leadership role.

Is there a limit to what managers can learn? Well, for leadership I suggest not. Hundreds of academic papers show that communication, appreciation and other leadership skills can actually be learned. By the one wanting to. Even, of course, humility! Otherwise, this book would be a sad story.

Do people already know and believe that they can learn everything? Well, this varies. In my research, I do encounter some severe doubts. Look at this surprising result in Figure 7.2.

Figure 7.2 Limiting Beliefs: Half or more do not believe learning to be possible.

Nearly half of the respondents do not believe that everyone can learn to be a great leader. Only 41 percent believe you can learn personal charisma and only around half believe in personality change.

This shows limiting beliefs that will stop many people from embarking on learning for themselves. In addition, this will hugely influence what change they believe possible in their employees, regardless of the level.

Let me give you some additional arguments for yourself and others. First leadership: Research has shown clearly that (once again) coaching increases leadership effectiveness on average by 55 percent. And that was after only four coaching sessions!3

On the qualitative side, there are dozens of cases, where people decided to change their style and by being persistent, they achieved it. Look at the following examples.

Andrall E. Pearson4 had always been successful. First at McKinsey, then as president and COO of Pepsico and finally at what today has become Yum!, operating more than 40,000 restaurants worldwide. While he had been a tough nut, enjoying to prove that he was the smartest on the room, by picking on peoples’ mistakes, he later came to the realization that this no longer worked for him.

I remember bringing one of our market-research women to tears because I told her that the information, she was gathering wasn’t producing anything. I could just see the breath come out of her. I realized that in today’s world, you can’t treat people that way. If you’re not careful, you might discard a very good person. There are a lot of ways to ask tough questions without killing somebody.

He learnt how the human heart drives a company’s success — one person at a time — and how this kind of success cannot be imposed from the top but must be kindled through attention, awareness, recognition, and reward. As a result, Andy adapted his leadership style to become genuinely interested in people. “Ultimately,” Pearson says, “it’s all about having more genuine concern for the other person. There’s a big difference between being tough and being toughminded. There’s an important aspect that has to do with humility.”

His employees observed the change, believed it and were empowered by it.

LeRoy Pingho5, former vice president at Fannie Mae, took charge of his own personal growth. He wrote an assessment based on the 360 feedback he received. Then he distributed copies to 50 people: bosses, peers, direct reports, his wife. He sent everyone the same message: “You work with me, so you should know my strengths and weaknesses. Also, I’m going to ask four of you to help me work on the things I’m not good at.”

Pingho dubbed those four people his “spotters.” He chose two at his level, one above him and one below him. He met with each of the spotters to review the “flat spots” he’d identified. Then he told them that he wanted to focus on getting better at two of those weaknesses. (He didn’t think he could tackle all at once.) One was active listening: “When I’m in meetings, I’m already through the presentation before the presenter has gotten to the first page.” The second was empowerment: “I want to use the input I get from people instead of disregarding it.”

He asked his spotters to alert him when they saw behavior that related to those improvement goals:

I said, “You don’t have to do this in a formal way. But if you see something, tell me” It’s like being on the high bar. Just knowing that there’s somebody to make sure you don’t fall helps you become more self-confident.

If you put your mind to it, you can adapt your leadership behavior, consequently become a great leader, just as you can learn charisma, and story-telling, and active listening and, and, and… Sure, it takes training, sure it takes time, but then again what doesn’t?

Does the same hold true for our personality? One of the most reliable assessments for personality is the Big Five Personality Test that measures Extraversion/Introversion, Conscientiousness, Agreeableness, Openness and Neuroticism. What is the connection to leadership? Research shows, for example, that extraversion is the strongest and most consistent correlate of transformational leadership6 and that conscientiousness predicts ethical leadership7.

While in the past researchers have focused more on what has remained stable over people’s lifespan, newer studies have looked at whether measurable change in the Big Five can be effected, if so wished. This is an important distinction to make – the key question is whether people want to change their personality. Most people do not wish or aspire to – they tend to settle into it like a comfortable shoe and shift only if this shoe stumbles over uneven ground.

A study from 2021 measured how much change was possible when people actually desired it. They looked at more than 1,500 participants over the course of three months.8 What did people wish to change? About 25 percent wanted to decrease their neuroticism, 25 percent each increase their conscientiousness and become more extroverted. The other 25 percent were spread over the other elements both for increase and decrease.

The result? There was a significant change in the desired direction. Who could see this? The participants themselves both for the increases as well as the decreases in personality traits. For the case of increase also family, friends and acquaintances noticed the change. Not, however for any of those decreases that the participants were sure they had achieved. Why was this decrease in the personality element not observed? This may have to do a) with the study only taking three months, and b) with the fact that, as seen above, we humans are not particularly great at noticing others. How very hard, in our limited interactions to notice the decrease of something….

The message though is clear: If I really want to change my personality, I can. Of course, it is helpful to get support in the shape of education, a coach or even an app – in the study quoted above, the support came from a smartphone app.

This research would also be a support to all those who may be disgruntled at my research shown in Figure 7.3 showing clearly that employees judged their leaders to be significantly humbler when these were extroverted, agreeable, conscientious, open and low on neuroticism. Since we now know that you can achieve shifts in your personality – you can equally well achieve shifts in your humility.

Figure 7.3 Personality traits and humility.

Take-Away: Knowing that something can be learned makes you wise – Many people are not even aware of everything that can be learned - unconsciously, we often assume that some things are natural and thus limit ourselves and others. Research shows that everything that is necessary for leadership can be learned, even something as magical as charisma!

Learning from Errors and Not-Knowing

An interesting question now arises – what can you learn more from? From errors or from weaknesses?

We have a problem with our culture of dealing with errors. It is a mere buzzword. Instead, we are actually still perfectionists.

(Interview No. 68, CIO, 76,000 employees)

We had this bad investment – the biggest machine, we ever bought. People wanted the machine, so in the decision-making process all negative arguments were ignored. Now, no one wants to take responsibility and we find it hard to learn from the mistake. It is still part of the culture that lies are actually wanted and rewarded.

(Interview No. 87, CEO, 7,000 employees)

As we have already discussed, errors are eminently important for companies and sometimes this is understood by the highest echelons.

Peter Senge in his book “The Fifth Discipline” tells the story of Ed Land, inventor and founder of Polaroid who had a plaque in his office that read: “A mistake is an event, the full benefit of which has not yet been turned to your advantage.”9

Surprisingly, people find the use of mistakes not immediately easy to recognize.

Let us look at the research. A study from 2020 shows that people generally prefer to share successes rather than errors. Even in those cases where errors were not connected negatively to the individual. Despite there being no chance of an attack on a vulnerable ego, people still prefer to be associated with successes than with errors.10

Do the test: If you could share either a failure or a success which would you prefer?

Those of you who work in a competitive environment, where there is a greater chance of being humiliated instead of appreciated will probably think: “Of course I only share successes.” But what if you were working in a good atmosphere, with people talking openly about their shortcomings. The underlying question would then be: What do you learn more from? From errors or from successes?

If you think about it that way and look back on your own experience, you will probably have a considerable number of examples where your own failures or those of others have been very helpful to you.

Two examples of learning from one’s own mistake.

The easiest way for me to think something through is to write it down. When I wrote my doctoral thesis, I did exactly that. After I finished the first draft, I went to my thesis supervisor. And he was furious. Why? He had wanted to influence the basic structure, something I had now denied him. Since then, I have continued writing down everything, so I can be sure that I have really thought things through (just like this book). But when I go into discussion, I only take a very rough agenda, so that the person being asked for advice has the chance to comment freely and make suggestions. They do not have to know that one version is already finished. As to implementing their advice, that is not difficult, since this first version never looks as much like a final version to me as it might to other people.

Siemens, together with the French company Areva, is building a pressurized water reactor for Finland at a fixed price of €3 bn. Construction has been underway since 2005, commissioning is postponed annually – the new plan envisages 2022 for a start. The costs have risen gradually from the agreed on €3 bn to more than €8.5 bn. Siemens will probably have to swallow more than €2 bn of this. It seems that Siemens has learned from this concatenation of errors. There was a cancer therapy center in Kiel, which they had already almost completed building. When it became clear that €300 Mio. additional costs were threatening and that the project would never be generating a profit, Siemens pulled out and demolished the almost completed building. They clearly did not want another Finland!11

Yet, sadly, our human brains seem to be designed in such a way that it is hard for us to appreciate the informational value of errors, unless we humbly push ourselves.

This even leads to the following strange result. Imagine an experiment with numerous quiz questions. In the first part, participants are asked to answer different questions. Afterwards, they either receive feedback that their answer was right, wrong or no feedback at all.

In the second part of the study, they can decide what to share with others who are about to embark on the same quiz. The absurd result? A whopping 70 percent actually preferred to share those questions with others on which they had not received any feedback! Where they did not yet know the right answer! Rather than those on which they had chosen the wrong answer. The information that the answer 2 b is wrong is far more useful (because then I know that 2 a must be correct) than that the participant still has no idea, whether the right answer is 3 a or 3 b.12

What is the reason for this? It may have something to do with emotions and memory. Negative emotions caused by mistakes are often and successfully repressed. This may not come as a surprise if, for example, 70-year-olds are asked to remember their high school grades. The past is already long gone, why use neurons for depressing facts. Yet even college students who have just left school remember their grades miraculously (and wrongly) far more positively.13

In contrast, our brain is easily fascinated by the fact that something has remained unsolved, i.e., has not found an answer. This fascination overrides our ratio, which clearly tells us that it is better for others to know which mistakes to avoid rather than to share an interest in the unsolved question.

In real life, however, there is also much value in sharing the not-knowing. Why?

Only, if someone first admits to their self, that there is a lack of knowledge, can they begin to learn. Moreover, when asking openly, it is often surprising how many other people were also struggling for an answer. Once all profess to their lack of knowing – they are already on a common journey to knowledge.

Anne Mulcahy, former CEO of Xerox, was proud to be called “Master of 'I don't know.’” In a program at Harvard Business School, she said that this willingness to be vulnerable to others turned out to be a great asset: “Instead of people losing confidence, they actually gain confidence [in you] when you admit you don't know something.”

This then created space for others at Xerox to offer their expertise and participate in the process of transforming the company.14

So, be prepared to share not only your errors but also your ignorance. The learning effect is enormous.

Take-Away: Mistakes and not knowing are gifts – One can learn a great deal from one’s own mistakes and from those of others. It is worthwhile to learn to love mistakes - as well as to share one’s own ignorance with others.

Knowing How Something Can Be Learnt

Let us look now at how exactly we learn.

Every week I have a feedback round with my head of HR and my assistant. They say what they as well as the employees understood from me in the last week and what did not get through. My appeal to all managers: get one or two people who really tell you what got through.

(Interview No. 37, CEO, 3,300 employees)

If you really want change you need to stop measuring successes and start measuring learning speed.

(Interview No. 127, Managing Director, 85,000 employees)

The virtues we get by first exercising them…. For the things we have to learn before we can do them, we learn by doing them, e.g., men become builders by building and lyre-players by playing the lyre; so too we become just by doing just acts, temperate by doing temperate acts, brave by doing brave acts.

Aristotle15

What does research say about how we learn?

Firstly, we need openness to listen at all. That sounds so easy, but often we do not listen properly.

For one, we may feel threatened by the knowledge of others as seen in this interview.

People find it hard to say that someone is better than them and be truly prepared to learn. Even when they are talking to an expert – they tend to say “sure, sure, sure” – instead of “thank you for this opportunity to learn”. They often duplicate what the experts say and pretend that they already knew.

(Interview No. 27, Head of HR, 57,000 employees)

The problem lies in my pretending to know. If I do this, I will want to protect myself and not ask open questions or probe deeply.

And for the other, we often only hear what we want to hear.

Bob Pittman, the founder of MTV, described in an interview with the New York Times how, in his view, real listening works:

Often in meetings, I will ask people when we’re discussing an idea, “What did the dissenter say?” The first time you do that, somebody might say, “Well, everybody’s on board.” Then I’ll say, “Well, you guys aren’t listening very well, because there’s always another point of view somewhere and you need to go back and find out what the dissenting point of view is.” I don’t want to hear someone say after we do something, “Oh, we should have done this.”16

This type of very open listening is part of the intellectual humility which is vital for any leader. Why? Studies show that those people who had greater intellectual humility were more interested in the viewpoints of others. Which sounds like a rather obvious result. Until you learn that these people were not only more interested in the opinions of others, but also in the actual person holding these opinions. Which led to less condemnation of others and more willingness to be open for interaction.17 There is hardly a more vital prerequisite for good leadership to be found than this intellectual openness!

In addition, with more intellectual humility, people were prepared to read more arguments from the other side and as a consequence learned more about the situation as a whole.18

In general, the intellectually humble are more intellectually curious which sets them firmly on a path of learning.19

How to acquire intellectual humility? A first step may be to realize that many of the smartest people had it. Newton adopted for himself what scholar Bernard of Chartres from the 12th century had poignantly expressed: “We are like dwarfs standing upon the shoulders of giants, and so able to see more and see farther than the ancients.”

Einstein went one step further and took a critical view of humanity as a whole: “As a human being, one has been endowed with just enough intelligence to be able to see clearly how completely insufficient this intelligence is when confronted with the existing.”

Did this attitude make Einstein, Newton or Chartres dumber or less successful? No, the opposite. Precisely because they were able to put their own knowledge into perspective and admit when they were wrong, were they able to develop wisdom. Even Warren Buffet understands when he has thought something wrong and without a hint of pain points the finger at himself. The question of why he didn't buy Amazon shares prompted him to make a clear statement: "Stupidity".20

Where do you find this sort of humility today? In managers who decide to spend the little free time they have in educating themselves. One good example is Dirk Rossmann, former CEO of a large eponymous Europewide chain of drugstores with more than 55,000 employees. He had left after primary school, yet inculcated in himself a yearning for learning. In his autobiography, he tells how he loved to read Nietzsche, Schopenhauer, Balzac, Dostoevsky, Zola, Goethe etc., and it becomes clear that he believes this sort of openness to the world to be a prerequisite for modern leadership.21

As a parent, I believe something similar. Put concretely, I believe it is my duty to give the children an overview of what has been thought and experienced by those that came before us. Only then can they extend and expand into their own future. I have, therefore noted down nearly 400 films and 300 books that I proffer to the children before they leave home. My fear is that otherwise they will neither appreciate what has already been thought nor will they be inspired to build on it. Which focus on the past, of course, does not mean, that the new and modern is not also vital for them to learn. Both lists have many modern films and books on them. Missing out on the modern would be an equal fault. I remember a friend at Cambridge who pompously leaned on the mantlepiece in his room and announced: “All literature you ever need to read was written before the First World War.” He actually wanted to stop with Anthony Trollope (1815–1882) and thought it a great concession to extend the period till 1914!

You can also find the intellectual humility needed for learning in managers who keep on going to seminars. One interviewee, who had actually been nominated in one of my questionnaires by his employees as a humble leader that I must interview, told the following story:

I was working at a company, where everyone was meant to go to two management courses a year. A lot of people did not like this and surprisingly conveniently fell ill around the time of the seminar. When the paid for place was then advocated, I was the only one who typically took it.

(Interview No. 149, Head of EMEA, 7,000 employees).

How different compared to many others, who find themselves too busy and too irreplaceable to take time to learn. I interviewed one manager who was disappointed that his employees were not taking time to approach him at lunch with their topics. “Here I used to be sitting in the canteen and no one came to me with their issues.” To him, that showed a lack of openness, a lack of responsibility and bravery. When asked if now during Covid-19, he could not help his employees to become more open, by arranging online lunches – in a blind date format which is so successfully used in other companies, he said: “I no longer take lunch. I have too many meetings.” Which in the long run becomes too little learning.

Intellectual humility is also found in belief systems. Buddhism, for example, has the term “Shunyata,” which carries within it both the concept of emptiness and openness. The key is not to believe that you have grasped something, but to always be open to the new.22 This is also called the “beginner’s mind,” with which you can perceive everything afresh. How to train it? By asking yourself questions such as: “If I had no preformed opinion about this matter, what questions would I ask to better understand the issue?” Or you could even take your inquisitive stance one step further and say to yourself “I have just come from a different planet, and really need to understand. X or Y.”

One of my interview partners told of how the CEO of an acquired company shadowed him for a day and afterwards said that he had never heard anyone say “Please forgive me, I don’t understand” as frequently as on that very day. His answer was: “This is by far the best way to learn.”

Interestingly, intellectual humility is not correlated with any reduction in self-esteem. Instead, it is the other way round. The lower the self-esteem, the harder people battle with intellectual defeat.23 And the higher the humility, the higher the self-esteem.

Aristotle not only showed as in the quote above that humility can be learned but also points out that the word for virtue, “ethike,” is only one step away from the word habit, “ethos.”24 And habits can be learned through repetition. Ergo: Right action creates virtue.

What does this mean for your learning?

You must build on a solid basis. What do I mean by this? Look at your own strengths and weaknesses while liking yourself as a being. No self-mortification and no self-hate. Instead, the willingness to accept yourself in general. Of course, this sounds terribly esoteric and soft – but do you really think that a Warren Buffet, a Jeff Bezos or a Marillyn Hewson, CEO of Lockheed Martin, regularly have deep self-doubts? Only once you have accepted yourself at a fundamental level, will change or learning lose its feeling of danger.

If you like yourself, and also see yourself in total, any learning will be a sound investment into your personal growth. As we will see in the next chapter, one element of the greater picture is your own life. In total. Whenever we get mentally or emotionally stuck; whenever we focus only on being a victim or on how fearful we are; whenever we cease to learn and adapt; then we are actually not being humble towards our whole life.

To make sure that you find a fundamental acceptance that is neither too self-critical nor too lenient, once again coaching may be an option. If you are interested in seeing how much a coach can open and shake you up without damaging your self-esteem, check out the book by former Google CEO Eric Schmidt about THE Silicon Valley coach, Bill Campbell. He was able to nudge dozens of CEOs roughly and lovingly into the open – and into clarity.25

What else do we need?

We clearly must consider ourselves capable of learning. That sounds so easy. Unfortunately, we often have reservations at our innermost core and as a consequence do not even realize that we are doubtful about being able to change. Like the 50 percent who do not believe that everyone can become a great leader.

Some of these reservations happen automatically without us even noticing.

There is a wonderful study showing this.26 Participants were divided into two groups. Both groups had to judge whether a series of words could make a meaningful sentence. Some examples:

“pupil apt Todd an is pencil,” “the brightest nothing idea everything promoted”
“welcome not morons one are here,” “the room obtuse had white green”

The participants had to read and evaluate a number of these sentences. One group those containing words about wisdom like the first example (apt, brightest) and another group devoted to stupidity like in the second sentence (morons, obtuse).

Then the participants worked on a memory task with numbers. During this they were lying in an FMRI and their brains were being scanned.

What makes this experiment relevant for you? In those participants who had read the negative sentences, the brain was much less perceptive of the fact that it was making mistakes. The area of the anterior paracingulate cortex, which is needed for learning, was only activated in those brains that had anchored themselves as “smart.”

The consequence of this? If I think I am stupid, I actually absorb less information about what I am missing and therefore will be less willing to learn than if I think I am smart. “Stupid will remain stupid!”

The first step to learning is therefore to consider yourself and others capable of learning.

There are various techniques to achieve this. On the one hand, of course, to remind yourself of the many occasions when you have learned something new that you now master. Most of us simply have to think back to puberty to shudder at the huge amounts of things we didn't know back then – be it actual knowledge or how to interact with others or drive a car or assemble Ikea shelves. And observe what is now so easy to do. This can range from cold calling to understanding blockchain to speaking in public. Or look at us after the Covid epidemic, how quickly we all have learned operating, managing and leading remotely.

If you cannot recall any such great learnings, you can at least trick yourself into learning mode. How does that work?

Research shows a path. Let us look at one study to begin with: If I write down the characteristics of a professor, I end up answering more Trivial Pursuit questions correctly than if I either do not write anything down beforehand or think about football hooligans.27 Why? According to the stereotype, hooligans only have fists and no sparks of wisdom! Our brain follows the stereotype of what food for thought we give to our neurons.

This effect is called priming and has to do with the fact that our unconscious is strongly influenced by the environment.

To understand this effect in more detail, take a look at some study results from outside the business world:

If German music is played in supermarkets, considerably more German wine is sold. Hearing French chansons, buyers instead waltz to the door with a Bordeaux in hand.28 By the way, the same applies to the amount of wine purchased – the more classical the music, the more bottles.29 The motto of the brain seems to be: Rosso for Rossini; Belting it down for Beethoven.
It has long been known that women objectively perform worse on maths tasks when they are reminded of the fact that they are women. Why? Because the reminder awakens in most women the stereotype that they – as women – simply cannot do maths.30 And then they can't. Absurd! Yet it also works the other way round: A new piece of research from 2018 shows that women perform better than the control group if they are previously primed by reading a story about a successful man.31
And last but not least: If I prime someone towards young people, they take more risky decisions than if I prime them towards older people.32

In summary, this shows that the decisions and the performance of our brain depend on how we approach a task, with what attitude towards ourselves as well as our environment.

The same applies, of course, in a working context.

In a beautiful study from 2018, researchers showed that a CEO can have a resounding impact on the brain of his employees with one single e-mail. The only difference between this e-mail and his normal weekly e-mail was that his usual 100 words now contained 12 words that focused on performance. Words like: “achieve,” “strive,” “success,” “triumph” and “mastered.” The result: The following week, the employees were 15 percent more productive as well as 35 percent more efficient.33 Did the employees perhaps consciously allow themselves to be inspired by the clever manager? No! When the employees were asked whether anything in the boss's e-mail had been different as compared to the other weeks, the employees were unaware of anything illuminating. Only that the boss “is sentimental,” “he tries,” or more brutally “He is just getting old.”

Clearly then, learning and performing is closely linked to our individual mindset: How much do we honestly believe that we can really learn something new, that we can truly change? How much, on the other hand, do we see our talents and our abilities as set and fixed?

On one level, hardly any of us will have doubts regarding some elements of future learning. Do any of you doubt that you will succeed in understanding the next two or three new technologies. Since all of us have mastered mobile phones, memory sticks and Zoom, we will certainly master holograms or external brains. If, of course, they are presented in a customer-friendly way.

Now the time has come to look at your results from the questionnaire that you filled in at the beginning of the chapter. Over the years I have adapted it from the research of Stanford professor Carol Dweck, to make it more applicable to managers. What you will see is whether your own answers categorize you as someone with more of a growth mindset or more of a fixed mindset.

Before I go into one of the major points of contention in this questionnaire, which is actually the word “intelligence,” I would like to turn to the word “growth mindset.”

For years, Carol Dweck has been investigating whether it is possible to correct unconscious assumptions about one's own intelligence. A widespread assumption is that intelligence is present from birth and that some children simply do not stand a chance in certain school subjects. This explains the often-heard sentence: “I just can't do maths. I am simply too stupid for that.”

Take a closer look at one of her studies34: In a high school, 1,594 young people are divided into two groups. One group is given reading material about the brain, especially about neuroplasticity, i.e., the fact that the brain can be shaped and trained like a muscle. The second group is also given reading material on the functionality of the brain, without going into the subject of plasticity or the trainability of the brain.

At the end of the semester, school grades are compared and now something happens which does not surprise those who have previously understood the Pygmalion effect. With the Pygmalion Effect, somebody else thinks the person is smart or capable of learning. In this case, half of the young people (those that have read about the brain's plasticity) think of themselves as capable of learning. And the impact of this belief is large.

In the “Growth-Mindset” group (“My brain is just a muscle that needs to be trained – by myself”) 10 percent more pupils than in the reference group reached their class goal, in mathematics even 20 percent.

The information about the brain helped one group realize that there was no fixed, biological judgment made about them by their DNA or their neurons. No genetic damnation. Instead, it is all about practice, practice and practice. Any neuroscientist will confirm this: The more I use the same neurons, the more they form a kind of highway, so that the electrical impulses move faster and more effectively along them.

This may also serve to explain why countries that focus more on practicing show higher overall average intelligence quotients per population than those in which there is no structured education.

Look at the numbers: The average IQ in 2022 was highest in Japan and Hong Kong at 106 (where children practice and practice and practice) and lowest in Nepal at 43 (where many people have no access to formal education at all).35

Back to the students in the Carol Dweck experiment: Due to the knowledge about the brain, something like mathematics has become learnable. 20 percent more achieving the goal is already pretty good for a short intervention. That is probably the jump from a D grade to a C and for some from a C to a B.

Of course, I do not want to overshoot the mark – a Growth Mindset will not allow everyone to become an astrophysicist. However, it is important to recognize that a Growth Mindset means that a momentary failure is no absolute judgment of your being. It is only an indication that your muscle has not been sufficiently trained.

It is therefore not surprising that research shows what can be trained in many other areas.36 For example, emotional intelligence37, transformational leadership and, as we have already seen, charisma. Not surprisingly, tenacity also has a measurable positive effect on performance38, with the equally negative consequence that many people who are described as talented do not achieve anything special because they lack stamina.

Therefore, you should not praise anyone for being the smartest in the team or the one who is by nature good with customers. If people are praised this way, fear arises that at some point it may transpire that they are not actually naturally smart or customer-oriented after all. Fearing to be found out that an innate quality is not there typically leads to shirking challenges or avoiding learnings. And in the blink of an eye, the praised ones become objectively worse.

This does not happen if you praise practice, effort or perseverance: “Really impressive to see how dedicated you have been in preparing for the presentation. As a result, it was really mind opening for me!”

If things go wrong, it is not about a missing character trait or an immutable truth about yourself, but only about insufficient preparation.

Back to the questionnaire and your results: About a quarter of the participants get angry after this questionnaire and argue the following: “Newspapers say that intelligence is largely hereditary. I cannot agree that everyone can learn the same amount, or that their own intelligence can still change hugely.”

Unfortunately, researchers have made life hard for us with their phrase of “60 percent inheritability of intelligence”: This seems as if our brain is not so much ours to develop but simply is as it is. The 60 percent, however, does not mean that I can only have 40 percent influence on myself and my understanding of maths and physics. (By the way, even those 40 percent may already constitute a jump from a D to a B.)

The research does not say that the environment or the self only make up 40 percent of each individual – it only says that in the STATISTICAL MEAN 60 percent of intelligence can be explained by inheritance. And we all know that the statistical mean is just a game of large numbers and does not necessarily have anything to do with me or my co-worker.

Instead, research has shown often how much intelligence is influenced by the environment as well as education.

To give just two examples:

In a study of 1,237 identical twins, it was found that one quarter had a similar IQ, half of them had 10 points difference and a quarter showed a deviation of 20 points. This quite enormous difference – between being normal and highly intelligent, or between below average and a solid average – is seen as due to environment and individual adaptations.39 And here it should be emphasized that, due to the same genetic make-up, identical twins are seen as the gold standard for measuring effects.
Since the 1980s, the so-called Flynn effect has been known. This shows that if we were to believe fully in IQ tests, our ancestors in 1900 would have had a lousy IQ of 60. Why? Since 1900, IQ test results have improved by about 3 points every ten years. This means that there has been a global intelligence gain of almost 40 points.40 To truly believe this, at least I lack the everyday proof of greater wisdom in our age. What it shows, instead, is how we humans have learned to think in abstract concepts. Which is exactly what the IQ tests are asking for and loops back to Japan and Hong Kong having a higher average IQ. In these countries, schools and culture put a strong emphasis on the practice of concept application for hours every day, already at a young age.

The implication of this research is that it is possible for people's IQs to be altered by their environment, their mindset and their training. Which, as we have seen, is confirmed by research on humility. Those who are humble in terms of their own intelligence learn not only to be more open, but also learn to perform better.41

Is it actually important that managers are intelligent? We could argue that many of the soft skills a manager needs to learn are actually quite independent of intelligence.

How intelligent is the average manager? You get a first inkling when you look at the degrees managers have. Statistically speaking, physics students have the highest IQ at 130, economic students score at 113 and those studying administration around 109.42

22 percent of students with an IQ of 95–104 completed their studies, 33 percent of those having an IQ of 105–115, and 60 percent of those with a yet higher IQ. Quite some difference, though it also shows that grit can partly compensate for a lower IQ and a high IQ is no guarantee for anything!

Some people even argue that our IQ fluctuates quite considerably depending on how much you actually challenge your brain. Neuroscientists have found that at the end of a three-week holiday, the IQ had dropped by up to 20 points.43

It is also clear that if you keep on using your brain in one specific way, that will give you some remarkable expertise which is typically only related to a high IQ. To better understand this, let us look at something with the bizarre title of “carton Calculus.”44

Psychologists in Baltimore observed workers in a factory. Their IQ scores were rather low. Their job was to process milk orders, packing cartons of 12 bottles of milk each with exactly the right amount of whole milk, low-fat milk and buttermilk. Depending on the order. Experienced workers can do this at tremendous speed bundled with an enormous amount of higher mathematics.

If an order called for 6 pints of whole milk, 12 pints of two-percent milk and 3 pints each of skim milk and buttermilk, an experienced assembler might select a case for 24 pints that was already half-filled with two-percent milk and one-third filled with whole milk, rather than try to prepare the order from scratch with an empty case. Using the half-filled case would enable the assembler to fill the order by removing 2 pints of whole milk and adding 3 pints each of skim milk and buttermilk, for a total of only three [back] bends. Moreover, when the orders were not evenly divisible into cases, the assemblers were able to shift between different representations of the order, a feat equivalent to shifting between different-base systems of numbers.

In other words, the brains of “normal” workers are able to acquire mathematical skills, which outside of work they would never have expected of themselves.

The takeaway of all these investigations: You and your employees can learn most that you or they wish to learn.

Of course, it makes a difference when you learn something. Some talents even seem to be innate because we typically do not really understand the environment of the first few years. For example, Mozart, just as Beethoven and later Yo-Yo Ma, were surrounded by music from birth on. And yet they all worked like fiends at their compositions and/or their playing – and you can see how much better they got year by year.

Regardless of whether you follow the approach of 10,000 hours that measurably successful musicians and athletes tend to put into their performances – the effect of environment and practice on one's own performance is enormous.

The question now is, of course, what are the take-aways for your leadership? When you come to implement strategies, understand customers, communicate with employees – all of which appear less daunting than astrophysics.

Once again, meet Professor Antonakis from the HEC Lausanne. He has interesting results based on 379 executives from 7 multi-national companies.45

Firstly, as regards their IQ which stood at an average of 111. This means that participants had a lower IQ than your typical business graduates and still were successful managers. HEC Lausanne is one of the great business schools. It is also not cheap – which means that companies only send those executives that they value highly internally.

Secondly, as regards their effectiveness as managers. This was assessed by their employees. The result: employees perceived those managers as particularly capable whose IQ was somewhat higher than their own. The best grades were awarded to managers whose IQ was exactly 18 points higher than that of their employees.

If the IQ was below or – and this is of course very intriguing – above these 18 points of difference, the manager was perceived as less effective – both in terms of the emotional as well as the task component of leadership.

What emerges from this is the following: Intelligence and leadership are not linked absolutely, but rather relatively. This means that statistically you need a higher IQ to lead consultants at McKinsey than factory workers in the food industry. And too great a distance to the employees is damaging. Presumably because the role model of a leader no longer works, when the gap is too great.

As an aside, I wish there were research, as to whether this gap can be closed. My gut feeling tells me that a leader who is far smarter by IQ but has also trained their emotional intelligence and their humility may well be able to overcome any “official” gap in IQ between themselves and their employees.

What happens if the IQ of the leader is very high while neither EQ nor humility is particularly strong became very clear to me at one company. The Group-CFO was an ex-management consultant and could laugh heartily at his own jokes which dealt with stochastics and quirky details of US GAAP accounting. His colleagues and employees, most of whom were high-ranking managers themselves, chortled politely and very quickly returned to their own business. They did not get the jokes and had trouble perceiving their manager as particularly effective. As super smart, but not as relevant for their own behavior.

Now, finally, let us return to you and your questionnaire. First of all, this questionnaire is only an indication as to how you assess yourself. If, when talking about intelligence, you only thought about IQ and followed the unreflecting press about its heritability, your results may not show your true attitude.

Therefore, please reflect independently of the results: How much do you believe that people can learn something new?

Do you believe that someone can learn to implement strategy at age 20? Be a great coach at 30? Master excel at the age of 35? Deliver great public speeches at 40? At 43 learn how to do small talk? Become an innovator at 47? Decide to be more conscientious at 50? Change their leadership styles at 54? Be at the helm of a new technology at 57? Start a new business at 61? Become less of a control freak at 63? Develop into a story teller at 67?

You may find that you see some of these as possible, others not at all. By observing this, you can uncover in yourself what research calls belief systems or mental models.

James Clawson from the Darden Business School, whom you already met above, puts it yet more succinctly. He describes what he calls “VABEs,” short for Values, Assumptions, Beliefs and Expectations about the way the world is or should be.46 In discussions with leaders around the world, he repeatedly discovered that managers declare that 95 percent + of peoples’ VABEs are habitual, that is mindlessly repetitive. If Level One is “visible behavior” and Level Two is “conscious thought,” Clawson asserts that our semi-conscious Level Three VABEs are the basis for virtually all behavior and that the vast majority of people live their whole lives “simply” passing on not only their genes but also their VABEs to the next generation – like viruses.

We all have hundreds even thousands of VABEs and these have a big influence on what we believe you can learn and what your employees colleagues or supervisors can learn.

As soon as you draw a line somewhere, you need to be aware of that line and reflect on how substantiated it is. You need to reflect on how much your attitude to learning may limit you as a manager, or limit what you dare to expect from your others around you.

Of course, this is not a plea for having to be able to do everything perfectly. All the more so, since the best CEOs say of themselves that they have always hired people who were better than themselves. This is humility in action. Recognizing your own strengths as a leader while not being afraid when every single person can do something better than you can.

The key point is that it is vital not to believe in fundamental limits for learning. Neuroscientists confirm daily that the brain changes considerably and is able to incorporate new knowledge and skills at any age. What does it need? Enthusiasm and practice. Sometimes it even does not have to be active practice – imagination is enough. Mental piano practice is enough to strengthen the corresponding area of the motor cortex.47 That is why chess players, ballerinas or conductors constantly practice in their heads. Good communicators do the same. Spending time to mentally go through a speech to their employees, what sort of coaching conversation they could have, how to moderate a workshop as to get truly everyone’s thoughts and ideas. And as a good manager you should do the same. Both your perception of others as well as your social interaction with others can be strengthened by thinking, reflecting and practicing before going into action. Remember my colleague at the consulting firm – who thought through his day when on the bus to work? Now it becomes clear why he became so successful: he practiced his presence, his leadership, his communications skills in his head. Over and over again.

One tool for how you can become aware of your unconsciously set limits follows in the next section. At this juncture, the key conclusion is: Intelligence is not an issue for you as a manager or for your employees – it is far more the mindset that counts!

One final important point regarding the connection between your mindset and your goals. Research shows that we actually absorb more new knowledge when we act with a mindset, that the goal is learning per se and not the achievement of one particular goal.48 This does not mean that clear and high targets do not generally lead to better performance. Because they do. For example, in terms of grades49, or negotiation results.50 The higher my goal for a grade or a negotiation result, the more successful I will be. But learning in itself is a different kettle of fish: The key here is openness, not a focus on any specific achievement.

In other words, if you want to learn something new, just set yourself the goal of wanting to learn the new – and not to achieve X percent by day Y.

Take-Away: The mindset counts – A positive attitude towards learning, as well as knowledge about the neuroplasticity of the human brain, are prerequisites for learning. Your IQ does not play a decisive role in most of the competencies that a manager has to master. Instead, it is the mindset that counts. It informs what learning you believe possible for yourself and others. Yet once you have uncovered your areas of fixed mindset, you can see if you cannot find enough examples out there as to also allow this area to become one in which growth is possible.

Meditation as a Tool for Learning and Humility

I had connected to more than two thousand leaders via LinkedIn for writing this book. Once I had the German version of the book finished, I mailed the information about this to many of my contacts, adding a short abstract of my research results. Amongst the numerous reactions was one from a board member from a company with 36,000 employees. He congratulated me and said that he was too busy right now to delve into the matter more deeply. “Also, I have made the resolve to no longer read books. For five years I have been successful in keeping it.”

As a believer in books opening minds and enabling vision as well as empathy that came as a shock to me. My first reaction was negative and I wondered how on earth I would reply to such a message. I thought about some light-hearted joke about humility and openness or one gently prodding at what I saw as hybris. Then I stopped. And reminded myself consciously that I was actually a trained mindfulness teacher and as such was not called upon to make immediate judgments. I decided to let the topic sit with me. And lo behold, in the course of the next few days I realized a number of things: First, since I was an avid reader everyone who was not appeared to attack my choice. A truly narcissistic perspective. Secondly, was I actually saying that readers were in general wiser people and that one could not understand the world without reading? Was I thus calmy designating billions of people as incomplete and somewhat foolish? Had I not realized that not only the wise but also the criminal love books? The murderer of John Lennon was reading Catcher in the Rye, while waiting for the police; the Unabomber loved Joseph Conrad so much that he shaped his writing on him; Hitler and Stalin were both enthusiastic readers.

The consequence: After a few days, I wrote a message back, expressing my genuine thanks for having been given a new perspective on what had been a set tenet for my life. Reading could be good, but did not have to be – and people could be insightful and wise without it.

My gut feeling is that years ago, before I started to train my brain to perceive itself, my neurons would have happily fired me up into a quick and judgmental reply, keeping numerous doors shut to me and my thinking.

Most likely you already expected that somewhere in this book homework would appear. Homework that takes effort but which will enable you to plunge courageously into humility and get better at it day by day.

Nobody said that it is easy to be open, perceive others, keep on learning, see the bigger picture and be honest about yourself to yourself. And we have seen, while more than 80 percent of people believe they are already humble, this is not what employees see.

How do you want to deal with this gap? How do you want to become humble while handling all the other leadership tasks that come up every day?

One way to get there is via mindfulness, which is nothing more or less than the trainable skill of perceiving whatever there is right now in a non-judgmental manner.

Mindfulness has nothing to do with religion or esoterics. Instead, it is practiced by Formula 1 engineers and Navy Seals, by the boards of Google, Amazon, Apple and Beiersdorf. It is also taught and practiced in the English parliament (House of Commons and House of Lords), the US Senate and the German Bundestag.

As a bottom line, you might say that mindfulness is about training the brain to make it easier for it to take an outside perspective. It is as if you set up your balcony inside you from which you can observe yourself and others in a friendly manner. This non-judgmental observing encompasses your own thoughts, feelings and goals, as well as the situation and the people around you.

The outcomes of mindfulness training which have been reliably measured by research include: a greater ability to concentrate, more emotional control, more creativity, increased resilience and the ability to deal with difficult memories and fears.51 Moreover, mindfulness creates a secure ego that is self-aware and does not have to resort to aggressive defenses in order to feel safe.52 And finally, mindfulness strengthens the focus on our surroundings. Which is a vital perspective for a manager to have. One of the studies confirming this growth in awareness showed that people who meditated regularly for a mere three weeks had developed a better perception of others and were far more likely to intervene to support them.53

Responsible for these results are changes in the brain that lead to increased self-regulation.54 Our brain learns to focus less on our actions and thoughts and instead observes itself. As a result, it can perceive all of the following:

What is currently moving me? Where do I feel endangered? Why has my ego suddenly become defensive?
What are my feelings and what established behavioral patterns are being activated?
What is happening around me, in the room, in my team, in my company?

Likewise, the brain learns to perceive that thoughts and emotions come and go, come and go, come and go – and that it is our choice which of these thoughts and emotions we assign meaning to. This choice frees us from short-sighted reactivity, allows us to see the larger perspective, not lose sight of our goals and make conscious decisions.

Mindfulness can be practiced in numerous ways:

Focus on breath: Consciously notice how you breathe, where and how the breath is felt. Learning to register when your thoughts drift off. Not to get angry when they do, merely perceiving the drift and returning to the breath. Again. And again. Digressing happens even to the most experienced meditators. Like eyes see, ears listen, in just the same way, the mind thinks. The goal is to perceive this. The goal is not to have no thoughts at all or to relax.
Focus on being open to all there is: After having noticed where and how you are sitting/lying down, focus on the breath for a few minutes. Then shift to sounds that you can hear within and outside of you. For another few minutes you notice the body, then your thoughts and yet later your feelings. Last but not least, stretch your awareness and give room for all there is. Coming, going, being. It may be a sound, a thought, an itch in the left knee. Learn to perceive all of these without getting involved or judgmental.
Eat consciously: Notice the texture of what you consume, what it looks like on the fork, its scent, what the sight of it triggers in you, how you bite and swallow it, what taste and aftertaste it has.
Do other things consciously: Deliberately climb the stairs; consciously walk down the corridor; open the door with awareness; put your cup down with full intent; type each letter with full focus and alert fingers. Any everyday action can be done mindfully.

Of course, as with any training, more meditation also brings more results. This means that people who meditate for thousands of hours become ever more attentive, ever less reactive, ever clearer. A consolation though, for all of us who may not wish to spend thousands of hours: dozens of research papers show that even a little practice goes a long way.

Many of my participants mention that merely the realization that we do not have to take our emotions and thoughts seriously has given them enormous freedom – and this, they say, is quite easy to recall even when a short breath meditation has once again fallen victim to an emergency call.

Not only do you strengthen your learning with mindfulness, but also humility in general. With mindfulness it is far easier to perceive where I feel threatened. Where I may not be honest with myself regarding my weaknesses. Where I might be too lazy to fight for what I believe in. Where I might have judged an employee as incapable of change. Where I may not believe myself that I can learn something. Where I am focusing so much on the task at hand that I am losing sight of the bigger picture.

Take-Away: Mindfulness, the path to humility – Learning to be non-judgmental in the here and now makes it possible to be open and ready for learning. Practicing this regularly for short periods of time has a lasting effect.

Knowing How to Create a Culture of Learning

Narayana Murthy, former CEO of Infosys:

I have often said that Infosys is an intelligent and enlightened democracy. I collected lots of smart people around me. And, we would decide every strategic issue only after we have had intelligent, informed and passionate discussions. On any non-classified issue, I would invite, in addition to internal experts, outside people with experience in that area, listen to them, argue the pluses and minuses, and then come to an informed conclusion. The important ingredient for a good decision is to create an open, pluralistic and fearless environment where the best debates are possible.55

The Mercedes racing team56

In 2013, Torger Christian Wolff, known as Toto, became head of motorsport at Mercedes. Until then, according to world champion Nico Rosberg, the employees had “been afraid to bring up mistakes.” With Toto everything changed. Born in Vienna in 1972, son of a Pole and an Austrian, who died of cancer when Toto was 15 years old, Toto was already a successful investor before he joined Mercedes.

His key phrase is:

The days when we fail are the days when we learn the most. The pain of losing lasts for many days, usually until the next race. The joy of victory disappears on Monday morning after the Grand Prix. This keeps us moving.

What were his big changes? For one thing he actually introduced meditation. First with 20 hostile and critical engineers. Now more than 1,000 employees practice mindfulness every day. In this way they become aware of their own mistakes without in any way endangering their ego or feeling fundamentally shaken by them.

Toto built a culture in which any error is openly discussed. Those of the engineers. And those of the managers. Time is spent on this not only after a defeat but also after being victorious.

Result: Mercedes has been THE leading racing team for years: eight consecutive titles from 2014 to 2021. Only one other racing team managed to come close to this: Ferrari in the years 1999–2004, and unlike Ferrari, whose driver only managed to win the world championship five times, Mercedes has won eight times.

If you want to create a culture of learning, you have to consciously institute it in yourself as well as others. Research shows that those who have internalized humility often keep a learning diary.57 This reminds us of the story from Wall Street banker as told above who, at least once a week, “objectively” reflected on himself.

In addition, a culture must be created in which open feedback is the norm, and permission is given for everyone to ask hard questions.

An example for this can be found at Rockwell Automation. The company uses a technique called Fish Bowl.58 Managers sit in a circle, surrounded by dozens of other employees. Everyone can step into the inner circle, sit down and discuss a topic. Over the years, this has led to managers becoming humbler and more open. Through discussion they learn to respect and accept the opinion of others. At the same time, the employees feel appreciated in contributing to a culture of dialogue and sharing, which is essential for learning.

To generate a culture for learning, learning must be available to all as well as visibly fostered.

In most companies, people get promoted into middle management because there is a need and an external person is too expensive. Then they are not given any support in seminars or coaching because there are no funds.

(Interview No. 64, Head of Learning, 1,700 employees)

In my old position, I had started a reading circle. Every month we met for an hour and three of us presented a book in 15 minutes each. At the new company I gifted my executives this year with Kahnemann's book, Fast Thinking, Slow Thinking. We now talk about it regularly.

(Interview No. 161, COO, 4,200 employees)

In well-organized companies, of course there will be support at every level. And coaching will also play a key role.

I know I am tirelessly repeating myself as regards using coaches – a consequence of the research and having got a coach myself more than 10 years ago. And having seen the impact in companies where they shift from seeing coaching as a repair mechanism for something broken to a vital external viewpoint.

There are some, that do not yet get it – or find it too strenuous.

In my old company we instituted a coaching process in the management team. After a first very good meeting, my two colleagues said, that this was too unpleasant for them and they stopped it.

(Interview No. 153, CEO, 1,800 employees)

But many see the clear advantages. Like the former CEO of Infineon Peter Bauer, who sought a coach at the age of 43. His trigger was actually an article about conflicts in management teams and the narcissistic personality structures of many managers. This fitted his actual situation, and the writer of the article subsequently became his coach.

I became aware of how certain conflicts affect me and how I can deal with them - better and more easily. This was also a relief for those around me…. I realized that I can better moderate the situation by knowing or understanding what the function of my behavior is and how my contact person will react to me. In coaching we were able to practice this in advance.59

What is the percentage of humble Peter Bauers? There is no reliable data on this. But there is interesting evidence of CEOs who manage start-ups and who are scrutinized as to their strength and weaknesses, their willingness to learn and their ability to see the bigger picture by investors.

In the first phase of funding, 39 percent have a coach, and in the later growth phase over 60 percent!60 For many of these CEOs, learning does not stop with a coach. Consequently, the percentage of CEOs who have a therapist and deal with even more fundamental personal issues increases from 4 to 30 percent.

The important thing is to realize that a learning culture needs to start from the top.

Half of the board went to the same coach – looking at the internal triggers, what made and what hinders each of us.

(Interview No. 68, CIO, 76,000 employees).

Incidentally, the consequences of learning if allowed and fostered are consistently positive, as can be seen from the following examples.

A manager was responsible for profit and loss of a business unit and had reached her limitations. She was taken off the position. One or two years later she got a second chance. Now she was successful. Partly it was due to the fact that the new job was a smaller business unit, but I think it was also because she did not break down as a result of the failure, but used it to develop further. Humility also helps to deal with difficult situations and to use them. It has something to do with resilience.

(Interview No. 8, VP L & D, 22,000 employees)

Three years ago, we changed our learning organization and converted it all to online. There was a manager who was very attached to traditional classroom learning. He absolutely did not want to accept the new version. But then he jumped over his shadow and has been a proponent ever since pushing the topic enormously.

(Interview No. 11, Head L&D, 300,000 employees)

Only when she started to learn, did she understand that her strength did not lie in designing, but in listening and coordinating people who knew more than she did. She learned the basics about the subject, but also learned to let go and concentrate on bringing the team together, selling things internally and making their performance visible.

(Interview No. 12, VP Change, 100,000 employees)

Of course, the company needs to allow this personal learning to take place and not to label people as being one type of person forever. This means the culture of learning truly needs to be pervasive from top to bottom.

Let us look at three more examples where the whole company has tried to become a learning organization.

We shifted the company to a model somewhere between Laloux and holacracy. As the board we now only decide what legally needs to be decided. All else, we pass down to the right level. Initially we had 20 percent who thought this great, 20 percent willing to observe things and 60 percent sceptics. Now we are down to 25 percent sceptics and I am hopeful that we can get another 10 percent. All of us are learning every day.

(Interview No. 118, Board Member, 1,200 employees)

We must all have the same understanding of leadership. So, we have identified 4 styles, and each manager practices all four with an actor. Then we can help each other realize that in this situation the dictatorial style No. 1 is no good and that he or she could try style 3 or 4.

(Interview No. 128, CEO, 600 employees)

We have this small production facility with 500 employees. When I joined them, I expected them to be run by some local families, not really interested in learning. I was so wrong! First of all, the company took care that all managers had seen a lot. They sent them abroad and into education. Secondly, they were truly open to feedback. They said to me: As an economist, you may not really understand what we are doing here – but if you notice anything that we could do differently or better, please tell us. And they meant it! No wonder this is our most profitable factory.

(Interview No. 95, HR Director, 31,000 employees)

A true learning culture must encompass all levels in the company, easy access to learning from the outside, regular discussions of learnings inside and humble leaders and employees that role model learning.

While everyone is clear about wanting to learn and change – I mean, who would be proud if someone told them: “You really are exactly the same as you were in school!” – we sometimes see learning as drudgery and mere duty.

There is a better way to look at it, if you follow how this CEO had a burst-out at a conference in 2011 about electro mobility. “Stop thinking only about the good it does. Stop only thinking that we must do it. Just go and drive an electric car. It is fun, it is fast, it is sexy!”

The same is true of learning: “It is fun, it is fast, it is sexy!”

Take-Away: Consciously create a culture of learning – A positive learning culture doesn’t happen on its own. You have to deliberately work on your own and the company's. Different tools can be used. A learning culture needs genuine commitment at all levels.

Notes
Jones, R. J., Woods, S. A., & Guillaume, Y. R. (2016). The effectiveness of workplace coaching: A meta‐analysis of learning and performance outcomes from coaching. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 89(2), 249–277.
Antonakis, J., Fenley, M., & Liechti, S. (2011). Can charisma be taught? Tests of two interventions. Academy of Management Learning & Education, 10(3), 374–396.
Thach, E. C. (2002). The impact of executive coaching and 360 feedback on leadership effectiveness. Leadership & Organization Development Journal.
   https://www.fastcompany.com/43395/andy-pearson-finds-love.
   https://www.fastcompany.com/34680/how-give-good-feedback?utm_source=postup&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=issue-17&position=39&partner=newsletter&campaign_date=02202021. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Bono, J., & Judge, T. (2004). Personality and transformational and transactional leadership: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89(5), 901–910.
Babalola, M. T., Bligh, M. C., Ogunfowora, B., Guo, L., & Garba, O. A. (2019). The mind is willing, but the situation constrains: Why and when leader conscientiousness relates to ethical leadership. Journal of Business Ethics, 155(1), 75–89.
Stieger, M., Flückiger, C., Rüegger, D., Kowatsch, T., Roberts, B. W., & Allemand, M. (2021). Changing personality traits with the help of a digital personality change intervention. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(8), e2017548118.
Senge, P. M. (1995). Learning Organizations. Gilmour Drummond Publishing, Cambridge.
Eskreis-Winkler, L., & Fishbach, A. (2020). Hidden failures. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 157, 57–67.
   https://www.deutschlandfunk.de/nutzennachweis-fraglich.676.de.html?dram:article_id=231689. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
Eskreis-Winkler, L., & Fishbach, A. (2020). Hidden failures. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 157, 57–67.
Bahrick, H. P., Hall, L. K., & Berger, S. A. (1996). Accuracy and distortion in memory for high school grades. Psychological Science, 7(5), 265–271.
Edmondson, A. C. (2018). The Fearless Organization: Creating Psychological Safety in the Workplace for Learning, Innovation, and Growth. John Wiley & Sons.
Aristoteles, Nicomachean Ethics, II. Book, 1 1103a33-1103b1.
   https://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/17/business/bob-pittman-of-clear-channel-on-the-value-of-dissent.html. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
Porter, T., & Schumann, K. (2018). Intellectual humility and openness to the opposing view. Self and Identity, 17(2), 139–162.
Porter, T. (2015). Intellectual humility, mindset, and learning [Doctoral Dissertation, Stanford University].
Krumrei-Mancuso, E. J., Haggard, M. C., LaBouff, J. P., & Rowatt, W. C. (2020). Links between intellectual humility and acquiring knowledge. The Journal of Positive Psychology, 15(2), 155–170.
   https://www.cnbc.com/2017/05/08/warren-buffetts-one-word-answer-for-why-he-hasnt-purchased-amazon-shares.html. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
Rossmann, D. (2018). "… dann bin ich auf den Baum geklettert!": Von Aufstieg, Mut und Wandel, Ariston.
Crossman, J., & Doshi, V. (2015). When not knowing is a virtue: A business ethics perspective. Journal of Business Ethics, 131(1), 1–8.
Brown, J. D., & Dutton, K. A. (1995). The thrill of victory, the complexity of defeat: Self-esteem and people’s emotional reactions to success and failure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68(4), 712.
Rego, A., Owens, B., Yam, K. C., Bluhm, D., Cunha, M. P. E., Silard, A., … & Liu, W. (2019). Leader humility and team performance: Exploring the mediating mechanisms of team PsyCap and task allocation effectiveness. Journal of Management, 45(3), 1009–1033.
Schmidt, E., Rosenberg, J., & Eagle, A. (2019). Trillion Dollar Coach: The Leadership Handbook of Silicon Valley’s Bill Campbell. Hachette, UK.
Bengtsson, S. L., Dolan, R. J., & Passingham, R. E. (2010). Priming for self-esteem influences the monitoring of one’s own performance. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 6(4), 417–425.
Dijksterhuis, A., & Van Knippenberg, A. (1998). The relation between perception and behavior, or how to win a game of trivial pursuit. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74(4), 865.
North, A. C., Hargreaves, D. J., & McKendrick, J. (1999). The influence of in-store music on wine selections. Journal of Applied Psychology, 84(2), 271.
Areni, C. S., & Kim, D. (1993). The Influence of Background Music on Shopping Behavior: Classical Versus Top-Forty Music in a Wine Store. ACR North American Advances.
O'Brien, L. T., & Crandall, C. S. (2003). Stereotype threat and arousal: Effects on women’s math performance. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29(6), 782–789.
Lungwitz, V., Sedlmeier, P., & Schwarz, M. (2018). Can gender priming eliminate the effects of stereotype threat? The case of simple dynamic systems. Acta Psychologica, 188, 65–73.
Dioux, V., Brochard, R., Gabarrot, F., & Zagar, D. (2016). The young and the reckless: Does priming age stereotype in young adults affect speed or cautiousness? Social Cognition, 34(4), 324–342.
Stajkovic, A. D., Latham, G. P., Sergent, K., & Peterson, S. J. (2019). Prime and performance: Can a CEO motivate employees without their awareness? Journal of Business and Psychology, 34(6), 791–802.
Dweck, C. S. (2006). Mindset: The New Psychology of Success. Random House Incorporated.
World Population Review. (2022). https://worldpopulationreview.com/countries/average-iq-by-country/ Retrieved 12.11.2022
Kelloway, E. K., Barling, J., & Helleur, J. (2000). Enhancing transformational leadership: The roles of training and feedback. Leadership & Organization Development Journal.
Mattingly, V., & Kraiger, K. (2019). Can emotional intelligence be trained? A meta-analytical investigation. Human Resource Management Review, 29(2), 140–155.
Schmidt, F. T., Fleckenstein, J., Retelsdorf, J., Eskreis-Winkler, L., & Möller, J. (2017). Measuring grit: A German validation and a domain-specific approach to grit.
Lyons, M. J., York, T. P., Franz, C. E., Grant, M. D., Eaves, L. J., Jacobson, K. C., & Kremen, W. S. (2009). Genes determine stability and the environment determines change in cognitive ability during 35 years of adulthood. Psychological Science, 20(9), 1146.
Shenk, D. (2017). What is the Flynn effect, and how does it change our understanding of IQ? Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science, 8(1–2), e1366.
Hess, E. D., & Ludwig, K. (2020). Humility is the New Smart: Rethinking Human Excellence in the Smart Machine Age. Berrett-Koehler Publishers.
   https://thetab.com/us/2017/04/10/which-major-has-highest-iq-64811. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
   http://www.changex.de/Article/interview_lehrl_urlaub_macht_dumm. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
Shenk, D. (2010). The 32 million word gap. The genius in all of us: Why everything you've been told about genetics, talent, and IQ is wrong.
Antonakis, J., House, R. J., & Simonton, D. K. (2017). Can super smart leaders suffer from too much of a good thing? The curvilinear effect of intelligence on perceived leadership behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology, 102(7), 1003.
Clawson, J. G. (2002). Level Three Leadership (5th ed., Vol. 36). Prentice Hall.
Pascual-Leone, A., Nguyet, D., Cohen, L. G., Brasil-Neto, J. P., Cammarota, A., & Hallett, M. (1995). Modulation of muscle responses evoked by transcranial magnetic stimulation during the acquisition of new fine motor skills. Journal of Neurophysiology, 74(3), 1037–1045.
Chen, X., & Latham, G. P. (2014). The effect of priming learning vs. performance goals on a complex task. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 125(2), 88–97.
Bipp, T., Kleingeld, A., van Mierlo, H., & Kunde, W. (2017). The effect of subconscious performance goals on academic performance. The Journal of Experimental Education, 85(3), 469–485.
Zetik, D. C., & Stuhlmacher, A. F. (2002). Goal setting and negotiation performance: A meta-analysis. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 5(1), 35–52.
Sevinc, G., Hölzel, B. K., Greenberg, J., Gard, T., Brunsch, V., Hashmi, J. A., … & Lazar, S. W. (2019). Strengthened hippocampal circuits underlie enhanced retrieval of extinguished fear memories following mindfulness training. Biological Psychiatry, 86(9), 693–702.
Verdorfer, A. P. (2016). Examining mindfulness and its relations to humility, motivation to lead, and actual servant leadership behaviors. Mindfulness, 7(4), 950–961.
Lim, D., Condon, P., & DeSteno, D. (2015). Mindfulness and compassion: An examination of mechanism and scalability. PLoS One, 10(2), e0118221.
Tang, Y. Y., Hölzel, B. K., & Posner, M. I. (2015). The neuroscience of mindfulness meditation. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 16(4), 213–225.
   https://corporatecitizen.in/v4-issue9/top-position-how-to-be-a-better-manager.html. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
Der Spiegel, Nr. 11, 7.3.2020. https://www.bbc.com/sport/formula1/48911849. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
Hoekstra, E., Bell, A., & Peterson, S. R. (2008). Humility in leadership: Abandoning the pursuit of unattainable perfection. In Executive Ethics: Ethical Dilemmas and Challenges for the C-Suite.
Anand, A., Walsh, I., & Moffett, S. (2019). Does humility facilitate knowledge sharing? Investigating the role of humble knowledge inquiry and response. Journal of Knowledge Management.
   https://www.coaching-magazin.de/portrait/coaching-interview-peter-bauer. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
   https://www.fastcompany.com/3060235/dismantling-the-myth-of-the-self-reliant-ceo?utm_source=feedly&utm_medium=webfeeds. Retrieved 12.11.2022.

===== FILE 16/23: xhtml%2fc8.xhtml =====

Chapter 8 Seeing the Bigger Picture

DOI: 10.4324/9781003358015-8

Consider yourself light. Think of the world as deep.

Miyamoto Musashi (Japanese Ronin 1584–1645)

Summary

It is easy to focus on your own momentary situation without putting yourself into perspective within the bigger picture. If you truly want to see the bigger picture, you have to see how finite we all are, that we are easily replaceable and that feeling like a victim is not an option. Tools for becoming aware of what is happening in and around you are provided.

My grandfather was a war criminal. Called “the Butcher of Poland,” he was trialed and justly hanged at the Nuremberg trials. My father wrote numerous books against him, so from my teens onwards I knew a lot about him. And soon formulated a burning question for myself: How could I and anyone learn to avoid becoming a war criminal? What steps does someone like my grandfather take that lead to the gallows?

My grandfather was a well-educated man, with some romantic notions about wanting to be important for Germany. Step by step he corrupted himself: with the people he served – he was Hitler’s private lawyer; with the money he yearned for – he loved being minister and General Governor of Poland, all that art and gold and food; with the sense of importance, he craved – he loved inviting famous conductors, composers and chess players to Cracow; and worst of all with the power he desired – he relished being the one able to order incarcerations, deportations or executions.

I think a lot of it has to do with a horrendous freely chosen blindness, an unwillingness to really see yourself and the bigger picture. What am I involved in here? Does this fit with my values? Do I think I'm too weak to get out? Do I feel like a victim of the situation instead of recognizing my own part and doing something about it?

Yet most people find it easier to blame circumstances and see themselves as victim, instead of taking control of that which they can control. Research with 55 war criminals confirms this.1 They all thought circumstances to blame and that someone else in their position would have been even worse. Also look at the balderdash my grandfather wrote on the night of his execution: “My 'guilt' is a purely political matter – but not a legal one. If men were wise, they would see the peace of my death and realize: 'No criminal dies this way!’”2

Pah, he had educated himself to be a criminal in the best possible way and had cowardly swept aside all opportunities to follow a still tenuously existing sense of justice.

Now, hopefully, these days we are not in danger of mutating into war criminals, but my grandfather's lesson remains: We need to understand what it is that we are doing, what we are responsible for, and at the same time to put ourselves in perspective. It is often the bigger picture and for that matter humanity that is important and not we ourselves in our small desires.

Before we go deeper into how this can be done, some proof that many of the managers I interviewed are aware of this issue and strongly active to keep this awareness alive in themselves.

It is important not to take yourself too seriously. If you think you are the smartest person in the room, better change the people around you or the room.

(Interview No. 24, CDO, 6,000 employees)

We are only a small part of the universe. There is much chance involved. We have an obligation to society simply by the fact that we have been born.

(Interview No. 25, VP and Head Global Services, 31,000 employees)

I am the smallest cog, since I produce nothing.

(Interview No. 47, CEO, 3,500 employees)

All of us are small ants only.

(Interview No. 70, CEO, 46,000 employees)

Humility is like golf. There is only so much that I can control.

(Interview No. 60, Director, 8,000 employees)

Many think of themselves as irreplaceable. I think this is hybris. Instead, we are finite, easily replaceable. Therefore, we should always ask ourselves, if we are actually doing the right thing.

(Interview No. 79, CEO, 1,300 employees)

I am happy when I can say that all works without me. I was ill for 7 weeks and all went perfectly.

(Interview No. 129, CEO, 600 employees)

I have been lucky in always meeting people who have supported me by giving me the right tasks. And I was lucky in being healthy. All of which are gifts that have nothing to do with my own skills or my own doing. Once you realize, how lucky you are you can only behave humbly.

(Interview No. 125, Group CEO, 1,200 employees)

There have been many blows of fate in my life, and yet I am blessed by people around me, my talents and my huge amount of luck.

(Interview No. 133, Board Member, 23,000 employees)

Learning humility is often linked to strokes of fate – death, illnesses etc. at least that was the case for me.

(Interview No. 117, Board Member 15,000 employees)

Whatever it is that you do – the question is always: Is it actually of use to the company that you are there?

(Interview No. 142, CEO, 3,000 employees)

What Is the Bigger Picture?

Seeing the bigger picture is a hard thing to do. More than 20 percent of my interviewees said that this was the linchpin of humility. Next to owning up to weaknesses the toughest nut to crack. This bigger picture was what seemed alien to many of the managers they observed and even more so to the employees.

What exactly is the bigger picture? It has numerous dimensions. It means, that we become aware of following:

We are finite: which sounds so simple and is so hard to remember as long as we are in full command and full sail.
We are easily replaceable: Who has not been surprised at how well things can run without others or even oneself if there is a crisis? Or if you have broken a leg, went on sabbatical or had a child – strangely things go on quite as well without us.
Much of our success is due to luck and circumstances: remember the research about the music markets? It was a mere chance which song was downloaded first and this first piece of luck hugely influenced the end result. Also remember the fact that it is not always the most talented that make it to the top – which is also attributed to luck. Of course, you may increase the chance of luck happening to you, by being prepared, by cultivating serendipity – but it is clear that much of what we tend to attribute to our talents is due to luck, circumstances and consequently other forces in terms of economics, politics, people etc. Take a look at the fact that you are employed right now, in an age where there are more options than hunting or farming, in a society not at war, with a roof over your head, an education under your belt and most likely enough technical support at hand that you and your close ones can look forward to a future even if the climate should change yet more strongly. All your doing? Mostly your doing? Some of your doing? 1 percent your doing? I leave it to you to assign the percentage.
Last but not least, the "bigger picture" is about the fact that there is actually a bigger perspective that you can take in relation to all actions and events. Like my grandfather should have taken, in terms of humanity!

Less powerful, yet still real, is the large amount of coincidences and circumstances on which depends what exactly you tell your employee today, how to write their presentation: From your education, your childhood, the state of your brain, your mood, the weather, the colleagues around you, the leader, the role you have taken on in the company, the pressures your company feels in world markets, world markets reacting to fundamental political changes or weather phenomena, the world as part of a galaxy where solar storms and gravity affect the entire system.

A lot to bear in mind, when all you want to achieve is that your team is motivated for today’s workshop.

And of course, we do not have to be aware at every moment that our planet is hurtling through the universe and that our decision to buy a pair of new shoes may be affecting the rainforest someplace. But we also need to avoid the opposite. The opposite is that in the daily hustle and bustle we lose sight of the big picture for ourselves and others.

So how do we fare with the big picture in today’s managers? We already saw in Chapter 3 that this got the worst scores. Only 48 percent of managers see themselves as a part of a bigger whole, only 51 percent understand that not everything can be under their control and only 46 percent want to make the world a better place.

These numbers get better when you look at those managers who are seen in total as humble. There we have 80 percent who see themselves as part of a bigger whole, 73 percent who understand that they do have not everything under control and 76 percent who are trying to make the world a better place – at least in the eyes of their employees.

Let us now look into more of the subcategories of the bigger picture. I asked participants to judge their managers on the statements as shown in Figure 8.1. How to read it? Look at the first column, the one saying 0.91: This means that on average those leaders that were generally seen as humble across all the different behaviors nearly scored – yet only nearly – an agree in the statement: “My manager subordinates his/her individual interests to the larger corporate goals.” In terms of percentage of managers scoring an “agree” or “agree strongly,” 74 percent achieved that, while the unhumble are not much worse at 69 percent.

Figure 8.1 Humble and non-humble managers and the bigger picture.

If you look in detail, there are some good and some shocking results. 97 percent of humble managers are conscious of their responsibility towards their employees, 76 percent seem to know that life is finite, 90 percent of humble managers adapt their behavior to fulfill the necessary tasks and 98 percent are aware that there is more in terms of culture, attitude and approaches out there. Shocking are the unhumble managers in that only 47 percent are willing to adapt their behavior to fulfill their tasks as a manager. That shows utter egocentricity and a total disregard for what the role of a manager entails!

All managers, however, even the humble ones, fail to be aware of how easily we all are replaceable and also of how much our successes are a function of luck and circumstances.

Some of you may mutter discontentedly: If humble managers are still rare, will they not, indeed, be harder to replace? And if they keep on working on themselves, will they not be more favored by their own talents and grit?

This is the moment, when our ego rears its head, wanting to be able to play a decisive role in our lives. Of course, as we discussed above, we have sayings like “luck favors the brave” or “luck is what happens when preparedness meets opportunity.” This means there is much that we can influence in our lives. Yet, I would still postulate that merely the fact that I can take the time and have the chance to write this book is 90 percent due to luck and circumstances. And only 10 percent to my being decisive, willing, stubborn, organized, mentally prepared and working at myself on least some of the time.

So even for those managers seen as humble, it would be worthwhile investing time to understand better, how much luck and circumstances are relevant for them.

What else must we consider in the bigger picture? To understand, where in it managers have a role to play. And because it is so salient, I repeat the quote from the beginning of Chapter 5:

What is my job? To bring people together so that they can successfully get tasks done. If one of my people is better or as good as I, they should do it. What is left for me? To go where it hurts, what no one else likes to do. I am being paid to go there and deal with people who are down or in pain.

(Interview No. 150, CEO, 6,600 employees)

There is often a refusal to really take responsibility for oneself.

(Interview No. 19, Head HR, 250 employees)

Firstly, we need to think about the concept of serving.

If you look at the history of management, one amazing fact stands out – when the first business schools were founded in the late 19th century, they saw the primary task of a manager in caring for their employees and serving society. Profit was a secondary objective.

This makes sense, since the word “administration” contains the Latin word “ministrare,” which means to serve and wait upon.

Owen Young, a lawyer and General Electric's CEO from 1922, even called management “the ministry of business.” He insisted that it was important for “the ministers of business, like the ministers of the church, to recognize their responsibility.”

This focus on serving was seen as broader than the company itself:

The autonomy and authority of professional managers is not only based on expertise, but also on their obligation not to represent the interests of the owners or the employees – and certainly not those of themselves – but to see that the company contributes to the general well-being.3

Today, many managers profess to stand in the same tradition of service. A few examples:

In 2016, Siemens CEO Joe Kaeser said: “A company must create meaning, it must serve society.”4
In 2019, the Business Roundtable, which includes 181 board members of major American companies, issued a statement turning away from shareholder value as the sole yardstick for companies. Instead, companies should be about investing in employees, creating value for customers, dealing ethically with suppliers and supporting the community.5
Satya Nadella, CEO of Microsoft posits: “If Microsoft is doing well, that means we’re creating productivity for that small business somewhere in the world. That alignment, where we do well if we can drive good outcomes for communities and societies and countries around us – that, to me, is at the center of it.”6

Nevertheless, in the everyday life of every manager, it is often the case that goals – the larger goals that go beyond the here and now – are often lost sight of. It is too easy to get caught up in the implementation of a project, in monthly or quarterly figures, in employee feedback meetings. This is where the larger goal or the perception of the interrelationships is lost in a flash.

Some of the interviews show the danger:

The Corporate Center has a tendency to explain the world to others. You can be self-confident, but the real added value lies elsewhere. This understanding is humility for me.

(Interview No. 11, Head L & D, 300,000 employees)

Many lack the reflection that we are only a small part within the company and should deal with the resources carefully. It is amazing how often business dinners are booked or financial packages decided on that you would never go for if it was your own company and your own money.

(Interview No. 92, Global Head, 150,000 employees)

What examples are there of a bigger picture seen and lived?

For the politician Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus, the goal was to serve the Roman people. But only for as long as he was truly needed. Never for his own ego. Consequently, he twice allowed himself to be called from his cornfields to the Senate of Rome in order to rule as a dictator. As soon as the crisis was over, he returned to his plough. This quality of letting go is something that one would wish for in some company managers
Alex Okosi, media mogul, understood at a young age that his bigger picture was the team. As a teenager he had been proud to have scored 38 out of 50 points for his basketball team. When the coach chided him on what kind of teamwork that was, the penny dropped. Since then, the focus of his management philosophy became being a “player coach.” If this is successful, he believes success will follow: “If I stay focused on helping others be successful, I get better results and I enjoy myself more.”7
An example from another world: for director Luciano Visconti, the greater goal was to make the invisible visible. To achieve this, the meals in his great film “The Leopard” were actually real; the spaghetti cooked to perfection, the wine bottle genuine and the glasses brimming with real wine.8
Sylvia Metayer, CEO Corporate Services Worldwide Sodexo and in charge of 120,000 employees, focusses on the company: “I’m learning that to be a CEO is to be a servant. My main job is to support our employees, and be a support to our clients and to our consumers.”9

Before we get to how you can actually perceive your very own bigger picture, one vital point: it is important to remember that the situation you find yourself in has been chosen by you – in other words, that you are not a victim.

When you meet managers in seminars, there are often participants who are very angry with their situation. This may be the next higher level, the processes, the colleagues – whatever it is, you realize that people often agonize over and suffer from the situation.

Typical statements are: “I can't do the right thing, because board member Miller...”; “If the processes weren't so stupid, I could satisfy the customers much sooner”; “The personnel department hardly leaves me any leeway as regards to bonuses to motivate my employees – no wonder Ms. M quit her job for this reason.”

Do you notice what is happening here? The managers feel robbed of their ability to act and instead see themselves as victims of circumstances.

In one company this was particularly striking. Innovation was the topic of the seminar. Participants were the management boards and top managers of the subsidiaries. In addition to the professors from the business school, the group management board was present for one afternoon each time. In each of the nine rounds, the participants from the subsidiaries demanded a budget for innovation from the group management board. And each time, the group management board said that innovation naturally should take place within the companies. So please let the management boards of the subsidiaries try out the innovation on a small scale within their own budgets. If these pilots went well, they would be free to come to the group management board again.

The result: Nothing happened.

The management boards of the subsidiaries did not feel supported by the group management board and saw themselves as victims who were not empowered; the group management board saw itself as victim of the inactivity of the management boards of the subsidiaries.

A perfect stalemate. And one which reveals that both sides were not actually taking responsibility for what they believed to be vital, but rather preferred to be a victim of the other side.

See, how one can go about this differently. Look at this example.

An employee has an idea. He presents to his boss who fails to agree. Believing himself still to be right, he conceives of a way to test the new system in one geographic market. He comes back to his boss to ask for a go-ahead and support.

This time, though, he left his charts and data at home. He just told her why he believed in the idea and how its merits could be tested with low risk. To his surprise, the crusty distribution chief started to offer help in designing the experiment. “When you came to me last week,” she said, “you were trying to convince me. Now, you're willing to test your idea. I still think it's wrongheaded, but I can see you care a great deal. So, who knows, maybe we'll learn something.”10

From feeling like a victim to making a (successful) change possible.

It is actually quite a miracle how quickly even the most clever, active and alert people can perceive themselves as victims. Just ask yourself the following question: When during the course of last week did you feel like a victim either at work, on the way to work or at home? It may be something as trivial as that the doors of the lift just close as you walk towards it so you have to wait for 10 minutes and are late for a meeting. Or that your computer breaks down and IT does not return your emergency call for a whole hour. Or that your budget is reduced by 20 percent as a result of cuts in all supportive functions?

What is the result of you seeing yourself as a victim? Typically, anger and a feeling that there is little that you can do and influence.

How do you overcome this sense?

Realizing that you are where you are voluntarily! Realizing that you have chosen this very job, that you can change it at any time – even if that may be a hassle and not easy. And that in general nothing, the lift doors, the budget cuts, the ITs processes are directed personally against you.

Feeling as a victim is only the result of your thoughts and your reaction. If you change your reaction, you stop being a victim. In the example above: You can choose to be grateful to the lift doors because now you can gather your thoughts one more time before the upcoming meeting. You can also be happy about your broken computer because while you are waiting for IT you can finally pay a visit to team 3 that you had planned a long time ago. And what better way to get your team to shift into innovation modus than if you tell them about the 20 percent budget cut.

If you approach work with that attitude, it is no longer “I'm not allowed to do this” or “X prevents me from doing this.” Instead, it is “How can I do this?”

For example: “How can I ensure that my employees are more motivated?” As soon as I ask the question like this, a financial bonus is just one option and probably not even the best one.

“How can I test this innovation with my existing resources?” leads to different thoughts and actions. Research even has a term for this type of “make-do.” It snappily calls what happens when I have to create something with only few resources “frugal innovation.” And can prove that the more our brain is set limits, the more creative we become. Boundaries and difficulties foster our creativity and lead to better results. Would you like a few examples?

Objectively better company slogans ensue if participants are only allowed to use five words for them instead of an unlimited number.
Children's book author Dr. Seuss wrote his best book “Green Eggs and Ham” after he had accepted a bet to write a bestseller with only 50 words. Feel free to count.
If people are assigned certain words to include, the poems they write are objectively better than if they were completely free in their choice.11

This means that one must consciously accept the restrictions and be willing to work with them. Not like the above-mentioned top managers, who only wanted to start thinking once they had received an official budget. But instead, like in the following example.

In 1999 Renault manager Jean-Marie Hurtinger took up the challenge of building a Renault that could be sold profitably for $6,000. This was at a time when even the smaller Renaults cost around $12,000. Less than five years later he and his team had fulfilled the board's mission.12

In other words, by accepting the limited situation, you stop feeling a victim and regain control over your actions. This way you also take real responsibility for what you do. And as we have seen above, humble managers and humble employees are more willing to accept full responsibility for their actions.

The Bigger Picture in Everyday Life

Let us now look at what the bigger picture entails in everyday life.

Because the picture is big, I must take care not to drift off into lethargy or fatalism.

(Interview No. 109, MD, 1,800 employees)

I know a CEO who reminds himself before any investment decision: Assuming this was my money, what would I need to have a good feeling about the investment.

(Interview No. 122, Board Member, 2,000 employees)

I must never confuse my position and career with whom I am.

(Interview No. 113. Ex VP, 295,000 employees)

How do you find your own bigger picture and make yourself aware of it in the stress of everyday life?

First of all, you have to be aware of your role. What do I mean by this? Have a look at the following example.

Emilio Galli-Zugaro, the head of communications at Allianz, was walking towards his office at the headquarters when he heard a steady ringing tone.13 It was coming from the room of his employee who was in charge of the Allianz staff magazine. He rushed in, answered and solved the caller's problem in a quarter of an hour. Only then did he see that Nils, an employee from the communications department of an Allianz subsidiary, had been sitting in the room the whole time. He angrily shouted at him, why on earth he had not answered the phone. “Never heard of customer focus?” Nils justified himself stutteringly: “But that wasn't my phone.” Galli-Zugaro barked back: “Was it mine? But I answered it!” Nils kept trying. He didn't know what he should have said; he wasn't from the holding company; he didn't know if he was breaking rules by picking up and say something wrong.

As a communications expert, the story came at just the right time for Galli-Zugaro. At last, he had a vivid piece of evidence for a disastrous lack of customer focus that he could use in his mission to make Allianz more customer-oriented.

Cut. Please think for a moment about where the humility debacle lay. It took Galli-Zugaro a whole summer to realize it.

Ready?

In fact, the disaster was not so much the employee's fault as the fault of the company's culture. As head of communication, Galli-Zugaro had an instrumental role to play in how this culture was shaped. After reflection he realized that he had failed to strengthen employees in such a way that they could be courageous and feel able to take initiative, such as answering the phone. Neither had Emilio Galli-Zugaro listened to the employee – in other words, he had not been the Listening Leader that he wanted so much to be. Put concisely, zero empowerment, zero psychological safety. It was an internal communication disaster on not just one level, but on several.

Once Galli-Zugaro had recognized his role in this bigger picture, he set out to change the culture – and talk openly about his initial wake-up call.

Typically, there is a problem of perception. People tend to perceive primarily what they focus their attention on. Humans, therefore, easily fall prey to their own frames and those of others. Do you remember the frame that CEO Anderson set? He wanted safety but asked about finances. In doing so, he shifted the attention of employees towards finance and far, far away from safety.

The same holds true of other foci: If I focus on streamlining processes, my culture of innovation goes out of the window. If I drive cross-selling to every customer, ethical standards will suffer.

So, it is imperative to focus yourself and your employees on the bigger picture.

That is, the leader must invest time and brainpower to consciously perceive the entire situation and then take the right action.

Sometimes, for example, a right action may be to postpone a decision.

After a discussion, Alfred P. Sloan, former CEO of General Motors, said to his colleagues:

Gentlemen, I assume we are all in agreement on this decision. I therefore propose that we postpone further discussion on this matter until the next meeting to give us time to develop disagreements and perhaps some understanding of what this decision is really about.14

He obviously perceived that they had not yet understood the implications of the decision and forced a pause for reflection.

The Antarctic researcher Shackleton, on the other hand, had his bigger picture influenced by the danger of death. Once his ship Endurance was locked in by ice, his main goal was to survive. With every single one of his men. To achieve this, a positive mood of the whole team was vital. So, he conducted entertainments, had competitions, and more importantly, he arranged a sleeping bag lottery. There were two types of sleeping bags, the inferior wool bags and the far superior reindeer ones. The lottery was rigged in such a way that the crew got “lucky” and the officers had to bite the bullet.15 The realization: If the crew slept well, this increased the chances of survival for everyone.

It is also clear that these big pictures come in layers… there is a present one as for Shackleton to survive and a longer term one – explore the Antarctic. That means also for you there will be different and changing elements of the larger picture.

What can help you in the process of perceiving them?

Step one: Generate in yourself the feeling of awe.

Awe is an emotion that research has only recently begun grappling with. It is identified as the feeling of wonder and amazement at being in the presence of something vast that transcends one’s current understanding.16 For studies, the feeling is typically generated by watching videos of nature, often combined with virtual reality glasses or by actually being in nature. The effects of awe are numerous. Awe reduces the focus on self, increases pro-social behavior, lets money appear less attractive, increases creativity and allows people to see their weaknesses more clearly than their strengths. Therefore, a sense of awe actually measurably increases humility.17

Neuroscientists have been looking at what happens in the brain during feelings of awe and have seen that our default network, i.e., that which causes us to ruminate and focus on ourselves becomes less active.18 Interestingly this is the same effect that happens under the influence of psychedelic drugs. These are nice prospects for the next team event, although it should be noted that the combination of drugs and psychotherapy is considered even more effective.19 And that would make for a very peculiar event.

In a more practical vein, how can you inspire awe in yourself in order to generate the bigger picture?

First of all, you can allow yourself to see the vastness of what there is around you. In terms of astronomy, geology, human history and nature. For some, it is a screen saver of our galaxy that inspires this sense of awe. Or a picture of our earth viewed from space. For others, it may be a picture of the family on a mountain top, or a plaque on the table commemorating the 100th birthday of your company.

Whatever it is, it is worthwhile to find something to inspire awe in you, since then you will find it easier to put yourself into perspective. Into perspective as regards your ego, your joys and also your sufferings. It also helps to see that we only have this one life. (Hopefully, I am not alienating some readers here – even if we did have several lives, awe would help you even more in seeing that our actions today have consequences for our future lives…)

It also helps to strengthen our understanding of what the world contributes to us. One of my interviewees expressed this succinctly:

I run a CSR program at the local business school. I may believe this position is about me as a person. But how can I say this? If I did not carry the business card of my company, no one would care a whit for me. This logo which awards me the opportunity of being allowed to teach has been generated by thousands of people.

(Interview No. 29, Group Head Customer Experience and CSR, 27,000 employees)

Step 2: Now look into the different levels you live in. I suggest to start with yourself and then consider what and to whom you feel connected and what roles you have.

See the Bigger Picture
Yourself

It is immensely important to see the first bigger whole as yourself. You should never lose sight of your own worth and value.

I have humility in respect to my own life. As a consequence, I need to see that what I do actually makes sense in the grander perspective.

(Interview No. 79, CEO, 1,300 employees).

The task is to not waste yourself, not allow yourself to be trampled on; if something is taken away from you in terms of tasks, status or even people, after a reasonable period of mourning you are, in my view, obliged to your own self not to remain down but to get up again. If you do not do this, because you perceive yourself as beaten, or as too weak to take action, then you are not paying yourself the respect that is due to this unique life of yours.

This does not exclude that there may come times when you may need to “sacrifice.” This can be something small such as canceling your dinner in order to stay with the team or canceling your team meeting in order to stay with the family.

It may also be something bigger, such as giving up what you wished for, for your children, for your family or for your commitment to truly serve others. One impressive example for giving up your position as a service to the greater whole came from one of my interviews.

The new director was hired to lead the company into a digital future. Once on board, she discovered that it was less an issue of innovation but one of survival. The situation was bad, insolvency threatened and she had to look for outside support. Two offers came to the table. One that would save one third of jobs plus her own, the other which would save all jobs apart from her own. To her the choice was clear. She ensured a smooth hand-over to the buyers and found herself a new job.

(Interview No. 119, CEO, 200 employees)

The choice made above also had something to do with her idea of what she wanted from her whole life. Which of the two choices allowed her to have a calmer heart and happier head? To her it was clear. Others take the mirror test.

I need to be able to look at myself in the mirror. So, I have decided to never lie anymore – and life has become much better.

(Interview No. 150, CEO, 6,600 employees)

You need to look at what humility means in relation to your own life. What values, what duties do you have, how do you want to look out of the mirror? Now and at the imagined end of your life?

Your Role

Next is what you have taken on. This may be responsibility towards your family and friends, or – more apt for this book – your role in the company. This entails reflecting on what this role requires.

As a manager I need to take care of the soft topics – no longer spend day and night looking at numbers, data and facts.

(Interview No. 41, Group CEO, 1,800 employees)

There are too many jobs involved, so I need to make myself replaceable.

(Interview No. 51, CEO, 500 employees)

Our task it to build our brand. The brand is above all so we have to do everything to serve it. There are some managers for whom their own well-being is the most important – such people have no place here.

(Interview No. 63, Head of supervisory board, 2,600 employees)

It is my task to take the brunt for my people. There are some managers who wish to shine, take on way too much and dump it on their team. I need to know what my team can do and not overstrain it.

(Interview No. 111, CIO, 1,000 employees).

Our CEO has a very strong sense of responsibility for the legacy of the company. We have 170 years of history behind us and our goal is to celebrate our 200th anniversary as a fully independent company. He bases his decisions on this, i.e., he does not focus only on quarterly results, but looks at the bigger picture.

(Interview No. 8, VP People Development, 22,000 employees)

Whatever it is that you think your role requires of you becomes your bigger picture by which you must measure your everyday work. This may mean standing up for your department or your position, where that is needed. It may mean sacrificing some of your resources where needed to the good of the whole company and not act like in this example.

We had a restructuring and needed free positions to match a reduced head count. Not one of the 44 department heads offered to give up positions. And this despite some of these posts having been left empty for more than a year. So clearly, they were not needed for what the heads saw as their bigger picture. Even when speaking to each of the 44 in person, their ego prevailed. So, we ended up having to decide from the top.

(Interview No. 120, Head Personnel, 10,000 employees)

It may also mean, stepping on someone’s toes.

I had a let one of my best friends go, because he could not lead as we needed to in our new culture. We are still good friends outside, though.

(Interview No. 144, Director, 20,000 employees)

Or staging an event in such detail, that the perspectives of employees is successfully shifted:

We had just been spun-off. There was a severe danger of this spin-off going under. For the first meeting, we were asked to come to a huge hall. After a while the three board members entered. We all fell quiet and looked at them expectedly. They went to one of the walls and stood quietly with their faces away from us, looking towards the wall. This lasted for a number of minutes, which felt very long. Then they turned round and one said: ‘We can look at wherever we want to – in the end we are only looking at ourselves. Only we together determine the fate of this company – no one else.’ That had a huge impact on us – it felt it was not only the board but us who needed to work out how to get this company of the ground.

(Interview No. 107, CEO Subunit, 12,000 employees)

The World and Beyond

For many there is also something transcendent, something spiritual and something connecting for all of mankind. This may be influenced by religion, by personal experiences, by philosophy.

There were quite a number of interviews, in which managers pointed to this bigger spiritual element and this bigger connectedness which Einstein tried to put into words.

A human being is a spatially and temporally limited piece of the whole, what we call the “Universe”. He experiences himself and his feelings as separate from the rest, an optical illusion of his consciousness. The quest for liberation from this bondage is the only object of true religion. Not nurturing the illusion but only overcoming it gives us the attainable measure of inner peace.20

For numerous, therefore, there was a much bigger purpose to pursue.

The aim must be to elevate human consciousness. This is also the task of the company culture.

(Interview No. 55, Director Global Learning, 34,000 employees)

It is all about becoming human-centric and a sociocracy. Supporting others in their catharsis and their path to enlightenment.

(Interview No. 30, COO and Chief Transformation Officer, 53,000 employees)

Just to make it clear – these statements came from managers in profit-oriented organizations, not NGOs.

This type of perspective on the world supports what Frederic Laloux and other researchers seem to find – that there is a change of consciousness – towards a different way of leading.

One caveat: already the famous management thinker Peter Senge, who coined the term “Learning Organization” seemed to spot this type of elevated consciousness in the 1990s. So it may be that in every age there are and have been humble managers who manage to see a connection and that the number remains more or less stable.

On the other hand, it may equally well be that we are in a Gartner hype cycle. This is a useful tool to look at technological innovation working as follows: You have rising hopes for a new technology. Soon, it seems to be able to solve everything – that is the peak of inflated expectations. Then comes the drop into the trough of disillusionment. Nothing works as promised, nothing happens – let’s give up on the idea. And now, when hardly anyone is looking, there is a steady climb to what is called the plateau of productivity (Figure 8.2). Want an example? Look at voice recognition. Hailed in the 1990s as one of THE greatest things, it initially failed to deliver, was discounted, nearly forgotten and now has quietly and powerfully emerged as Siri, Alexa and dozens of applications.

Figure 8.2 Gartner Hype Cycle adapted for humility.

Possibly all these years of neuroscientists researching, leadership coaches coaching, mindfulness teachers training for the here and now, organizational psychologists bolstering actions with research – possibly we are finally climbing out of the trough of disillusionment towards the plateau of productivity. Which in this case would mean indeed an elevated consciousness of managers, expressed in greater humility.

Once you have determined what your bigger picture is, for your own life, your role and the world, there are numerous tricks to keep it alive.

I know an executive who keeps a miniature skull on his desk. This is a daily reminder that her own lifetime is limited. The result: she devotes herself – as far as possible – only to those projects that make her proud at the end of the year.
Another manager sets himself goals for three years, which he also carries written on a laminated card in his wallet. He typically achieves the goals after 2.5 years, rests for a month and then sets himself new goals.
One manager wanted to contribute to making the world a measurably better place, and moved to a company that is involved in renewable energy.
Another manager has pasted the words of coach Bill Treasurer on his screen. “When you’re a leader your primary responsibility is to leave people and the organization better off than when you found them.”

In addition, there are several questions that you can ask yourself again and again to reduce the risk of forgetting your bigger picture.

If I imagine in this very moment of time that I am 80 years old, what does this eighty-year-old want me to do? What should I focus on from her/his perspective?

This is a kind of ex ante ex post approach which helps you to get up to speed on tasks or changes that you actually know are right but which are hard to imagine at this very moment. In addition, the projected octogenarian has a very good insight into what really matters in life and this may often have more to do with other people, with being part of something, than one is consciously aware of at the moment.

It is the year 2030 and I am dissatisfied with myself – why?

This is a so-called pre-mortem, which is often used in organizations to understand where there are weak points in project or a strategy design and implementation. It can also be applied easily to you as a person. This question can help you see what it is that you actually want deep down and what you should therefore get working on today.

When I leave my job, what would I like my employees and colleagues to say about me afterwards? How I was, what I achieved?

The check if a) I am perceived the way I would like to be and b) if I am even thinking about my effect on others.

What am I thankful for – and what do I have to do to keep that which I am thankful alive?

See all the good things around you. In everyday life we often do not spend much time seeing what there is and tend to notice only when whatever it was has disappeared. If you notice now, you can take action. That is, defend the company culture that appears to be crumbling. Put some weight behind values that are weakening. Or spend more time with your team or your family in order to ensure that both remain strong and connected to you.

Whom do I feel I belong to? Myself, family, friends, my team, the company, customers, stakeholders, my country, the world, humanity, all beings? What should I do for those to whom I feel I belong so that I can live well with myself?

This helps to put yourself in the wider context and to become aware of possible obligations towards yourself and others.

Where do I let myself be carried away towards thoughts and deeds that are only functional and not significant and meaningful?

This is against inner laziness and our tendency to take the easy way out.

Take-Away: From awareness comes the bigger picture – from awareness comes the bigger picture. It is difficult to see in everyday life where the bigger picture lies. It is useful to regularly foster awe in yourself, spend time on identifying your big picture and learning to keep it alive. For this you need to ask yourself numerous questions to ensure that you are still moving into the right direction and have not lapsed into a blind automatism.

Notes
   http://www.sueddeutsche.de/wissen/kriegsverbrechen-psychologie-des-massenmords-1.3049560-2. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
Frank, N. (1993). Der Vater: eine Abrechnung (Vol. 12500). Goldmann.
Khurana, R. (2010). From Higher Aims to Hired Hands: The Social Transformation of American Business Schools and the Unfulfilled Promise of Management as a Profession. Princeton University Press.
   https://www.focus.de/finanzen/boerse/wirtschaft-und-geld-wir-werden-nicht-aussterben-wie-die-dinosaurier_id_5708692.html. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
   https://opportunity.businessroundtable.org/ourcommitment/. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
   https://www.cio.com/native-link/the-living-enterprise/collection/becoming-a-digital-leader/article/lessons-digital-leaders-can-learn-from-the-covid-19-pandemic. Retrieved 12.11.2022.
Treasurer, B. The Leadership Killer: Reclaiming Humility in an Age of Arrogance. Little Leaps Press, Inc.
Servadio, G. (1981). Luchino Visconti: A Biography. Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
   https://www.inc.com/marcel-schwantes/heres-a-top-10-list-of-the-worlds-best-ceos-but-they-lead-in-a-totally-unique-wa.html.
Senge, P. M. (2014). The fifth discipline fieldbook: Strategies and tools for building a learning organization. Currency.
Haught-Tromp, C. (2017). The Green Eggs and Ham hypothesis: How constraints facilitate creativity. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, 11(1), 10.
Radjou, N., & Prabhu, J. (2015). Frugal Innovation: How to do more with less. The Economist.
Interview am 16.3.2020 sowie Zugaro, E. G., & Zugaro, C. G. (2017). The Listening Leader: How to Drive Performance by Using Communicative Leadership. Pearson UK.
   http://www.economist.com/node/13047099.
Johnson, K. (2011). The Endurance Expedition, Edina.
Keltner, D., & Haidt, J. (2003). Approaching awe, a moral, spiritual, and aesthetic emotion. Cognition and Emotion, 17, 297–314.
Piff, P. K., Dietze, P., Feinberg, M., Stancato, D. M., & Keltner, D. (2015). Awe, the small self, and prosocial behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 108(6), 883. Jiang, L., Yin, J., Mei, D., Zhu, H., & Zhou, X. (2018). Awe weakens the desire for money. Journal of Pacific Rim Psychology, 12. Rudd, M., Hildebrand, C., & Vohs, K. D. (2018). Enhances creativity Chirico, A., Glaveanu, V. P., Cipresso, P., Riva, G., & Gaggioli, A. (2018). Awe enhances creative thinking: An experimental study. Creativity Research Journal, 30(2), 123–131. Stellar, J. E., Gordon, A., Anderson, C. L., Piff, P. K., McNeil, G. D., & Keltner, D. (2018). Awe and humility. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 114(2), 258.
van Elk, M., Arciniegas Gomez, M. A., van der Zwaag, W., van Schie, H. T., & Sauter, D. (2019). The neural correlates of the awe experience: Reduced default mode network activity during feelings of awe. Human Brain Mapping, 40(12), 3561–3574.
Hendricks, P. S. (2018). Awe: A putative mechanism underlying the effects of classic psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy. International Review of Psychiatry, 30(4), 331–342.
   https://www.thymindoman.com/einsteins-misquote-on-the-illusion-of-feeling-separate-from-the-whole/. Retrieved 12.11.2022.

===== FILE 17/23: xhtml%2fc9.xhtml =====

Chapter 9 The Limits and Disadvantages of Humility

DOI: 10.4324/9781003358015-9

At home I am a nice guy: but I don't want the world to know. Humble people, I've found, don't get very far.

(Muhammad Ali, Boxer 1942–2016)

Summary

There are limits and disadvantages even to humility. Many of these can either be circumvented or are actually par of course. Nevertheless, it is important to know that in some situations the positive effects of humility can be counteracted by oneself, by others or the prevailing culture. Where humility is not genuine, where employees feel too far removed from the manager, where competence is lacking or a different image is important, there it may be difficult to express some elements of humility.

It was a sunny afternoon in May 2020. By then we had all got used to having our meetings online. The interview was with the head of HR, let us call her Clarissa, of a company with more than 300,000 employees. When it came to the question, of whether she had seen limits of humility, she sighed and said:

I have a case, that seems to fit perfectly. A colleague of mine is running a very critical and risky project. He has a strong conceptual background and that has driven him to involve all the relevant stakeholders and groups in his discussions. He has also been very careful to run pilot phases in various business units. At the same time, he has coordinated with the Executive Board and co-opted all stakeholders from the beginning.

If you look at it from the outside, he has done absolutely everything right. Nevertheless, the project is currently only partially successful. It may be that this is the usual valley in the change process. But perhaps it is something else. When we talk - only the two of us – there is quite some emotion in him. A strong annoyance at all of the objections voiced in the process by the people involved comes through. It makes me think, that his humility is actually not quite authentic.

Hearing that story made me realize that next to all the benefits to humility, I should also focus on whether humility has boundaries, downsides or only works under certain conditions. For example, the question arose, if humility has to be genuine or if you cannot simply act it? The above story would indicate that this is not possible, And, are there some people with whom humility works more easily than with others?

This chapter is dedicated to what research so far has found on a dark side of humility. Some in the interviews doubted it, while others saw clear problems in being humble in front of some employees.

After 22 years at C-Level, I can actually see nothing negative in humility.

(Interview No. 110, CEO, 500 employees)

For political reasons one of my employees was nominated to be part of the worker’s council. That makes admitting errors in front of him much harder.

(Interview No. 141, Director, 140,000 employees)

One remark before we dive into the topic: Almost every new field of research first claims vast amounts of positive effects, followed by research that tests the limits. This is a healthy process, yet sometimes leads to absurd results.

Want an example? Let us take the subject of mindfulness, which as we have seen is important for the process of humble perception.

After years of neuroscientists explaining the helpful restructuring of the brain by means of meditation; after years in which psychologists found a calming effect on mind and soul; after years during which business psychologists attributed more creativity and a better working atmosphere to mindfulness it had to happen: the first articles about the dark side of meditation began to appear. Their arguments: meditation can lead to negative experiences, depressions can arise, people can become dangerously dissatisfied with their present lives.

This strikes me like carrying owls to Athens. Any qualified mindfulness teacher spends at least 20 minutes speaking with each participant individually to discuss the dangers involved. Why? Meditation, i.e., learning to be in the present moment, brings up many repressed feelings and issues. Even in the short period of an eight-week-long course, some people realize that they do not want to live the way they are living now. This understanding can lead to depression, but also to job changes or divorces. More often, however, it leads to an adjustment in perception as well as in behavior.

So yes, there are dangers in meditation, but primarily in uncovering existing wounds. A good mindfulness teacher can help staunch these wounds while not missing the moment when there is a demand for the stronger arsenal of a psychotherapist.

Equally, there is research that considers sport to be just as useful as meditation for reducing stress. Point taken! And great that people have options to choose from. On the other hand, the fundamental truth behind mindfulness remains untouched. It remains a simple training of the brain that allows us to perceive non-judgmentally, react non-automatically, while not forgetting our larger goals and values.

The same is true of humility. Other virtues might also be powerful. Great – you have options. And while there is no danger of depressions arising from humility, there are some issues you should know about, which researchers see as critical. And then decide for yourself, as to whether some of these are not actually intended results of humility, whether they belong to a slightly wrong interpretation of humility or whether they are genuine dangers and limits.

Humility Must Be Real and Not Fake

If someone has always lived the opposite of humility, it takes time for the staff to accept it.

(Interview No. 7, VP Training, 22,000 employees)

Humility has to be authentic. It must not be faked.

(Interview No. 132, CEO, 900 employees)

My colleagues pretend to be open – but are not!

(Interview No. 81, CHRO, 13,000 employees)

Having read the story above, it does not come as a surprise that research shows employees to have less confidence in managers whose humility they do not see as genuine.1 If employees believe that the humble behavior of the manager is merely for show or put on to make a good impression, they refuse to award their trust. If employees believe the manager to be mainly into humility for impression management, they will of course see him or her as hypocritical.2 Additional research confirms the result – if employees think that their manager does not really feel on the inside what he or she professes on the outside, humble behavior is of no use.3

This is not surprising: if I feel I am only being praised because it is on the to-do list of the manager and she does not really think and feel that way, why on earth should I trust or value her?

If my manager pretends to be interested in my opinion and yet does exactly what he has been planning to do from the beginning, I will not believe in him.

If she plays bottom-up but decides top-down, I won't stay on board.

If someone claims to learn from me and my experience but continues as always, I will not be motivated.

And finally, if someone pretends to do things for the bigger picture and only ends up serving themselves, why should I be willing to follow?

In all these situations, the maxim of the writer La Rochefoucauld applies: “Humility is often only feigned submission which people use to render others submissive. It is a subterfuge of pride which lowers itself in order to rise.”4

This pretending is closely connected to what we have already seen termed as “humble-bragging.” On LinkedIn this can often be found in sentences such as: “I was humbled to accept my award as manager of the year in front of 10,000 employees.” Or: “Even though it has been going on for 10 years now, I still feel uncomfortable being recognized by everyone on the streets.”

This is fake humility and carries none of the benefits of real humility. Research confirms that people sense it immediately and consequently think far less of the persons having posted this than of others who either merely communicate that they are happy about an award or write about something that hasn't turned out so well.5

Humility is about an inner attitude and it is this attitude that the environment tries to perceive and test as being real.

What does this mean for you? If you have no real interest in cultivating humility, then don't bother. As we have already seen, it is quite a complex process of looking at yourself in a truly objective and loving way, appreciating others, being open for learning and seeing the bigger picture.

Many, however, would say that becoming humble is a worthwhile journey to embark on. Especially in times of rapid change. If I do not assess myself properly, I will not be able to perceive the situation correctly and will not be able to manage my staff and my department or my company well. If I cannot praise others, I will soon have no employees left. If I cannot learn fundamentals afresh, I might as well return to analog photography.

Frankly, I assume that just about every manager – who is not caught up in their narcissism – has an interest in really living humility. In seminars and in my interviews, most managers seem to agree: I have never yet heard anyone say, that this humility stuff is pointless. Most aspire to it; many believe wrongly that they already have it and some are aware that there are large stumbling blocks in everyday life on the path to humility.

If what I am seeing is correct, then in numerous cases the impression employees get that the manager is only putting on an act may actually be a wrong one. Why? It may be more often than not that the manager is not yet able to properly communicate their humility.

This failure in communication may be due to a simple lack of practice. When someone pays a compliment for the first time, it often seems stilted and not real. Does this mean that the compliment is not genuinely intended? No. The compliment simply may have been expressed with insufficient words and gestures.

On the other hand, if employees have this impression of the manager not really being humble, they may after all be right. Why? The manager may still be missing one of the key elements of humility, namely genuine “active listening.”

That this is often the case is indicated by a 2017 study by the Hay Group. Now that you have learned to recognize overconfidence, the results will only bring a weak smile to your face. The board members in the study? They proudly state that they listen actively in 51 percent of cases. The human resources department puts a slight dampener on this optimistic assessment with 41 percent, while the employees appear to be seething. Only 27 percent of them perceive any active listening in their company at all.6 What a meager result!

This pessimistic assessment is unfortunately backed up by further research: Most managers admit that they usually live a 10:1 ratio: speaking 10 times more than asking. Listening is set at a maximum of 20 percent.7

The first level rarely speaks with employees. And sometimes the CEO takes 50 out of 60 minutes to talk. Both behaviors show a huge lack of appreciation.

(Interview No. 33, CTO, 300,000 employees)

In my company, the higher the level, the more Alpha, the harder they find to listen and to limit their own share of speaking. We have a huge gap there. And sadly, no willingness to listen to coaches either.

(Interview No. 126, Head of Corporate Talent Management, 15,000 employees)

This has an immediate effect – if I do not listen, this is a) a failure of seeing what the other may know and be able to contribute and b) the less I hear, the harder I will actually find something to appreciate. Accordingly, in the cited piece of research, only 39 percent of the employees felt that they were appreciated, while the management rated appreciation between managers and employees at a pleasant 76 percent.

Is it not simply enough for managers to undertake to listen more? Where a will, there an ear?

This is where we get back to the topic of status and look at one additional interesting neuroscientific finding. We have already seen that the brain of a high-status person is less focused on others. In addition, it also expends less energy on mirroring other people than the brains of people in a lower position.8

In other words, status entails, purely biologically, that I devote more attention to myself and upwards and less to others around and below me. That may be helpful in times when it is important to focus on content – because then the manager is not distracted by additional social information. In situations where it is exactly about better understanding the situation or my employees, this is of course a hindrance. In other words, as a manager you first have to be aware of this automatic default setting in order to be able to correct it.

Being caught in my power role, I automatically perceive fewer communication signals than when I step out of my role.9 As a rule of thumb, therefore you can say that you should actively give yourself twice as much time as you had planned in order to consciously and actively listen and to pick up social signals.

In other words, your humility may actually seem feigned because your employees do not really feel seen. Make sure that your employees clearly get the signal from you in terms of attention as well as of time “here I sit and I want to listen.” Then, in the long run, humility if already there will be seen as real and not fake.

By the way, if humility is only put on, something negative actually happens for the manager. He or she ends up suffering more from emotional exhaustion.10 This is no wonder when we recall the findings on surface acting and deep acting. Putting on a humble face while feeling no interest in others, in open feedback or in something new, costs a huge amount of mental and cognitive strength.

Take-Away: Fake humility is useless – Play-acting what you do not believe in does not benefit yourself or others. This does not mean that one has to be perfect from moment one and is not allowed to practice getting better at humble behaviors. Yet, if someone does not really want to be humble, he or she should not bother trying.

Humility Allows Employees to Object

As we have seen, humility makes employees believe in their own strengths, feel psychologically safe and gives them the courage to contribute by raising their voices. This may go so far that they end up taking a firm stand against plans that the manager would like to implement.11 The greater the psychological empowerment, the stronger the employees, their opinions and possibly their objections.

Is this a real limit? Or a genuine problem? I suggest not. First of all, a humble leader will be happy to have employees take responsibility and use all their brain power for discussing and rejecting ideas. Secondly, humility does not mean that the authority of the manager dwindles – unless he or she wishes to fully delegate his or her decision-making authority. Instead, a humble leader is equally free to exercise their right to decide, after having collected and listened to input with appreciation.

The key in this process is fairness. Research is crystal-clear: fairness motivates employees even if the outcome is not to their liking.12 This means that the only thing a humble leader must ensure is a fair process of decision-making. What would be unfair? If a manager already had made up their mind and merely pretended to take ideas on board. Or if a manager actually had no options and was still asking for input. In either situation, this would not only be unfair but also unhumble.

If, however, in a process with options, employees are heard and then not all their wishes granted, a humble leader will have no trouble communicating both the process and result clearly and then employ charisma or story-telling to bring all employees on board.

It is, therefore, still advantageous that humble leaders cause their employees to become more involved.

Take-Away: Welcome dissent – Even if a humble leader faces a lot of dissent from the “awakened” employees, he or she will not feel attacked or offended, but will remain firm in his or her role, shaping the process and taking the decision for the best of the company. In an atmosphere of appreciation and willingness to learn, employees will also be able to accept and endorse the final results.

Success of Humility Depends on the Employee and the Situation
Power Distance

There are organizations in which hierarchical structures are very strong. This typically stems from the current management style. There are those managers who love to project their status, attach great importance to being blindly followed while not being in any way prepared for open discussions or criticism.

These will be companies like the following.

The new CEO arrived. His first phone call was to his secretary. “Parking spot Nr. 1 is mine from now on – get that car moved!” Then he let himself be driven to the car dealer, bought an X5 and said: “No need for a bow, I’ll take it right now.”

(Interview No. 112, CHRO, 33,000 employees)

The Group CEO called people losers and clowns. One guy was shouted at so madly by him and took it so badly that he ended up in hospital with a paralyzed face. The CEO made jokes about it in the next meeting.

(Interview No. 67, Head of Talent Management, 49,000 employees)

250 of 800 people were let go. Some of the top team at the same time decided to fly in to the factory by helicopter – demonstrating that there would always be enough money for them.

(Interview No. 20, CEO, 250 employees)

This high-power distance may exist in the department, in the entire company or even in the entire work culture. To this day, purely statistically there is a greater power distance in German, Russian and French companies as compared to Swedish, Dutch or US companies.

Humble managers will try to reduce this power distance for two reasons. Firstly, they are aware of their own fallibility, and secondly, they appreciate the opportunity to work with and through committed employees.

In the long run, humility is contagious – yet in the short run there may be employees who find it harder to communicate openly and who are not actually interested in having an approachable manager, but rather want someone to tell them exactly what to do.

Consequently, research shows that employees with a greater distance of power to the leadership do not have as strong a relationship with their humble manager as those with a lower distance of power.13 This means that a lengthier process is needed for these employees to feel secure with their humble leader and to accept the offer of being open and honest.

For the humble manager, this should not pose a serious problem: Either they accept that not everyone thinks it right how they do things – which is the normal occupational hazard – or they trust that the experience of a lower power distance will be attractive enough in the long run.

Likewise, they could develop an intermediate version and approach these types of employees in a customized fashion. As we have seen above, employees are more accepting of a humble manager acting differently with different employees. That means, there will be acceptance of a manager leading some employees with a more authoritative and directive style.

On the other hand, it is important that the humble manager does not take it personally, when people are not yet ready for a low power distance. Remember the story at beginning of Chapter 6? The CEO who shared his 360° feedback and was disappointed and irritated when others did not? He had thought them at fault, while he had simply not prepared the situation and people well enough.

Look at one other situation:

I was allowed to pick my own people. That was a complete flop. I expected that without hierarchy there would naturally be knowledge sharing and joint learning. Poppycock.

(Interview No. 34, CDO, 35,000 employees)

The manager was trying to instill a low power distance, was not taken up on it and felt cheated. This feeling is understandable, while at the same time lacking in humility. It focuses on the ego of the manager instead of what the employees would need to really feel empowered. It could even be considered naïve to expect a desired culture to emerge by itself. Any form of culture must be instilled, shaped and kept alive by a common understanding and desire. There needs to be regular discussions in the team about what must be done in order to build trust or what is seen as model behavior.

What would a truly humble approach have been for the CDO? Read up on cultures first, see where there are good examples, begin developing ideas for the ideal culture for his team and in all of these steps consciously involve the team.

Seeing this example, it is then not surprising that changing a high-power distance to a low power distance will take time and effort!

There is another interesting research result regarding power: Humble managers tend to be more effective in situations where employees think that they truly have the power to implement their feedback and comments.14 In other words, if the leader has no power at all, humility loses its effectiveness.

Of course, it is possible that a managerial position is not endowed with comprehensive influence. If the manager correctly recognizes this as a weakness, it is up to him or her to try to eliminate this weakness. Whether this is through wise political maneuvers or by applying clever rules of influencing – whatever it is, it is part of the role of a manager to acquire the power he or she needs to carry out those tasks that have been assigned and taken on.

The humble leader must therefore ensure that the relationship with the superiors is strong. Literature calls this the LLX – the leader-leader exchange. In the rare cases that humble managers have not seen this bigger picture and fail to have a strong relationship with their bosses, this has a negative effect on their teams, especially as regards creativity.15 This is no wonder, since as we know, we human animals are great at sniffing out status. Once we realize that the status of our leaders is not high, then our own engagement and motivation to go the extra mile and think creatively suffers.

A humble leader must therefore find and assume the power to achieve what he or she wants. Then it also becomes easier to change a high-power distance culture to one of low-power distance, with all the sharing and open feedback it entails.

Demography

There is some evidence that humility is more effective when there is similarity in age and a match as regards gender.

The explanation for this has two steps and goes as follows. People are more likely to assess behaviors as individual characteristics if they themselves are similar to the person being assessed. If a person is very different from us, our empathy tends to fail and we attribute their behavior primarily to the situation and not to the character. This is again the fundamental attribution error, which we saw earlier. In the case of humble behavior, it means that employees may perceive it as less genuine in a manager when there is a significant age difference as well as if they are of a different gender. People generally open up more to someone who is similar to them – with all the positive consequences for trust and open atmosphere if similar and the negative consequences if dissimilar.

In the case of a humble leader who is demographically similar to us, something called “self-expansion” happens. What does this mean: Humans wish to develop their efficacy in life and therefore seek relationships that have the potential to further them. These relationships have to be desirable and it has to seem probable that such a relationship can be formed.

How is this self-expansion measured? Participants in studies are asked to assess their relationship with a leader by picking one of seven pairs of circles. These range from circles that are fully separate via circles with a small overlap to circles that overlap completely.

What happens with age and gender? In a piece of research with 57 managers and their 256 employees, there was more self-expansion if the humble manager was similar to their employee.16 The employees found it more desirable and probable to build a close relationship with someone of their own age or own gender.

This human leaning towards one’s own also finds some support in my data regarding gender, while not finding its expression in age. If you look at Figure 9.1, you will see firstly that men give a significantly lower score to their female leaders when it comes to the average of all 12 leadership behaviors. Only 28 percent of female leaders of male employees are seen at a 4 or better on all dimensions, versus 38 percent for male leaders. Female employees see no statistically relevant difference between their male and female leaders – both stand around 35 percent.

Figure 9.1 In-group bias by gender.

Figure 9.2 shows a few further elements where employees seem to see more humility within their own gender. Women experience male leaders as significantly less concerned about feedback, as well as less open to suggestions. They see far more praise from their female leaders. Men, in turn, see more praise from male managers.

Figure 9.2 More gender bias.

What to make of this? Firstly, put it into perspective. Yes, there are some differences, but only in a few out of the 12 dimensions as well as for the average. And the average of the male leaders is also yet nothing to be proud of.

Secondly, if you look at where the differences are – they are on those dimensions of leadership behavior that either get personal very quickly (seeking feedback and being open to suggestions) or have something to do with the type of communication (praising). For both, you need to have generated a feeling of trust as well as a common language of communication. It may be therefore that it is less a matter of self-expansion and more one that too few managers invest enough energy to ensure that they include all employees equally. Instead, they may prefer to communicate more within their own gender group.

The consequence? Managers must be aware of the fact that their humility might initially have a stronger impact on some employees in comparison to others.

Is this a real issue for a humble manager? I suggest not. For the following reason: we have seen above that humility does not mean treating everyone the same. It also does not mean that my ego as a manager is at the center of my focus. This means that I will be able to adapt my behavior to the needs of the situation.

Let us look at an example. If, as a young female manager, I have a seasoned IT specialist in my team who is twenty years older, I would and should not expect him to immediately approach me openly, see me as a humble role model or actually be at all that much interested in my appreciation.

The humble manager would arm herself for such a situation. She would acknowledge that she may not be liked or appreciated by everyone yet then focus on the task she has taken on. If that means one employee needing more freedom, another more guidance, yet another a clear reminder of joint goals, then it signifies humility if she attunes her leadership to ensure just that.

Humility is exactly this: not driving on autopilot and acting the same way regardless of the situation, but instead, consciously responding to what there is without the ego leading to actions that only serve oneself.

Humility also remains an inner attitude. What of it you carry to the outside strongly depends on the situation. In order to do your job well, it may be necessary to allow there to be distance or to rebuke someone strongly (without forgetting the merits of the person). It may also be that you have to be hierarchical or very self-confident towards someone in order to get that person on board.

I find the image of a good parent to be useful. Good parents know when to be firmer or softer, depending on what the child needs at this precise moment of time. The trick to getting your own ego out of the way is not to say “What does my daughter or son need now,” but instead: “What does this child need from me in this situation?” This helps silence one's own longings, one's own vanity as well as one's own hopes and disappointments. Instead, it focuses on the needs of the other without completely forgetting one's own. (By the way, one manager summed up parenthood with the following great sentence: “Having children is one of the strongest expressions of ego, raising them the biggest exercise of letting go” (Interview No. 15, Head of L&D Europe, 1,500 employees))

The same applies to the company. The question “What does THIS (not my) employee need now?” helps to change one's perspective, as does the question: “What does THIS company need now?”

That is why in the following example, in my view, the manager has only partially behaved humbly.

A manager had to take responsibility for a very fundamental change process. It had everything in it: customers, structures, role perception and cooperation. There were many situations where her original leadership role was in conflict with her role in the overall change process. She consistently put her own perspective last in favor of advancing the overall objectives.

In general, she was able to take a step back where others would have been offended. She was able to detach herself. This was very beneficial to the process. For her the humble behavior was actually both beneficial and harmful. Beneficial because she was perceived as strong, as someone who cares about the cause. But there were slight doubts as to whether she could really be tough when it comes to her own issues which are also those of her own team. This means that you have to be careful to keep the balance, that you are taken seriously by people who work with other styles and that you meet the expectation of your own employees to fight for their issues as well.

(Interview No. 6, Head HR, 300,000 employees)

The manager here did not really see the full picture. While she was fighting strongly for the sake of the project, she overlooked the needs of her own position and own team. There may be times when a sacrifice may be useful for the greater good, yet here the interview partner suggested that the project leader acted more along a default mechanism than in a consciously chosen manner. It would have been better had she openly gone into discussion or even productive conflict with her team to communicate her appreciation of them and explain the need in this case for putting the company before the team. And at the same time showing where she was fighting for them.

Coming back to the impact of demographics on a leader’s humility. It is worthwhile being aware of the tendency that you will get employees more easily on board if you are similar to them. But firstly, it is only a tendency and not a rigid one or zero situation, and secondly, there are many of us who have learnt to view a person as an individual and less as someone representing an age or a gender. In most cases one thing will still be true: constant dripping of humility wears away a stone, regardless of its shape or age.

Take-Away: With some employees, humility is easier to implement – Some employees will be more likely to relate well to you and open up more easily to humble behavior. For others, this will be more difficult. However, a humble, flexible, open manager with a whole toolbox of instruments can cope easily with this.

Without a Good Top Team, Humility Is Useless

As we have already seen above, humble top management results in a middle management that quits less, works more committedly as well as more effectively.

There is the justified hope of each and every manager of being able to create a good atmosphere in their own area of responsibility – even if these are only small “pockets of sanity.”

I try to develop a pocket of sanity for my employees. The mother company only talks about what is great, leaving out all the problems and never bothering to engage in self-reflection.

(Interview No. 154, Country CEO, 4,000 employees)

This, according to research, has its limits when a top team does not function well. Then, for all their humility, an individual manager further down the hierarchy will have less positive influence than would otherwise be possible.

When does a top team work badly? Research has been trying to measure as well as predict this for decades.17

At the core of this discussion are the so-called fault lines in the top team. Fault lines are present when the top team is split along different categories and as a consequence does not act uniformly. This can happen, for example, if the top team is made up of four men, two of whom are 30-year-old economists and two of whom are 50-year-old engineers. In such a situation, there is a great danger that a common understanding will form only along the educational and age lines and not for the whole team. If the team, however, is made up of two men (30 and 50) and two women (40 and 60) in such a way that one from each gender is an engineer and the other an economist, the risk of malfunctioning is much lower.

Why is this the case? On a cognitive level, we all know that diversity makes sense. Yet it is very human to still love best what we know well. This is why top teams are successful if they are either very homogeneous or so heterogeneous that there is no clear dividing line.

These fault lines in the top team have an impact on the humble manager lower down the line. If the top team radiates strongly into the whole company, the effectiveness of the individual manager is considerably limited. This will be even more the case in smaller companies or where the top management involves itself strongly in the day-to-day running of the company.

You should therefore think through for yourself and your position as to whether there may be effects of top management on your people which you cannot compensate for. If so, your options are probably limited.

One option is that together with your peers you pass the perception of the split up to the top team. Whether that step is possible and will lead to any positive consequences depends very much on the humility of the top team.

The other option may be to insulate your team from the top team where possible. This, however, may contradict that which you see as the bigger picture.

So, you either look at the big picture for the whole company, and perhaps scale down your own and your staff's expectations. Or you could look at your own bigger picture and choose another employer where you can achieve more in your chosen role.

Take-Away: See limits – If the company does not model humility from above, it will be difficult to make up for all the negative effects of a lack of humility. The solution: Create a small “pocket of sanity” - or in the long run also draw personal consequences.

Underestimating Your Own Knowledge

Remember the study with the person, tapping a melody on a table and assuming that the other person easily guesses the tune. This is called the “curse of knowledge” and sometimes has painful consequences:

Experts easily underestimate how much time it takes to acquire expertise. For example, people who are familiar with a device think that a newcomer would need about 18 minutes to solve a task on it. In reality it takes almost twice as long.18
Another piece of research for once exculpates second-hand car salesmen. Since they know their cars well and therefore know all those faults and weaknesses that a normal buyer cannot see, they find it difficult to ignore this knowledge and therefore actually tend to sell at a lesser value than what the buyer would have been willing to pay.19

A similar danger exists with humble managers to the extent that they look at their own knowledge with a slightly more critical and detached eye. In other words, they tend to slightly underestimate their own cognitive ability.20 They also do not regard their knowledge as in any way special. Since they value others for their strengths, they tend to assume that they either have the same knowledge or can acquire it quickly.21 (Thus, I also thought that all my children could study at Cambridge and earn a PhD if they wanted to – now I know that this is probably not the case. And find that – said in a non-judgmental way – just exciting and no problem!)

This means that humble managers are in danger of communicating less clearly and, despite all their humility, of having too high expectations of their employees.

This is a genuine potential trap for the humble leader. But it can be solved. As with communication, it is a matter of consciously putting yourself in the other person's shoes, which works because it is a matter of comprehension. It is also about asking questions.

A humble leader can easily cultivate both of these qualities in himself. That is, before going into a meeting, he or she needs to make themselves aware of what the others might not know. And prepare for this. In the same way that you prepare yourself for outsiders and reduce the use of company argot. Or in the same way that polite acquaintances always mention their children’s names or their own birthdays and never expect others to have to remember either.

Take-Away: Problem recognized, danger averted – A humble leader may expect his own knowledge to be replicable and absorbable more quickly than is actually the case. This may lead to overestimating others. The leader can guard against this by being open and aware of others.

Too Little Exchange of Knowledge

As we know, there are different approaches to leadership – sometimes it may be more about the person, more about the concrete task or more about a process. Since humility leads to employees appreciating and trusting the manager more, this can actually have a detrimental effect in some rare situations.

While psychological safety, as we have seen, drives employees towards voicing their opinions and ideas, research also shows that there may exist situations in which there is less knowledge sharing with a humble manager.22 Specifically, the study at hand examined what effect the humble behavior of a manager has on the exchange of information within the team.

Interestingly, when the manager behaved humbly, employees ended up sharing less information. At the same time, they felt more confident and affectionate towards their leader.

It is probably this feeling of confidence and affection, this feeling of safety, that leads employees to assume that the manager has everything under control. Therefore, they no longer see the necessity for making a big effort to communicate.

In addition, another very human reaction ensues: just as one is reluctant to discuss political differences in a relaxed atmosphere, it may also be the case that conflicts are avoided and fewer opinions are exchanged because employees do not want to damage the good atmosphere.

How can this danger be countered? Especially in virtual situations where social signals such as challenging or confirming nods do not work?

There are a number of possibilities. For example, the manager can point to the larger goal – solving the task for purpose X; spur on a playful competition by deliberately challenging the group; and last but not least, ask clever questions that make the employees get more involved. Example questions would be: “What additional information would you give to someone who is new to the team?” “What information do you have, but do not think is important right now?” Or merely say: “Everyone should share three more pieces of information that only they have.” Some questions are useful in order to garner and create healthy dissent and conflict: “I want Z to be our advocatus diaboli today” or “Three arguments from every one of you, as to why this idea/project etc. may fail.”

Take-Away: Fight coziness – Managers must consciously encourage knowledge exchange as well as conflicts. Conflicts do not have to be fought out aggressively but can be approached in a factual and appreciative manner. Just as the brain becomes more creative in difficult situations, it becomes more alert when challenged. The humble manager must never forget this.

Humility in the Absence of Competence Does Not Work

The question is whether humble behavior works in the absence of competence, or whether humble behavior can actually result in managers being seen as incompetent.

Only truly confident people can be truly humble.

(Interview No. 27, Head of HR, 57,000 employees))

It is my belief that humility is only valuable when you have a reason to be arrogant but you are not.

(Interview No. 29, Group Head, 20,000 employees)

In many interviews, managers say they can only show humility if they are actually competent. Since research shows that humble people learn better and get better grades, the case can be made that most humble people will very quickly become competent at what they do.

So, is there nothing to worry about? Well, research does show that admitting to not knowing something always entails a (small) loss of perceived competence if the knowledge would have been in the executive's area of expertise.23

Would this be a cause for worry to a humble manager? I suggest not. Firstly, their ego will be under control, not suffering if seen as someone with a weakness. Secondly, once he or she realizes that something is missing, it is always possibly learn it. If it cannot be learned or the effort is too great, then employees can be openly empowered to take on more of the role. A number of interviewees pointed out how great it was to be higher up the ladder when you can get employees who are expert at those things you are not!

Thirdly, as we have seen, there is power in asking. If the manager asks questions before admitting to not knowing, this will reduce any impact of not knowing. Moreover, employees are happy to be noticed and praised and are more willing to get involved.24

Nor do you need to constantly point out your own errors and weaknesses – unless it is for the bigger picture. Imagine a process that requires a lot of creativity or decisions – would you like to work on it with someone who constantly focuses on the negative and the past?25 How much better to focus on opportunities for change and improvement.

Take-Away: No humility bonus without competence – Put bluntly, if you are not competent or do not appear to be competent, you will not be able to reap the positive effects of humility. The probability of being incompetent for longer as a humble leader, however, is low. After all, it is not for nothing that they are willing to learn. In addition, they also like to use the team in order to generate competence in the entire team through appreciation and motivation.

Humility Can Be Stressful for Employees

You may know the situation in which you are entrusted with a large project. The manager says she is sure you can handle it and that you will show good results in a fortnight. Just like Steve Jobs said to Weeks: “You can do it!”

What happens? The joy of getting the project is quickly followed by stress. You want to prove yourself worthy, but may not yet have everything under control. After all, under a humble manager, you want to achieve more and show more initiative than under a dictatorial one, who very precisely defines your tasks and their solutions.

Research has recognized this problem: People who are given a lot of credit by humble leaders see themselves as having more work to do, worry about their reputation and suffer more from emotional exhaustion.26

This is not very surprising but is worthwhile reflecting on, since it requires action by the humble leader. He or she must notice the stress and then support with good assistance and helpful regular feedback. Should you stop giving stretching tasks? Not an option. Instead give them repeatedly since once the task – with more initial help from you – has been completed well, this will strengthen the feeling of self-efficacy. The next project will then automatically be less stressful.

At the same time, it is important to remember that trust can be a burden. And some employees will not desire this trust because they are not willing to learn, have no interest in developing themselves further or in seeing the big picture.

Here, the constellation of not humble employees and humble manager may lead to employees having a negative attitude towards the manager and even deliberately acting destructively.27

The manager may have to lead these employees with a stronger hand while allowing them to take on less personal responsibility. If this turns out to be destructive for the team, the humble manager de facto has no choice but to part with those employees who prove to be unwilling to learn.

Take-Away: Free trust from burden – It is the task of the humble manager to ensure that employees are not burdened by the trust extended to them. If the manager keeps this in mind, he or she can strengthen self-efficacy through support as well as appreciation in such a way that an assignment of tasks does not degenerate into negative stress.

A Different Image

Someone who emphasizes the “WE” and talks about their own errors naturally creates a different image as compared to someone who presents themselves as the key agent who is never at fault. We have already seen that investors initially lower their expectations for humble CEO. The results are then “surprisingly” always better than expected, which in turn leads to a better performance on the stock markets.

This type of analysis is also carried out by employees. Someone who leads with humility is perceived as someone who is more capable on the relationship level. While employees like this leader more, trust him/her more, feel more secure and empowered, they also perceive him or her as less agentic and less decisive.28

Why? Well, when I put others in the limelight, when I enable others to work independently, when I always speak of the “we,” then I am not only perceived as less instrumental, but to be honest I really am.

Therein lies the solution: As a humble manager, you should be able to live with this image. Right? Since you would never want to be seen as the sole agent.

Will this lesser agency immediately be accepted by all? Well, no. Sometimes you may have to fight for this.

I was told in one interview for a top position, that I was framing achievements too much as being the result of teamwork. They wanted to hear more “I have done this” and “this is my contribution”. When I gave more details about my leadership style and was brutally honest that I would never claim to be doing things that I can only do through others, it was okay and I got the job.

(Interview No. 123, Group CEO, 3,500 employees)

So yes, a humble leader is perceived as less agentic because he or she has indeed empowered others to become more active. Yet, this typically fits in wonderfully with the manager’s self-image and is therefore harmless.

Take-Away: The We before the I – Humble leaders are perceived as less agentic, because they have indeed empowered others to become more active. This fits the self-image of the leader and should therefore not be a problem.

If we now look at all the limits and downsides that research has found for humility, I personally remain undaunted. There seems not to be a single study that indicates that humility, if lived correctly, could ever be in any way seriously damaging.

At this point, I would like to once again share the results from my research in Figure 9.3. If you are ever worried about the downsides of humility – look at this slide and see how much better humble leaders are perceived for competence, intelligence and strengths. The graph shows how many of those managers whose employees identified as humble received a 4 or better out of 5 on all the dimensions. As you can see for example, a whopping 90 percent say that their humble leaders should be successful in the company, compared to only 68 percent for the unhumble manager.

Figure 9.3 Humble managers are not seen as weak.

The conclusion is clear: despite any hiccups humility will contribute to your success!

Notes
Yang, J., & Chen, X. (2019). Why do leaders express humility and how does this matter: A rational choice perspective. Frontiers in Psychology, 10, 1925.
Bharanitharan, D. K., Lowe, K. B., Bahmannia, S., Chen, Z. X., & Cui, L. (2021). Seeing is not believing: Leader humility, hypocrisy, and their impact on followers’ behaviors. The Leadership Quarterly, 32(2), 101440.
Helfrich, H. (2018). The effect of leader and follower personality on work processes: analysing the influence of humility and narcissism.
de La Rochefoucauld, F. (1948). Maximen und Reflexionen: Deutsch durch... Friedrich Hörlek. Reclam.
Sezer, O., Gino, F., & Norton, M. I. (2018). Humblebragging: A distinct—And ineffective—Self-presentation strategy. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 114(1), 52.
Hay Group HR-Report 2017 Schwerpunkt: Kompetenzen für eine digitale Welt.
Hoekstra, E., Bell, A., & Peterson, S. R. (2008). Humility in leadership: Abandoning the pursuit of unattainable perfection. In Executive Ethics: Ethical Dilemmas and Challenges for the C-Suite.
Hogeveen, J., Inzlicht, M., & Obhi, S. S. (2014). Power changes how the brain responds to others. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 143(2), 755.
Uskul, A. K., Paulmann, S., & Weick, M. (2016). Social power and recognition of emotional prosody: High power is associated with lower recognition accuracy than low power. Emotion, 16(1), 11
Yang, K., Zhou, L., Wang, Z., Lin, C., & Luo, Z. (2019). The dark side of expressed humility for non-humble leaders: A conservation of resources perspective. Frontiers in Psychology, 10, 1858.
Bharanitharan, K., Chen, Z. X., Bahmannia, S., & Lowe, K. B. (2019). Is leader humility a friend or foe, or both? An attachment theory lens on leader humility and its contradictory outcomes. Journal of Business Ethics, 160(3), 729–743.
Falk, A. (2014). Fairness and Motivation. IZA World of Labor.
Qian, J., Li, X., Song, B., Wang, B., Wang, M., Chang, S., & Xiong, Y. (2018). Leaders’ expressed humility and followers’ feedback seeking: The mediating effects of perceived image cost and moderating effects of power distance orientation. Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 563.
Wang, L., Owens, B. P., Li, J. J., & Shi, L. (2018). Exploring the affective impact, boundary conditions, and antecedents of leader humility. Journal of Applied Psychology, 103(9), 1019.
Chen, C., Feng, J., Liu, X., & Yao, J. (2021). Leader humility, team job crafting and team creativity: The moderating role of leader–leader exchange. Human Resource Management Journal, 31(1), 326–340.
Mao, J., Chiu, C. Y., Owens, B. P., Brown, J. A., & Liao, J. (2019). Growing followers: Exploring the effects of leader humility on follower self‐expansion, self‐efficacy, and performance. Journal of Management Studies, 56(2), 343–371.
Ou, A. Y., Seo, J., Choi, D., & Hom, P. W. (2017). When can humble top executives retain middle managers? The moderating role of top management team faultlines. Academy of Management Journal, 60(5), 1915–1931.
Hinds, P. J. (1999). The curse of expertise: The effects of expertise and debiasing methods on prediction of novice performance. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 5(2), 205.
Fisher, R. (2011). Don’t get smart: The curse of knowledge. New Scientist, 39–41.
Krumrei-Mancuso, E. J., Haggard, M. C., LaBouff, J. P., & Rowatt, W. C. (2020). Links between intellectual humility and acquiring knowledge. The Journal of Positive Psychology, 15(2), 155–170.
Hannon, M. Intellectual Humility and the Curse of Knowledge.
Swain, J. E. (2018). Effects of leader humility on the performance of virtual groups. Journal of Leadership Studies, 12(1), 21–37.
Cojuharenco, I., & Karelaia, N. (2020). When leaders ask questions: Can humility premiums buffer the effects of competence penalties? Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 156, 113–134.
Li, J., Liang, Q., & Zhang, Z. Z. (2016) The effect of humble leader behavior, leader expertise, and organizational identification on employee turnover intention. Journal of Applied Business Research (JABR), 32(4), 1145–1156.
Yuan, L., Zhang, L., & Tu, Y. (2018). When a leader is seen as too humble. Leadership & Organization Development Journal.
Baer, M. D., Dhensa-Kahlon, R. K., Colquitt, J. A., Rodell, J. B., Outlaw, R., & Long, D. M. (2015). Uneasy lies the head that bears the trust: The effects of feeling trusted on emotional exhaustion. Academy of Management Journal, 58(6), 1637–1657.
Qin, X., Liu, X., Brown, J. A., Zheng, X., & Owens, B. P. (2019). Humility harmonized? Exploring whether and how leader and employee humility (in) congruence influences employee citizenship and deviance behaviors. Journal of Business Ethics, 170, 147–165.
Zapata, C. P., & Hayes-Jones, L. C. (2019). The consequences of humility for leaders: A double-edged sword. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 152, 47–63.

===== FILE 18/23: xhtml%2fc10.xhtml =====

Chapter 10 Different Nationalities, Ages and the Topic of Gender Revisited

DOI: 10.4324/9781003358015-10

Reason respects the differences, and imagination the similitudes of things

Percy Bysshe Shelley (1792–1822)

Summary

While humility as a concept works all across the world and results in the same positive effects, there is some difference as to how strongly it is being lived in different countries. In addition, the manager who wishes to express humility must adapt to the different needs of different cultures in order to be effective. While there are some small differences in how managers are seen across gender and age, in general, there is no large statistical difference.

Once I had the luxury of having four one-week-long modules with Russian managers from an energy conglomerate that had been bought by a German company. Most of the participants were males, many from Siberia and their hobbies were – simply put – hunting and fishing and fishing and hunting. One participant, Maxim, a large man lovingly described how he relished his weekly fishing expedition: once he and his friends had caught some fish, one person would scale, gut and cut the fish into small pieces (Maxim’s huge hands came into theatrical play here). At the same time, someone else would pour the vodka. In installments of hundred grams, of course. And then – he smiled widely – “You would bite into your raw fish, down the vodka and that was heaven!” Hearing this I was sure that when we were together in Düsseldorf, I knew just the right place for them. So, we went to the Uerige, a famous old restaurant in the center of town with local beer and the beloved specialty of steak tartar. Raw meat for tough Russians – that surely would be another heaven! What happened? No smile from Maxim, no smile from Sergej, Oleg or Artem. None of them touched the tartar. Why? Not knowing Düsseldorf, the way restaurants worked in Germany, the legal requirements for hygiene, they had no trust in how the meat had been procured. They had no trust in how the meat was cooled and served. They had no trust – full stop. As a consequence, they stuck to all the other food and I returned to Berlin, delighted to have three kilograms of the finest meat in my luggage!

That brought home poignantly that habits, traditions and behaviors do not translate easily from one country to the other. Too different are the experiences, the assumptions and the traditions. Yet at the same time, anyone who has read books like War and Peace, Les Misérables or the Buddenbrocks, has seen films like Slumdog Millionaire, The Red Lantern or The Leopard or has made friends in Singapore, Kenia or Denmark knows that there is ever more that connects us as humans than separates us.

So where does humility stand? Is it like steak tartar to be eaten in some countries and not in others or is it a common fiber that comes in many colors and textures but which connects us all not only across nations but also across gender and ages?

Nationalities

In nearly every seminar, the question is raised whether there are national differences when it comes to the understanding and practice of humility.

Let us start by understanding how the definition of humility is received around the world. The good news? There is no difference! Regardless of whom I interviewed, managers from Asia, Africa, the Americas and Europe, they all understood and approved the definition of humility as developed by research.

This makes sense, when you see that it was also academics from all over the world that had a part in generating the definition as well as measuring the effects of humility. The researchers come from Australia, China, France, Germany, India, Italy, the Netherlands, Pakistan, Portugal, Spain, UK, the US to name but a few. And in all these countries, the effects of humility as we saw them in this book were observed and measured.

So why are we instinctively looking for differences? Because many feel that there simply should be a difference between the Asian countries and the West, or between the US and say Germany or Italy.

At the same time, we also know that there are core values and virtues that are universal. Research confirms that you can count humility amongst these – once you focus on the “right” elements of the concept. What are these?

As one researcher pointed out:

In cultures that hold independence and self-esteem in high regard, dissent about the value of humility comes to a great extent from a misunderstanding of its meaning. In fact, individuals in ANY cultural context will tend to reject humility if it is associated with self-denial and abasement. On the other hand, when humility is defined as a down-to-earth perspective of oneself in relation to all other beings and accurate and realistic self-knowledge, it not only becomes desirable, but also necessary for survival and success regardless of tradition or culture.1

While the concept of humility fares well worldwide, the same is not necessarily true of the word used to describe it. Let us look how much the word used for humility actually conveys that it is a virtue of strength and of a down-to-earth perspective. Or does the word nudge us into thinking about weakness and therefore making the average manager unwilling to be associated with it?

Despite its positive roots in “humus,” i.e., “earth,” for many the word “humility” is historically charged and way too close to abasement and humiliation. This holds true not only for English but also for French (humilité), Italian (umiltà) or Spanish (humildad). Despite this, some interviewees really liked the word and emphasized that to their mind it was closely and beautifully connected to humanity.

Outside the Latin sphere of influence some languages have an even greater struggle. The Dutch call humility “Nederigheid,” which is close to lowliness, the Finns use Nöyryys which to them has associations of prostrating yourself before kings and queens. The Slavic languages go more for modesty (Скромность/skromnost – Russian), submitting oneself to the will of God (Смирение/smirenie – Russian again) or putting yourself below someone (pokora – Polish). As we have seen, the word “Demut” causes some trouble in Germany since the courage element (“Mut”) is often overshadowed by the serving bit (“Dienen”). In Europe, only the Norwegians seem to be quite happy with their “ydmykhet”. (“It includes for me not only weaknesses but also strengths!”, Interview No. 89, Head of organizational development, 10,000 employees) even though the word actually comes from the old Danish containing the elements of “easy” and “soft.”

Some countries on the other hand are in peace with their words. In Chinese, either “qian xun” (谦逊) or “qian bei” (谦卑) is used. I love the way Chinese words are made up – the first part of “qian” is the basis, the so-called radical for “word” – which indicates that “qian” has something to do with speaking. The second element of the first picture contains a hand grasping a sheaf of wheat 兼 giving hints to the pronunciation as being “qian”. The second picture is either 逊 (xun) which is someone walking with their grandchild – giving it the feel of there being something greater – the sheaf of wheat as well as the grandchild. Or the second element is 卑 (bei) which is either seen as a servant holding a fan or someone having a high rank in the Imperial examinations. This nudges us again towards being part of a bigger picture – one possibly weak (the servant), the other quite strong (part of the empire of the son of heaven). Possibly as a consequence of this focus on the bigger picture, none of my Chinese interview partners struggled with the word. And loved the concept!

In Turkish the word is “alçakgönüllülük”, consisting of “alçak” and “gönül”. “Alçak” means low – also as in a plane flying low, “gönul” means soul or character. Together, for the Turks I talked to, they make a positive mix and lead to sayings such as “Those who want to rise must be humble, there is no ladder but humility to rise to the roof of greatness” (Sadi Şirazi).

In India, three interviewees pointed me to a Sanskrit saying “Vidya vinayen shobhate,” which means “humility adorns knowledge.” The connection between competence and humility was seen as particularly strong – each strengthening the other. The more you know, the humbler you become. And the humbler you are, the more you learn.

In Hindi the word for humility is “िवनम्रता vinamrata”, which has to do with bending down. Interestingly, despite a potentially difficult root, all Indians I spoke to were very positive about the word and the concept behind it.

Which shows that any semantics can be topped by the way a concept is being lived and talked about.

This to me is the key lesson regarding the word used for “humility” – it is important to be aware of its connotations in every language and then it may actually be a good idea initially not to use it. Why? In many conversations with HR managers or CEOs, I have discovered that I lose them if the word “humility” is brought up too early. How can something as weak-sounding as that have something to do with the bottom line (which we know it does); how can something as modest inspire employees (which we know it does) and how can something as gentle be a strength (which we know it is) and not a weakness?

The solution for the time being? I talk about “modern and mature leadership” or “timely feedback” or “becoming accountable” and then I use the topic at hand as a Trojan horse. Once – to continue the metaphor – the humble soldiers come out of their wooden horse, they master, convince, lure, do whatever is required and quickly the concept is taken on board. During this process, the word is infused with more positive connotations, associations and stories.

Is this not a somewhat feeble and defeatist approach? In my mind the opposite: it is strong and humble to realize that some people may need an easier route to humility than by ramming the word down their throats! The worry should not be about what letters are used to describe the concept but instead about whether the concept can be strengthened and lived worldwide.

So having bought that the concept of humility engenders positive results all over the world and that the word used for it does not represent a hindrance, the next question is if there is a difference in how humility is being lived.

For this, I conducted a piece of research in 10 countries with 100 employees in each. More than half of these employees were also in a leadership position themselves. The countries I analyzed were Britain, China, France, Germany, India, Italy, the Netherlands, Singapore, Switzerland and the US.

The results show at a first step that indeed there is a statistically relevant difference between the different countries!

Remember how to calculate the average score of humility? We look at the 12 leadership behaviors and take an average across these. The resulting range is quite large from 3.89 in India to 3.51 in Germany down to 3.22 in China. This span even gets bigger when (Figure 10.1) you look at the percentage of managers that are seen as humble across all 12 elements. These scores range from a mere 16 percent in China to a still uninspiring 53 percent in India.

Figure 10.1 Average score and percentage of humility per country.

The scores get somewhat better, if we look at what employees say once they have read the definition of humility and are then asked how humble their direct manager is according to this definition. Then, as you can see in Figure 10.2, we have far more positive scores between 48 and 80 percent.

Figure 10.2 Percentage of humble managers according to definition.

I personally find the results across the 12 leadership elements more indicative. Why? Because this way we measure concrete behaviors and not simply wishful thinking or a warmish feeling one may have towards one’s manager.

Before I look in some detail at each country, you may ask yourself if some of these positive or negative measurements do not also depend on how generous the culture of scoring is in each country. Anyone who has ever taught Germans and Americans in the same class knows that the written scores for any faculty differ wildly, while the communicated satisfaction with the program is typically the same.

It is therefore not surprising that you can see a similar difference across the countries when it comes to participants of the survey awarding themselves scores for their personal humility. The British and the Americans are exhilarated at around 90 percent, while many mainland Europeans go down to the 70s and China stands with the lowest self-score at 64 percent. (Figure 10.3).

Figure 10.3 Percentage of participants that see themselves as humble.

In general, employees (and please remember that more than 50 percent of these also are managers) see themselves on average across all countries as 46 percent humbler than their direct leaders. In Figure 10.4, you can observe this hybris.

Figure 10.4 Gap between own and manager’s humility.

This means that indeed, we should be careful and not overinterpret the results across the countries but mainly take them as a starting point for a discussion about each country as a stand-alone.

This becomes yet more obvious when you look deeper into the data. Figure 10.5 shows what I mean. If you formulate an average for each country and see which strengths are above and below this average, you see something similar all across the globe. Every single country assesses its own managers as being on average weaker in seeing the bigger picture. Apart from China, all countries also seem to struggle with seeing and showing their strengths and weaknesses.

Figure 10.5 Elements of humility and country average.

While there are these similarities on the higher level, we will also encounter some differences, when we look at each country. And if we take this not as something set in stone but as a beginning for a conversation, this analysis will be valuable. What sort of conversation am I looking for? A conversation about what is possible in each country, where some hurdles may lie and how best to deal with them.

Experience shows that in any country, in any company there is much potential once you put your mind to it. CEO Wilf Blackburn expresses this succinctly.

I think, in any country, you can build a company culture that is different from the local one. The recipe: Take the best from the country culture and add what you need to make the best company culture.

Finally, I also believe that any cross-cultural research must avoid resulting in labels or drawers that belie the multi-faceted world we live in. There are narcissistic Indian leaders just as there are humble Chinese or German ones. And if you look at the result of another piece of research, it becomes clear that even “officially” humble countries still have their own battles to fight.

I asked the participants of my study the somewhat polemic question: “How high do you think the percentage of narcissistic managers is in your company as compared to humble or other managers?” And look at the result in Figure 10.6. Even in “humbler” countries such as India and Switzerland, we still get a frightfully high 26 percent of narcissistic managers.

Figure 10.6 Average percentage of narcissistic managers in company.

So, bearing all this in mind, are you ready for a quick dive into the ten countries? And then for a look at how you can best express humble behaviors across the world?

Britain

Britain (Figure 10.7) together with the US, India and Switzerland ranks most highly amongst the ten countries analyzed. In particular, the understanding that not all is under control seems to allow British managers to be empowering with their employees and untroubled by mistakes or sudden changes.

Figure 10.7 Britain.

This may have something to do with the stiff upper lip that used to be much cultivated. While research shows that today there may be some lessening of that stoicism with emotions becoming more acceptable and prevalent,2 this development does not seem turned British managers into control-freaks.

One of the underlying reasons for Britain doing well on many of the scores may come from the fact that many managers still start working at the very young age of 20/21 directly after finishing university. The assumption is that anyone entering the workplace so early on in life knows that he or she still has much to learn. Which is one of the prerequisites of humility.

In addition, Britain seems to have a leadership culture that appears more people-oriented than in many other parts of Europe. Coupled with the willingness to attend leadership seminars, this results in high scores when it comes to learning, seeing the bigger picture as well as appreciating others. While this appreciation typically is not done with extensive emotional exuberance, it seems to work nonetheless. The CEO I cited who makes tea for his new employees comes from Britain. So does Wilf Blackburn, who as we have seen leads both in a clear and appreciative manner.

Yet, still there are areas for improvement – only 40 percent of managers are seen as trying to make the world a better place and only 44 percent seek feedback, which is the second worst score amongst all the countries looked at.

In addition, we have a whooping score of 92 percent of participants who believe themselves to be humble. That seems to point to a serious issue of self-awareness, which should surely be addressed in each and every company striving for humility. How genuine is what we seem to see? And how much is it simply wishful thinking?

China

China (Figure 10.8) received or rather gave itself the lowest scores from all the ten countries analyzed. Initially, this came as a surprise. Be honest – did we not all expect Asian countries to show more humility than Western ones? Yet if you look more closely, the conundrum is resolved: The great respect that Confucianism as well as the Communist Party demands for elders and people of higher rank has as a consequence a very traditional leadership style. One that is based on authority, paternalism and unquestioning obedience.

Figure 10.8 China.

Humble leadership behaviors on the other hand require a sense of equality and a willingness to deal with the other human being as an individual person. And not as a cog in the wheel, not as someone to merely fill a role. In addition, humility needs the inclination to be truly seen by others in all one’s own weaknesses and strengths. How likely am I to have that inclination when I am placed miles above others? And someone else is placed miles above me?

Many employees therefore report a lack of this necessary sense of equality. Remember Huawei’s boss Ren Zhengfei who suggested that an employee rather divorce than leave his job. That was far from being a humane, appreciative, humble statement.

On the other hand, despite the sad scores, there are also numerous Chinese companies and leaders that showcase humble behaviors. Just hear what the reclusive founder of one of China’s largest companies has to say about the value of individual employees.

I would rather give up a business with a profit of one million, than give up a person who brings the right talent to our enterprise.”

He Xiangjian, founder of Midea Group (150,000 employees)

And if you look at the white-goods company Haier with its 100,000 employees, you will find an organization where CEO Zhang Ruimin has consistently tried to empower employees to act more freely and independently. Already in 2005 Haier made the bold move towards a management concept called Rendanheyi. This entailed getting rid of a whole layer of middle management and shifting the decision-making powers right down to the smallest team units. Add to this a strong culture of job rotation for any of the managers remaining and you get a Chinese company that in my assessment ticks many more boxes for humility than others worldwide.

In addition, younger Chinese leaders who have worked abroad tend to bring back a more open leadership style. This fits well with the research, which shows that in all Asian countries there is a growing interest in participative leadership.3 Therefore, I expect that humble behavior will be more desired as well as become more feasible over the next years.

And finally, we must take these bad scores with a pinch of salt. Yes, only 16 percent of managers are assessed as humble across all 12 leadership behaviors, yes, at best 50 percent of managers engage in each single behavior – yet, the Chinese employees also only saw their own humility at 64 percent. So, we may actually have the case of at least some humble employees giving overmodest scores not only to themselves but also to their managers.

France

France (Figure 10.9) scored itself quite low on many of the different leadership facets. While 78 percent of employees saw themselves as overall humble, they saw their managers only closing in on that acceptable score when it comes to noticing the strengths of others. Shifting from noticing to complimenting is already seriously lacking with a mere 57 percent.

Figure 10.9 France.

Together with Italian managers, French bosses are given the lowest scores within Europe when it comes to the whole segment of being open and willing to learn.

This may have to do with the prevalence of an autocratic style of leadership, with managers finding it difficult to take on ideas and suggestions from others along the lines of: “If I am the boss and need to show to everyone that I am the boss, then surely I cannot publicly be seen to need to learn anything.” The fear is that openness may be seen to harm the power of the position.

Interview partners confirmed this. They saw many managers as fearful of being seen as weak. Instead, their focus was on how to exert individual power. In addition, a tendency towards power games reduces the space for humility.

People are always in competition mode and fighting to keep their power. That makes them unwilling to cooperate and learn.

(Interview No. 55, Director Global Learning, 34,000 employees)

On the other hand, executives from some smaller companies shared how over the years they had managed to shape leadership behavior towards the humble by giving regular feedback. Not only once. But again. And again. And again. And over the years the desired behaviors have been fostered.

We have invested hugely in helping people gain better self-awareness. We measure perceived behaviors every half a year, provide coaching and just keep at it. After the third or fourth feedback people slowly start to change.

(Interview No. 160, SVP Human Resources, 15,000 employees)

Nevertheless, it will take time for the hierarchical leadership to disappear. In particular, since it is still strongly modeled in the political world, where many perceived how President Macron lead during Covid times as far more autocratical than in most other European countries.

Germany

Germany (Figure 10.10) has the worst scores worldwide when it comes to seeking critical feedback! In other areas, scores are middling to good, until we get to the bigger picture, which also sports some of the lowest scores.

Figure 10.10 Germany.

How to explain this? I suggest two routes for interpretation: Firstly, Germans start work quite late in their lives. Many managers are of the generation that used to study beyond their mid- or end-twenties. The consequence: if you are already age 27 when you begin working, there is a huge danger that you will think of yourself as more or less finished. Not perfect, but having learned most there is to be learned. Why then should you benefit from feedback? Or share your weaknesses with others?

This also matches the impressions I have gained from seminars that I have run over the years. US and English managers from large multinationals were typically far more willing to talk about their own weaknesses than their German counterparts.

There is a second element to look at. In research, there exists a concept called humane orientation. This is a value at work that encompasses caring, kindness and a focus on employees as humans. Assessed by the Globe Study, an international long-term research project, Germans actually score lowest on this element out of all the 62 societies studied.4 This has little to do with Germans not being able to be kind or caring, but more with them seeing professional and private life as two very different spheres. There is no tradition of Friday drinks as in the UK or the concept of being vulnerable to your staff as in the US. This may explain why Germans seem to be less willing to bring their whole personality to work and share their weaknesses.

Regarding appreciation there is a growing upside: over the past decades a culture of appreciation and valuing others has slowly made its way into many German companies. The result being that within Europe Germany scores quite highly on this. While a few managers still follow the adage “Not being scolded is praise enough” (“Nicht geschimpft, ist Lob genug”), many others have realized that appreciation is neither a sign of weakness nor some overemotional verbal hugging but an essential part of effective communication.

Having said this, people who have worked abroad still tend to see better leadership culture elsewhere.

When I worked in the US, I was impressed by a much humbler management culture. There was a willingness to listen and really work on things together.

(Interview, No. 153, German CEO, 1,800 employees)

So, it will be interesting to observe whether the younger generations of German managers will be able to let go of some of the negative behaviors described in the following quote.

In Germany people play boss – when they do not know something they simply become assertive. This is very different in Sweden or Holland – there the manager realizes that it is far healthier to work together on something.

(Interview No. 148, Head Customer Innovation, 4,000 employees)

One last point. Why do Germans get amongst the lowest score on the bigger picture – especially when it comes to trying to make the world a better place?

Partly this is an issue of wording: Germans do not like what they see as exaggerated exuberance. Most Germans would cringe at the thought of even daring to think that they could make the world “a better place.” This is the kind explanation. The ruder and – to my mind – more truthful one is that Germans tend to not go for discussions about purpose or their role in the bigger picture out of fear and for historical reasons. “As long as we don’t start another war, we are doing fine – thinking about bettering the world is too big and dangerous for us” is the motto. For other nations, this is hard to understand, in particular since Germany sports considerable resources which it could choose to put at the service of the greater good. Including the brains and hearts of its managers.

India

India (Figure 10.11) has the highest scores worldwide on numerous dimensions: actively seeking feedback, complimenting others and being open to ideas. The participants also see only 26 percent of managers as narcissistic – a result that otherwise only the Swiss achieve.

Figure 10.11 India.

Every Indian interviewee emphasized how humility was a core value both for society as a whole as well as for companies. One manager told me how as a child he used to read comics about Hinduism and how they were all about the need to understand yourself. And to “know that you can become better every day if you try.” A very humble mindset!

Not surprisingly, there is also popular awareness of business leaders not only professing to be humble but actually behaving thus.

One anecdote from personal experience. During a large conference in Berlin in 2010, the founder and CEO of Infosys Narayana Murthy related how during the financial crisis the whole management took a pay cut in order to be able to keep the lower-level employees in full pay. He was deeply appalled at other companies worldwide that had resorted instead to downsizing while preserving their own management jobs.

More material comes from two widely shared social media posts that show Indian business billionaire, Sir Ratan Tata, visiting an ailing ex-employee and former Indian president A. P. J. Abdul Kalam giving a humble speech at the European parliament.

While I have seen humble behavior in many managers, I have never ever been forwarded from any other culture a link celebrating that humility. It could be that it is this pervasiveness of the concept of humility that makes it easier for managers to behave humbly.

Most interviewees agree.

The focus in India is not on you as an individual.

(Interview No. 25, VP and Head of Global Service and Customer Care, 31,000 employees)

Humility is part of Indian culture.

(Interview No. 29, Group Head Customer Experience and CRS, 27,000 employees)

Not wanting to sound too rosy though, there are many who see the leadership culture as still too hierarchical as to be able to truly reap all the benefits of humility.

We should also remember that the average score in the country was still below a 4 out of 5 – namely a 3.89. And that there may also be some overconfidence in place if 85 percent of participants see themselves as humble. Possibly they are also overconfident about their managers and tend to overlook what may happen to some of them.

I have seen people lose their way the higher up they get. They no longer get enough feedback to be able to remain humble.

(Interview No. 158, Indian Head – L&OD and Corporate HR, 70,000 employees

But still not all Indians are humble, if they can afford to exhibit arrogance. This happens most easily on the way up in a company.

(Interview No. 29, Indian Group Head Customer Experience and CRS, 27,000 employees)

However good scores remain good scores and humility is seen as a core value for managers. Which is more than can be said of many other countries.

Italy

You saw above that 46 percent of managers in Italian companies are assessed as narcissistic. As a result, it does not come as a surprise that Italian employees see a deficit of managers that appreciate and are willing to learn. Indeed, within Europe, Italy fares worst on those two dimensions (Figure 10.12).

Figure 10.12 Italy.

Some interview partners try to give a reason for this.

Our top leaders find it very hard to say that there is a problem. And ideally, they solve it on their own.

(Interview No. 139, Head Digital Learning, 100,000 employees)

There is too little appreciation – possibly because you only appreciate those whom you like.

(Interview No. 83, CMO, 6,500 employees)

At the same time, there still exists a large power distance between the different levels.5 And what manager within such a culture will be willing to admit mistakes, ask for feedback and “lower” him- or herself to appreciate others?

While there is a strong paternalistic element in the leadership culture – that inhibits creativity and engagement – much is also changing in Italy. The duty to innovate has pushed numerous companies further along the path of humility.

The CIO whom I have cited and who calls himself “Chief Ignorance Officer” comes from Italy. He is convinced that humility is the way forward. Together with his CEO they are attempting to foster at least elements of this virtue.

When I first came, the company felt more or less invincible. But once they saw that there were failures everywhere around, they began to become humbler. We then implemented “my best fail-program”. I shared my mistakes; the CEO shared his mistakes. That was needed for others to open up.

(Interview No. 26, CIO, 68,000 employees)

So, while Italy may be quite low in its own assessment, times may be changing more quickly than expected. Who would have thought that a nation that loved Berlusconi and Matteo Salvini could (if only briefly) unite behind an Italian Prime Minister Mario Draghi, a man as far removed from a narcissistic leader as is possible.

The Netherlands

The Netherlands (Figure 10.13) is a very egalitarian society with a low power distance. I remember one seminar in which I had three layers of management from a Dutch company. Observing their relationships with each other, I could not have guessed who was higher up the corporate ladder. This equal footing is a prerequisite for nearly all of the humble leadership behaviors, so that the managers I interviewed had no problem relating to the concept of humility within their work experience.

Figure 10.13 The Netherlands.

On the other hand, the Dutch also pride themselves as being very open and direct with little need for a culture of praise or acknowledging others. “Being professional surely is good enough.” They do not mince their words; they voice their criticism loudly and clearly.

In particular, this last point may explain why the Netherlands do not score very highly on any of the dimensions of humility. There is only a single one of the 12 behaviors where they score amongst the top 3. This is “seeing oneself as a small part of a larger whole.” Here only the more self-certain British and Americans score more highly. Possibly being so close to an ever-rising sea, together with a strong protestant legacy of duty, has instilled a sense of being not too important after all.

To some, this subjugation to the bigger picture does not only represent an upside.

We are a warm and friendly culture so we are not good at discussing the inconvenient. As a result, many of our problems stay under the water line.

(Interview No. 138, CEO, 1,200 employees)

So there seems to be room for looking at the bigger picture not as a friendly culture but also at times as one of excellence, which needs conflicts to be delighted in and not shirked.

By the way, this very same CEO quoted above is in a shared leadership role with a female CEO. That demands considerable humility from all the involved! So, we seem to have a mixed bag in the Netherlands: A large amount of openness, the right culture for humility to thrive and yet it has not taken off fully.

Singapore

Even though by self-assessment the Singaporeans see themselves as quite humble at 77 percent, they do not extend this assessment to their managers. On two fronts Singapore leaders garnered the lowest scores worldwide: acknowledging when the manager does not know how to do something and being willing to learn from others (Figure 10.14).

Figure 10.14 Singapore.

If you compare it to China – which also has numerous low scores in the leadership behaviors – there is a far higher rate of narcissists in Singapore. Employees in China seem to think of their managers more as mindless than narcissistic, counting only 28 percent as being the latter (remember Figure 10.6). Singapore managers, however, are assessed with the second highest narcissism score (after Italy) with 41 percent.

How to explain this? A very strong performance orientation might have something to do with it. According to data from the Globe Study, Singapore has the second highest score on this dimension of all societies studied. This focus on individual performance may result in managers focusing less on the individual employee and more on the desired outcome – for themselves. In consequence, an employee is more a cog in a wheel that simply has to function and not someone to enter into a personal relationship with.

Another explanation could be that many of the Singaporean managers have worked abroad and have adopted behaviors that are seen as non-compatible with humility, as in this example.

In general, I see more humility in Asian countries. But some of my countrymen would no longer see me as humble, since in my years abroad I have learned assertiveness.

(Interview No. 152, Singaporean CFO who worked at many MNCs, 2,200 employees)

If there is a shift within society towards other behaviors that did not use to be socially acceptable, then it may be that managers receive lower scores or are seen as more narcissistic even though their behavior – in this case assertiveness – may actually represent a humble behavior. If assertiveness is not used egocentrically but for the role that one has taken on,then it is actually an essential part of humility.

This reminds of when humility is perceived as fake or play-acted, while it is simply the case that managers need time to practice how to verbalize appreciation or talk about their weaknesses. In Singapore it may be that the concept of humility still needs to expand in order to encompass more assertive behaviors.

There is however also one other argument to be found for the generally low scores. As in China, there exists a high reverence for age, experience and rank, making humble behaviors that need more of an equal footing harder to role model or emulate.

But remember, managers like Wilf Blackburn have been successful in Singapore which gets us once again to the realization: it is “simply” a matter of intent and grit that gets cultures shifted.

Switzerland

The Swiss garner the best scores on five dimensions: Acknowledging others, taking notice of the strength of others, showing appreciation, being willing to learn from others and being open to the advice of others (Figure 10.15). They also only see 26 percent of managers in their company as being narcissists.

Figure 10.15 Switzerland.

For Swiss interviewees, this positive result does not come as a surprise. The CEO who told me that he was chosen for his humility was Swiss; the CEO who asserted “When you have a good culture, numbers will be good” was Swiss. He was the same CEO who told the story of how his Swiss supervisory board members before interviewing for the job gave him the Jim Collins’ book “From good to great” to read in order to convey their expectations for a humble CEO.

Many Germans who work in Switzerland also mentioned to me how much less prevalent the ego is.

While other nations are proud of their (sometimes tempered) narcissists such as Steve Jobs or Richard Branson or Andrea Agnelli or Jürgen Schrempp, the Swiss are proud of Adele and Gottlieb Duttweiler. These were the founders of the cooperative Migros, a grocery chain that saw it as its duty to make life as easy as possible for the consumer. Both are well-known not only for having been full of ideas but also for an intense sense of serving others.

This cultural precedent may help in understanding the relatively high scores. Yet, there are also some foreign managers who have had different experiences.

I sometimes feel that the Swiss are merely toying with the idea of being humble and not being interested in ego or competition. After a while I realized that there is a lot of comparing and measuring going on after all.

(Interview No. 95, German HR Director, 31,000 employees)

To add to this, many see the former CEO of Deutsche Bank, the Swiss banker Josef Ackermann as anything but humble.

Yet, as we have seen repeatedly – research is the game of large numbers. On average the Swiss fare really well in the assessment of the employees, and while there is always room for improvement it would be churlish to continue looking for the fly in the ointment!

US

The US scores highest on three dimensions (admitting when not knowing, making the world a better place, seeing themselves as a small part of a larger whole) (Figure 10.16). They are also amongst the top three for another five dimensions. These are great results. Which must be partly put into perspective, when you see that 88 percent of participants (62 percent of whom were also managers themselves) assessed themselves as humble.

Figure 10.16 US.

So, there may be some bias in the US that drives people towards the positive side of things and results in overscoring both for the self and others. I remember the US part of a management consultancy being flabbergasted by what they saw as very negative feedback from the German employees. While the Germans saw their comments and scores as a loving support for one of the best companies they knew. They saw the US grades and comments as (mindless) overpraise not at all helpful for anyone anywhere.

On the other hand, the US management culture appears to allow managers to show some of their weaknesses and failures without losing respect. In some cases, it may even be regarded as strange for a manager not to have errors or weaknesses to talk about.

On top of that, there is a greater sense in society that you can learn whatever you need to learn, whenever you want to. When business leaders like Eric Schmitt from Google openly speak about having a coach, this demonstrates to others that leadership can be learned and that you need support from others for this.

While amongst fifteen-year-olds, the US only scores number 10 worldwide on the growth mindset that we discussed above (behind Germany and the UK, yet ahead of the other seven countries analyzed)6; I am very sure that this data would be different if you asked older people. The advantage the US used to have as regards believing in possibilities and personal growth may be eroding, yet amongst the managers there still seems to be a great can-do atmosphere. Which is a vital prerequisite for learning.

In addition, the culture of appreciation is strong. This culture starts early on: one US mother told me how their primary school teacher asked the children in the class to say what they thought great about Lucy. Just a few weeks later, a German mother told me that her teacher had said: “Now please each of say what you don’t like about Noah.”

Add to this, a general discussion about purpose and the bigger picture, possibly influenced by a high level of openly professed religious belief if compared to Europe, and you have an explanation for the high scores, which even with a slight discounting stand valiantly next to the results from Britain, India and Switzerland.

I found incredibly humble people at GE. Neither pushy, nor do they need to talk all the time.

(Interview, No. 116, French Head of New Work, 147,000 employees)

On the other hand, even in a country that seems to do so many things right, there are still considerable elements to work at. Where up to a third of managers do not know to ask for feedback when it is critical, there is still room for improvement! And across all 12 leadership behaviors, only 52 percent of managers were seen as humble.

What to Take From All of This?

By now we have seen differences and similarities in different countries. We have tried to identify some reasons for why the numbers are what they are in this moment of time. And this is useful for anyone who works in different countries.

At the same time, it is also often simply interesting to look at one’s own country and agree or disagree with the findings. There might even be a comfort in being assessed and labeled.

Yet this to my mind is not an option. It is no option to say: We have few managers in my country who are humble, so I will not be able to introduce humble behaviors in my company. Why? Because there is no reason to believe that humility will not work in every company worldwide if the leadership wants it to.

Humility would also work in Russia, but the managers do not do it for fear of losing face.

(Interview No. 143, CEO, Russian Nationality, working in US for an American company, 100 employees)

In particular, I would agree with interviewees who point out the following:

In any international company, there is more similarity between the different functions than there is a difference between the country cultures.
A company culture can exist across borders.
Across all nations as well as across age and gender, there is always more that people have in common than what differentiates them.

So even if you come from a country with low humility – that is no excuse. And if you come from a country with high humility, this is no excuse either. In each category at least a third of manager are not seen as humble. And as we have seen across all 12 dimensions, 53 percent of humble managers is the maximum for any country.

So, the goal of implementing humility should be there for any of you regardless of what country you come from!

So how do you go about this? Which leads me to the next question. Can you express your humility the same the world over?

Of course not. There is a considerable difference in exactly how you have to go about being “successfully” humble.

First a look at admitting weaknesses. A typical story comes from a Dutch manager who went to a meeting in Italy.

Just when I was made board member, I had a meeting in Italy and apologized for something. I could see in the face of one of the directors, that this had not gone down well. I went for a one on one with him. He told me that apologizing in his view was a weakness. We talked about Italian culture, about Dutch culture and now we understand each other better.

(Interview No. 138, CEO, 1,200 employees)

The lesson from this story? You need to adapt what you do to each country you work in. You need to reflect: what do I need to have done beforehand, how do I need to have established myself before I can share what I want to share.

Is this in any way new or rocket science? Not at all. This is common fare for any manager working abroad: It is vital to first understand the culture and then see in what ways and when you can project your desired behaviors, including your humility. This goes back to being humble yourself and seeing the bigger picture of which country, company, department and individual culture is all a part.

One example: giving feedback. Reed Hastings and Erin Meyer’s book No Rules dedicates pages and pages on how the Netflix culture of giving feedback had to be adapted to the different countries.

Why? Well, in Japan, for example, it is not done to criticize directly or give open feedback to your boss. Is it therefore impossible for Japanese employees to learn to give feedback? Is it impossible for a leader to ask for feedback? No, of course not. You just need to shift. If you find yourself in a more formal country like Japan, you need to move away from the ad hoc immediate feedback to more formal feedback which employees have had time to prepare beforehand. Netflix had thought about this and gave employees some guidelines on how to prepare for an open feedback session.

The results were remarkable. During the 360 process the Japanese on my team provided higher-quality feedback than my teams in the US had in previous years. The comments were frank and well-constructed. Their recommendations were actionable, and they didn’t pull punches. They received the feedback with grace and appreciation.7

For each country, Netflix tries to ensure that the feedback is practiced and ritualized in such a way that the desired effect appears. And if this means more prepared feedback and less live feedback, so be it.

In a less formal country like the Netherlands, it actually needed the mental preparation for the American managers not to be stunned by feedback that is far more direct and personal than in the US.

Erin Meyer in her book The Culture Map8 has a great story about how the Americans were shocked at what they thought too blunt a feedback between two Dutch colleagues. They even expressed their worry about it having damaged the relationship, only to hear from the manager who had been on the receiving end:

Of course, I didn’t enjoy hearing those things about myself. It doesn’t feel good to hear what I have done poorly. But I so much appreciated that Maarten would be transparent enough to give me that feedback honestly. Feedback like that is a gift. Thanks for that.

So, showing one’s weaknesses, receiving feedback, showing one’s strengths – all needs to be adapted to the situation you find yourself in.

Let us take a look at appreciation: Again, it works worldwide but needs to be expressed differently.

Appreciation in Asia is generally weak. But I believe they need it as much as in Europe. The important thing is, it needs to be seen as sincere. If it smacks of flattery then it is discounted.

(Interview No. 40, English CEO in Asia, 24,000 employees)

This is why many Europeans take issue with what they see as a culture of over-praising in the US. That, however, does not mean that they do not want to be appreciated, nor that there is not some improvement possible also in the US.

Imagine the following situation. After a presentation, the boss nods to you and says: “Great presentation.” This will be pleasant for some, fake for others. What if she had said: “Thank you very much for this presentation. I was particularly impressed by what you showed on slide 9. That made this process so much clearer for me.” A totally different kettle of fish and an appreciation that will actually work in all countries. At least if it is directed at the person in a one-on-one situation. Other rules apply in groups. So, before you blurt out individual praise, it is vital to understand how much society allows or expects individual contributions to be singled out.

In summary, if you look at all humble behaviors, they may appear much harder to express in some countries than in others. Yet, if you speak to more people from any one country, even those where things are seen as tough, they all know managers who are humbler and more successful with their humility than others. Compare, for example, an old Russian state company with a modern Russian internet company such as Yandex. Well, you actually cannot compare it. Like you cannot compare the Siemens of 20 years ago with the Siemens of today. One interviewee remembered how people were shouted at on stage until they cried, something that would be impossible in the Siemens of today. But I am sure somewhere in Germany, there still exists a company where people end up crying…

So humble and non-humble managers and companies can exist side by side in any culture. The important thing therefore is to find out how to role model humility in your very own company and your very own situation!

Take-Away: Humility works everywhere – Humility works everywhere! There may be certain differences between countries in the extent to which humility is already practiced there today. However, if humility is communicated in a way that is appropriate for the country, the effects are equally positive in every country.

Gender

I have many female employees. They don’t want to lead since they want harmony and not be responsible for negative decisions.

(Interview No. 104, female board member, 200 employees)

If I had the choice, I would always employ a woman over a man.

(Interview No. 99, male Board Member, 500 employees)

I think it is hardest for elder white males to admit errors.

(Interview No. 134, young male managing director of a Start-Up)

Women tend to underestimate themselves.

(Interview No. 23, female former VP HR, 1,000 employees)

My managers stopped me when I began to apologize for not speaking German well enough yet: “Don’t undersell yourself, there is a good reason why you have joined the team”. That sort of thing happens more to women – but is not humility!

(Interview No. 77, female HR Partner, 80,000 employees)

Many women when they get to be manager take on wrong behaviors – as do men.

(Interview No. 71, male COO, 2,100 employees)

There is one member of the Executive Committee. She was very direct to us all. I thought it great, but my team was frightened of her in a way they would not have been with a man.

(Interview No. 84, male CLO, 29,000 employees)

I think men are humbler – just because women in a more male environment tend to be quieter, does not mean they are humble.

(Interview No. 152, male CFO, 2,200 employees)

My male colleagues undermined me – they just had to be so much greater than me. So, I quit.

(Interview No. 85, female CEO, 1,200 employees)

As we have seen in Chapter 4, there seem to be some interesting points for discussion when it comes to gender. If you remember, it was the case that between 17 and 44 percent of top managers saw their female employees as humbler than their male employees. When the employees were asked the picture changed. Only those led by leaders below the age of 40 saw some elements of greater humility in their female managers. Below 50 there was parity with male managers and above 50 female leaders performed worse on a number of counts. At the same time, younger male leaders fared better when it came to asking for feedback even if it is critical, while elder male leaders seemed to gain some benefit of becoming older.

While it needs yet much more research to dissect this topic and to come to firmer conclusion on this “hot” topic, I would like to use this chapter to share some observations the interviewees made.

First of all, from my interview partners, 60 percent saw a difference between men and women leaders in the sense that in their view women exhibit more humility. They spoke about less ego, more self-reflection, finer perceptions, being more relaxed, more honest, better at assessing themselves. Some said if there was an option, they would always prefer to employ a woman. At the same time, they saw women as underestimating themselves as well as being more reluctant to take on responsibility. They perceived men to be more narcissistic and also equipped with more confidence, as engaged more in fights and less willing to self-reflect.

The other 40 percent were partly appalled at the question, thought it outdated and clinging to old role models, saying that they saw no difference. Or they saw the opposite, that in their view women get too tough as they climb up the ladder. Some said that men took some time to catch up, or that they expressed their humility differently as compared to women. Some saw women not as humble but as frightened of alpha males. Yet others said that the humility associated with females is often not real humility but simply a failure to stand up for oneself – hiding one’s light under the bushel and taking the easy road in avoiding conflicts for the bigger picture. And finally, there was a group that told stories about former female colleagues who once promoted had become cool and distant believing they could not show vulnerability the higher they get.

All in all, it seems that there are all viewpoints held on this matter. Let me share some more quotes from the interviews with you on this.

When I was a young woman, mid 30 to 40, I tried to be very male and power oriented. I ended up very unhappy, took a coach and decided to stop pretending.

(Interview No. 133, female Board Member, 23,000 employees)

I am tall and sporty. When there are only men in a meeting, I go into power modus. I am much more willing to compromise with women.

(Interview No. 46, male Head L&D, 2,000 employees)

Unlike others, I don`t expect a woman to be nice to me as a leader. My boss is caring but she can get tough.

(Interview No. 94, male Head of Learning, 3,000 employees)

There are 10 women, all candidates for bigger roles – none of them want to. They do not see it as a game that could be fun to play, as many men do.

(Interview: No. 103, female Global Head 36,000 employees)

Men are keener to lift others up, because they are more secure.

(Interview No. 48, female Global Head Diversity, 16,000 employees)

So, what to take from this all.

To my mind there are three key points.

Firstly, all different results are possible. There are humble men and unhumble women, there are humble women and unhumble men.

Secondly, our stereotypes may contribute to us expecting women to be humbler and then be disappointed when they are not, causing us to judge them more harshly. These stereotypes also may contribute to us expecting men to be unhumble and then either not notice, because it does not fit the picture or be overly enthusiastic about it.

Thirdly, there are numerous indications that some women may be underselling themselves – i.e., they may be seen as humble but what they are actually doing is hiding the light under a bushel. This entails them being too conciliatory instead of fighting those fights that they should for their and the company’s bigger picture.

All in all, I would say that one should humbly perceive each man and woman and see what there really is. And that when you lead humbly you will set the tone for your whole team, your colleagues and even partly your superiors – and then gender will not count any more.

In addition, one of the key points of humility has to do with not looking into the past, but into the present and the future. That means, even if there is in one female or male leader at a moment in time a lack of humility, this need not continue. See this wonderful example:

When I became CEO, I promoted the head of accounting to CFO. She had obviously felt, she had to be very tough and bite her way to the top. She was very distant, very curt and reluctant to invest time for example to bond with our supervisory board. We had a good relationship with each other, so I was able to suggest for her to go and work with a coach. She was willing to learn, worked with the coach, changed quite a lot and is now a successful CFO of a stock-listed company.

(Interview No. 151, male CEO, 3,700 employees)

The more humility reigns, neither woman nor man will need fear to appear weak when they are humble. There may come a time when it is clear to all that it is actually the narcissists who are weak.

If you look at another piece of research, there is already an indication for this downside of narcissism.

My aim was to see if the gender of a humble or narcissistic leader affected how they were being perceived. 239 participants from all over the worldd read short vignettes of two candidates. Without them realizing, there were two questionnaires in distribution: one with a narcissistic female and a humble male and one with a narcissistic male and a humble female.

The text ran as follows:

Candidate A: Nina/Nick

Nina/Nick regularly informs the board about her/his departmental successes. She/he sets a tight framework for her/his staff to work within and expects regular feedback on the steps taken. In meetings she/he compliments staff for special achievements and usually takes a speaking share of 50–70 percent. She/he does not discuss her/his own errors or weaknesses with anyone – her/his focus is on strengths. She/he has a private office with an assistant in the anteroom. She/he attends career-relevant training seminars and is a mentor to younger employees in order to share her/his experiences. She/he sees herself as difficult to replace and favored by her/his talents. "Without my grit and my skills, I wouldn't be in this position," she/he says frequently.

Candidate B: Hester/Henry

Hester/Henry regularly coordinates her/his goals with the board to ensure contributing to the larger corporate goals. She/he gives her/his staff broad guidelines. Within these they are free how to do their work. In meetings, she/he praises much and usually takes a speaking share of about 10–20 percent. She/he discusses her/his errors with her/his nine direct reports and asks them to support her/him in her/his weaknesses. She/he has moved her/his office and her/his assistant into open space. She/he attends training seminars and has a coach at her/his own expense. She/he is mentor to younger employees in order to share and learn from them. She/he sees herself/himself as easy to replace and favored by fate. "Without luck and circumstances, I wouldn't be in this position," she/he says frequently.

Approximately 90 percent of all participants saw Hester and Henry as humble leaders. Now, of course you will be interested to know if one of them reaped more benefit from being humble.

Well, the good news first. There was no statistical difference for participants wanting Hester or Henry as their leader or as a board member. Regardless of which one they read about, 88 percent wanted the humble leaders, 70 percent also as a board member in their company.

The sad news is that 12 percent did not want them as their direct manager and 30 percent not as their board member. Why not, we ask ourselves? Yet, whatever answer you may have, you need to put this result into perspective by looking at the narcissistic leader. Here only 25 percent wanted them as their leader and only 22 percent as a board member.

So, narcissism comes at a cost to your leadership attractiveness. In addition, only 18 percent saw Nick and Nina as likeable, compared to more than 80 percent for Hester and Henry.

What about being seen as weak versus being seen as competent. Here are some interesting statistical differences: As you can see in Figure 10.17, 13 percent actually see Hester as weak, while Henry is only negatively evaluated in 6 percent of cases. That may fuel fears that humility may indeed be seen as weakness. Yet if you compare it to the weakness seen in Nick and Nina, this pales into insignificance.

Figure 10.17 Narcissists are seen as weak.

While the difference for Nick and Nina is actually not statistically relevant, it nevertheless serves as an indicator that narcissism seems to be more costly to male leaders than to female leaders. Why do I say this? Look at Figure 10.18. While more than 80 percent saw the humble leader as competent, regardless of gender, there is a difference in the narcissists. Nina is seen as competent by 67 percent, Nick only by 53 percent.

Figure 10.18 Humble leaders seen as competent.

This is an interesting aspect – it looks as if there is still something in the way we perceive leaders, that it seems to harm females less when they are pushy and self-focused. They are not liked for it, as are the male leaders of that ilk, but it seems to award them with a halo of competence.

There is one additional gender effect to consider when you look at the gender of the rater. Women seem to be more accepting of male narcissists than men, while at the same time in general agreeing more than men with the competence narcissism transfers to women.

So, you can see in Figure 10.19 that 43 percent, i.e., nearly half, would be happy to have Nick as a board member, while men have no desire for such a leader. And 81 percent of women believe that Nina is competent, with men seeing this not quite as rosy.

Figure 10.19 Gender differences when it comes to narcissists.

Yet, overall, I want to emphasize a key point: Apart from these cited differences on all other dimensions, there was no relevant statistical difference. None. That looks as if there is primarily parity of the sexes here, with women being no better nor worse than men, and female employees and male employees being at most times in agreement on the level of humility of their leader.

Take-Away: A praise of equality – Since there seem to be only a few differences between the sexes in terms of humility, it can be stated that men and women show the same amount or the same amount of humility on average. Finally, a field where equality reigns?

Age

In Chapter 4, we also saw that there seems to be only a small age difference amongst the male managers, and a slightly larger one amongst female managers. So, it is interesting to look more deeply, into whether age plays a role for humility.

Amongst my interviewees there were four types of answers. About a third said that there was no difference either way, a third said that it gets better the older you are, a third asserted that it depends on the person and a final smattering of about 5 percent said that young ones were humbler.

There is a danger, the older you get: You start losing people who are senior to you – and have limited sources to learn from – unless you learn from the young. But in the past people only learned from older people – therefore the older have less reason to be humble.

(Interview No. 29, Group Head Customer Experience and CSR, 27,000 employees)

Bad leadership often gets passed on like cancer, therefore I do not think that the young generation will be better – they will be conditioned.

(Interview No. 65, Group HR Director, 70,000 employees)

Someone once said: You do not become wiser with age, but it becomes clear that others don't either.

(Interview No. 39, Board Member, 3,000 employees)

I have seen many older managers turning down their volume and becoming humbler.

(Interview No. 136, Director, 11,000 employees)

If you look at the data, there is no clear-cut answer.

On two dimensions, managers seem to become worse with age. Firstly, the older they get the less they seem to be willing to ask for feedback. And secondly, the over 50-year-olds are seen as considerably less humble by their employees once these have read the definition of humility (Figure 10.20).

Figure 10.20 Differences regarding the age of the manager.

There is once again a small bias for one’s peer group. Yet only for the over 50-year-old managers. Here, as you can see in Figure 10.21, the employees that are of the same age are much milder with them than those that are younger.

Figure 10.21 Some ingroup bias.

On all other dimensions, however there is no statistically relevant in-group bias.

That leads me to the conclusion that age indeed is hardly a relevant factor in how humility is lived.

If you look at the impact of other factors, this becomes even clearer: As we saw above, managers with a coach are seen as far humbler than those without a coach and this holds true regardless of age. If someone suffers from a stroke of fate when he or she is young, humility may come early on, if people use age to reflect, humility will come then.

My conclusion would be to see humility as a virtue that anyone can choose at any age.

That may sound like the same cop-out as above with nationalities and gender. But if all is possible, why should we try to find the right data set to press people into.

There is no safety in data for any future assessment – every person can decide to change, to act differently. It is the task for you as leaders and for your organizations as systems to create conditions in which humility becomes the desirable virtue to have. And then the demographic or national differences are only like a tune being played with a slightly different interpretation.

But it remains the same tune!

Take-Away: The agelessness of humility – Although there are small statistical differences, they are not relevant in the grand scheme of things. One can be humble at any age. Unfortunately, you can also lack humility at any age!

Notes
Vera, D., & Rodriguez-Lopez, A. (2004). Strategic virtues: Humility as a source of competitive advantage. Organizational Dynamics, 33(4), 393–408.
   https://www.britishfuture.org/english-identity-british-future-poll-findings/. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Park, S., Han, S. J., Hwang, S. J., & Park, C. K. (2019). Comparison of leadership styles in Confucian Asian countries. Human Resource Development International, 22(1), 91–100.
Schlösser, O. (2006). Humane Orientation: A Cross-Cultural Study in 26 Countries [Doctoral Dissertation, Universitätsbibliothek].
Tavanti, M. (2012). The cultural dimensions of Italian leadership: Power distance, uncertainty avoidance and masculinity from an American perspective. Leadership, 8(3), 287–301.
   https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/bd69f805-en/index.html?itemId=/content/component/bd69f805-en. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Hastings, R., & Meyer, E. (2020). No Rules Rules: Netflix and the Culture of Reinvention. Penguin Press, New York, NY.
Meyer, E. (2014). The Culture Map: Breaking Through the Invisible Boundaries of Global Business. Public Affairs.

===== FILE 19/23: xhtml%2fc11.xhtml =====

Chapter 11 Humility in Politics

DOI: 10.4324/9781003358015-11

A politician thinks of the next election. A statesman, of the next generation

James Freeman Clarke (US author 1810–1888)

Summary

Initially it looks as if humility in politics is harder to achieve. In particular, the voters, while “officially” claiming to desire humble politicians, tend to be drawn to more narcissistic versions. Yet, there are considerable upsides to humility and both research and case studies show that it can be cultivated in such a way as to be treasured by voters and the press alike.

The politician had once run a larger German federal state. When asked about humility in politics, he sighed:

In politics you are stuck with your party. You cannot simply quit and join another one… So that is why people fight harder and tend to be less open about their weaknesses and less willing to show appreciation of others.

He continued:

Yet I have seen numerous politicians, who do behave humbly. One has really stuck in my mind. As a young politician I was part of a group visiting England. There we were hosted by a member of parliament, who had been made lord a few years back. He was very religious and yet had been given the task to introduce the first bill on abortion. And he said in front of us: “From the very moment on that I received such an order, I forgot everything I had ever thought before. It had simply become a task that will be performed through me for the good of the people.”

Here was a politician willing to look at the bigger picture and see himself in his role as a servant to the people who had elected him. A rarity? A common occurrence? What do you think?

In this chapter, we will have a look at the empirical evidence to determine whether humility can actually play a relevant role in political life. Or whether due to the many pressures from the party, the constituency, the press it is well-nigh impossible to be humble and successful at the same time? Can you be humble on the way up or only once you are at the top? What else is unique when it comes to humility in politics?

One thing is clear upfront: where politicians have employees, they reap all the benefits of humility and all the negative effects of narcissism just as if they were in charge of any other group of subordinates. Numerous interviews confirm this.

I loved working for him. He was the most appreciative person I have ever met. Seeing him on the public stage made you cringe, because he put on this strange persona, but in every day work life, he was a delight.

Employee of minister of state)

She took time to regularly check how we were doing. She seemed genuinely interested and remembered not only what we told her but also often thanked us explicitly for our work.

(Employee of high-ranking party politician)

I have never worked for someone who was less humble. Outwardly he tried to portray himself as modest and interested in the welfare of others. But behind closed doors he was simply an arrogant narcissist!

(Former employee of a former secretary of state)

Do Humble Politicians Manage to Get Elected?

Things become more complex when it comes to the relationship with voters. Do voters actually value humble politicians, people who know their weaknesses as well as their strengths? People who acknowledge others in their own party, in other parties? People who are obviously open to learning and actually see a bigger picture that goes beyond them?

Well, voters definitely claim to want humble politicians! My research in Figure 11.1 shows that once voters have read the definition of humility, 86 percent of voters see humility as a desirable quality in politicians. This is a huge number, yet at the same time, less than for business leaders, where 97 percent are desirous of this virtue.

Figure 11.1 Percentage that sees humility as a desirable virtue.

This gives a first indication that people see a difference between the two types of jobs. From the interviews it becomes clearer where the two diverge.

To live this brutal life as a politician, where everything you do is scrutinized, I believe you need a dose of narcissism to not only want to become a politician but also to survive as one.

(Activist in party politics)

Politicians are constrained by rather hierarchical party cultures, because so much of their rise is determined by their standing within the party (and increasingly the press). Most don’t develop individual opinions, except perhaps a crafted eccentricity. They need a strong ego in order to advertise themselves. So, though they would undoubtedly benefit from the breadth that true humility would give them, it’s usually not a priority for them.

(Professor of history)

86 percent of voters who want humility is still a large group. Do these voters actually believe that they can get that desired virtue in their politicians? Or is there an equally huge gap as there was with the managers? Remember: 97 percent of employees wanted a humble leader and only 35 percent on average worldwide get it.

Remember also how employees judged a third of managers in their company to be narcissistic?

When asked about politicians, the results in Figure 11.2 are even more depressing. Only 23 percent are seen as humble, 61 percent as narcissists and 16 percent are designated as others. What are these others? The comments range from: “10 percent are psychopaths” to “either idealistic or corrupt.”

Figure 11.2 Humble and narcissistic leaders.

That shows that public perception of politicians is far more critical than for managers. Not surprising then that politicians rank very low when it comes to trust:

Members of the US Congress are at the bottom of the list when it comes to trust: they are distrusted by 58 percent of the population versus for example nurses, who garner 84 percent of trust.2
In the UK 78 percent said that politicians were the least trustworthy, followed a distant second by journalists (37 percent) and car salesmen (27 percent).3
Even in India, where humility scores are as we have seen generally very high, only 59 percent of the population trusts politicians.4

On a second level, it also is doubtful if the voters truly want humble politicians. They may claim to want them and then prefer a narcissistic leader after all.

Take a look at my research. In 2021 more than 200 voters answered questions about political candidates. The candidates were described as either a male narcissist and a female humble candidate or as a female narcissist and a male humble candidate.

The focus was on what voters observe and judge in a one-time communication with this politician. This is, of course, of a different magnitude compared to what I as an employee can see from my manager in everyday work life. However, since we can only know politicians by how they chose to communicate with us, this must become the litmus test of their humility. As a result, it is even harder with politicians to judge what of this is real or play-acted.

This was the text describing the candidates:

The two candidates are the same age, are running for an important leadership position in the same party and have similar positions in terms of content.

The Narcissistic Politician

Excerpts from candidate Nina's/Nick's speech, described by a journalist afterwards as follows: "With grand gestures and verve, here is someone who sees herself/himself as the right person to lead the party into the future."

Each person has their destiny – and I see mine as doing the best for you and the party. To that end, I have assembled and briefed the most capable team so that we can tackle whatever is at hand from the moment "Go."

I am grateful that my fighting spirit has brought me to this moment in time and being able to take on this job for the party. Precisely because our times need strength and spirit my goal is to implement our political agenda in a way that benefits all of you who are sitting here.

As for my competitor Hester/Henry, we have known each other for a long time – I appreciate her/him for her/his openness and for the fact that she/he also knows her/his own weaknesses.

Last but not least: All of you here from the party base know what the future demands from the leadership of our party. I am ready to fight for it, teeth, claws and all.

The Humble Politician

Excerpts from candidate Hester's/Henry's speech, described by a journalist afterwards as follows: "With great team spirit and full of gratitude, someone wants to achieve the best for everyone."

Everyone has weaknesses and makes mistakes – that's where I'm grateful to my team for standing by me with their expertise and help, and also for being relentlessly open with me.

The fact that I am standing here is due to an enormous amount of luck. My goal is to formulate and implement our political agenda in a way that benefits everyone. Even those who are not as fortunate as I am. Even those who will not vote for us.

As for my competitor Nina/Nick, I have respect for her/his skills and abilities. We have accomplished a lot together in recent years, and no matter in which constellation we find ourselves after this election, I hope for an equally successful future collaboration.

Last but not least: You know best what exactly is needed for this party and our future. I'm happy to stand up to your scrutiny.

Participants rightly identified humble Hester and humble Henry as being humble (89 percent) while narcissistic Nina/Nick clearly did not fit the bill (less than 10 percent).

Yet! Yet only 58 percent wanted to vote for Hester and only 50 percent for Henry (Figure 11.3). This was better than the 23 percent that wanted to vote for Nick and the 32 percent that wanted to vote for Nina, but compared to 86 percent who want humble politicians this is somewhat depressing.

Figure 11.3 Percentage who would vote for…

It demonstrates once again that we say we want something and when the option arises, we go for something else. Like wanting to live a healthy life and stuffing down cake or swigging back beer instead.

Research confirms this dilemma on other fronts: If you ask voters how they vote, they of course point to their own rationality and that the politician has to be competent. And then there are dozens of study results from all over the world that show that voters prefer the more attractive candidate5, and that attractiveness alone predicts more than 70 percent of the election outcomes6.

So, it is not surprising that on the humility/narcissism front the result gets even more irrational, when you dive more deeply into the data.

For one, giving exactly the same speech, female humble politicians are seen as more competent than their male counterparts! 62 percent see Hester as competent, while only 50 percent agree for Henry (Figure 11.4).

Figure 11.4 Percentage of voters who see as competent.

Male voters are least impressed by Henry, only 42 percent think him a good politician versus 65 percent women (Figure 11.5).

Figure 11.5 Female voters more impressed by male narcissist.

The first result therefore: humility in politicians seems to serve women better than men. As you saw in the chapter on gender, this problem does not arise for managers – here the humble female manager and the humble male managers are both seen as competent by 88 percent of employees.

There are yet some other fascinating results from the data that show how much more complex humility is for politicians.

Firstly, the effect of age. Interestingly, young people are more open towards narcissists than older people. More than 70 percent of voters below the age of 35 think of Nick or Nina as competent, while only around 30 percent of the older voters agree with that (Figure 11.6).

Figure 11.6 Enthusiastic young and disillusioned older voters.

Yet this effect is neutralized when it becomes obvious that the young are in general more enthusiastic, while people older than 35 have become cynical or lukewarm and appear to be disillusioned with all types of politicians.

There are other elements in the make-up of the voters that seem to condemn humble politicians to fail.

First the issue of self-esteem. We have already seen above that humility and self-esteem are correlated. How? Well, the greater the humility, the higher the self-esteem; the lower the humility, the lower the self-esteem – and the higher the narcissism and arrogance.

If these are correlated, is it then not to be expected that people with low self-esteem find humble politicians a waste of space?

Indeed, a piece of research from 2020 shows exactly this7: Assessing the video of a politician speaking humbly, those with greater self-esteem assessed the person far more positively than did those with low self-esteem.

My research, as you can see in Figure 11.7, bolsters this finding. Those voters who had lower self-esteem were far more positive about the narcissistic politician. A full 56 percent of these see Nick or Nina as competent versus only 38 percent of those with higher self-esteem. Those with higher self-esteem were also more skeptical as regards the performance of the narcissist, even though still somewhat impressed with 64 versus 77 percent.

Figure 11.7 Low self-esteem correlates with acceptance of narcissism.

The inner argument of voters lacking self-esteem seems to run along the following lines: “If I am a sad little sparrow, I want a glorious peacock to fight for me.”

This means that at least in part humble communication in a politician will depend on the audience for its effectiveness.

Two other groups also make life hard for humble politicians. One group consists of those people that believe it to be quite right that (their) in-group is in charge of things, that equality in humans is overrated and that those who know better or have more resources should actually be in charge. Research calls this snappily “Social Dominance Orientation.”

How to assess this Social Dominance Orientation? By getting people to rate statements such as “It’s probably a good thing that certain groups are at the top and other groups are at the bottom” or “Superior groups should dominate inferior groups” or “Group equality should be our ideal.” 16 questions later you have your personal score.

Now, what do you guess? I expect you have predicted the outcome that you can see in Figure 11.8. Those who believe it desirable that there are different groups, i.e., those with a high score on Social Dominance Orientation have a big issue with humble politicians. Fewer vote for the humble politician, fewer think him or her competent, fewer think the humble one to be a good politician and even fewer think that humility is a desirable virtue for a politician.

Figure 11.8 Correlation between social dominance orientation and humility.

This reminds of the research that humble managers have a limited effect on those employees who believe in high-power distance. These employees believe it right for there to be an above and a below and as a consequence think someone who treats them as an equal as slightly strange and not to be taken too seriously.

The final group of “difficult” voters has to do with what attachment type they are. Which one are you? No idea? Well, read the following and then pick one of the answers.

These questions are concerned with your experiences in romantic love relationships. Take a moment to think about these experiences and answer the following questions with them in mind. Read each of the three self-descriptions below (A, B and C) and then choose the single alternative that best describes how you feel in romantic relationships or is nearest to the way you feel. (Note: The terms “close” and “intimate” refer to psychological or emotional closeness, not necessarily to sexual intimacy.)

Response options:

(A) I am somewhat uncomfortable being close to others; I find it difficult to trust them completely, difficult to allow myself to depend on them. I am nervous when anyone gets too close, and often, others want me to be more intimate than I feel comfortable being.
(B) I find that others are reluctant to get as close as I would like. I often worry that my partner doesn’t really love me or won’t want to stay with me. I want to get very close to my partner, and this sometimes scares people away.
(C) I find it relatively easy to get close to others and am comfortable depending on them and having them depend on me. I don’t worry about being abandoned or about someone getting too close to me.

So, which one did you pick? A is the avoidant style, B is called the anxious style and C the secure attachment style.

Research has shown that the avoidant style in general is negatively correlated with humility.8 Why? Humility is grounded in a sense of security that allows you to consider your strengths and limitations in a non-defensive manner. Avoidant attachment on the other hand causes people to be dismissive and to try to extricate themselves from the judgment of others by – yes you guessed correctly – becoming defensive and arrogant.

My research confirmed this also for the political sphere. Voters who were of the avoidant type (36 percent of the participants) were much more impressed with the narcissist. A full 41 percent thought him or her a great politician vs. only 26 percent for the anxious or the healthy attachment style.

As a result, we have a quandary for any politician. There they may be wishing to be humble and due to the fact that voters come in all types and shapes many of them will then be assessed negatively.

There is however a positive piece of news that reflects back to what I have brought up many times in this book: We are not stuck with our styles. Research shows that we can easily be shifted.

What do I mean by this? Look at this piece of research regarding priming and its effects: Participants were asked to recollect a scene from their childhood where with a care-giver they had either felt safe, anxious or avoidant. Those who were primed into feeling safe ended up being much more open to arguments that had a different view point than people primed into anxiety or avoidance.9

The message is clear: If I feel safe and do not feel threatened, then I am willing to deal with people who are different from me and am even willing to listen to them.

This means that a humble communication which manages to convey a sense of personal safety will be far more willingly received. Is this sort of communication difficult? Well, it comes down to how you are talking to others. How much are you focusing on them and how much on yourself.

If you look at some of the politicians that are regarded as humble such as former US-President Obama or the former President from Uruguay José Mujica, you can see that in their speeches they show concern for their audience, they manage to convey that they are taking care of them and that people can feel safe with them. In this way, they will partly manage to shift people of avoidant type to trusting them.

Similar ways of adapting the communication will also help appeal to people with lower self-esteem and those with a greater social dominance orientation.

Of course, I am not postulating that a politician will be able to communicate well with absolutely all types of voters – yet as we know a few percentage points here and there can make the difference between being able to implement policies versus not being elected.

My research in Germany gives an indication that this might be possible. Just before the 2021 national elections, I asked 200 voters about the humility and the narcissism of each of the candidates. You can see the result in Figure 11.9: Those politicians fared best with the voters who were either seen as mainly humble and hardly narcissistic (Annalena Baerbock, Green Party) or those who were middling on both fronts (Olaf Scholz, Social Democrats). They gained more than five percent for their party as compared to the last election. Even Christian Lindner (Liberal Democrats) with still a good score on humility seems to have been able to counteract his high narcissism score. Yet if you look at Armin Laschet (Christian Democrats), it gives an indication that someone who is hardly seen as humble and mainly as narcissistic was not able to succeed. Instead, the ruling Christian Democrats ended up not only losing nine percent but the whole election and now there is a (humble?) coalition of Greens, Liberals and Social Democrats in place.

Figure 11.9 The impact of humility on the German election of 2021.

While this is only a first piece of evidence, this goes in the direction of the research seen above, which showed narcissism tempered by humility to be a successful combination also in managers.

Can Politicians Stay Humble after Having Been Elected?

This brings us to the next question. Even if I am humble when I get elected, is not holding office then typically the death of humility? Even politicians see many hurdles here.

As a consequence of these structural pressures, people see a different reality for politicians and seem to have some doubt as to whether humility in politics is truly possible.

If you ask politicians, they agree in parts, since they feel so strongly tied to their own party and their own voters that it limits their ability to act freely.

The party and the voters get you into office with a clear agenda. But in order to get things done you actually have to compromise. And of course, not all on the other side are bad. Often, they are reasonable people, with whom you can establish good working relationships and actually get things done. But when you come home, you have to pretend that you were forced to give in and that the other side is hateful or unreasonable. A real quandary!

(Former member of parliament)

To solidify their base, politicians have to be partisans. Red meat must be thrown to the hounds. At the same time, the politician has to reach beyond the partisan corral to those floating voters who want to be spoken to, not spoken for. A good politician has to be simultaneously in the battle and above the fray. A great old Scottish politician once put it this way: “A man who can’t ride two bloody horses at once has no right to a job in the bloody circus.”

(Michael Ignatieff, former Canadian politician)1

And riding two horses may make it impossible to be humble, open to learning and serving a picture bigger than one’s own party.

This is true for the “ordinary” member of parliament. It is even more dangerous for the government, especially its head. Because that’s where hubris looms. Studies show that political leaders are even more likely to fall victim to this kind of hubris. How is hubris different from normal narcissism? Firstly, in that it is developed during the time of holding office, while narcissism typically stems from childhood and then is only strengthened or weakened by the surroundings.

Secondly, it has some additional elements that go beyond narcissism. Former politician Sir David Owen, who served in an UK labor government and who as a qualified doctor took to studying politicians once he had quit active service, has developed the following assessment to uncover who has developed hubris during their time in office:10

I suggest you check this with some politicians from your country in mind.

Hubris syndrome is formulated as a pattern of behavior in a person who:

Sees the world as a place for self-glorification through the use of power.
Has a tendency to take action primarily to enhance personal image.
Shows disproportionate concern for image and presentation.
Exhibits messianic zeal and exaltation in speech.
Conflates self with nation or organization.
Uses the royal “we” in conversation.
Shows excessive self-confidence.
Manifestly has contempt for others.
Shows accountability only to a higher court (history or God).
Displays unshakeable belief that they will be vindicated in that court.
Loses contact with reality.
Resorts to restlessness, recklessness and impulsive actions.
Allows moral rectitude to obviate consideration of practicality, cost or outcome.
Displays incompetence with disregard for nuts and bolts of policy making.

Some of these behaviors are also found in a narcissistic personality or in what scientists call Anti-Social Personality Disorder or Histrionic Personality Disorder, yet five of the assessments are unique to hubris (5, 6, 10, 12, 13)

Who do researchers see as people who have developed this syndrome?

Former British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain, who in 1938 had come back from Munich negotiating with Hitler and believed that only he had seen the light and that everyone else was badly mistaken thinking of Hitler as a vile and evil man.
Former Chairman of the communist party Mao Zedong who in 1958 flabbergasted the Russian foreign minister Andrei Gromyko by telling him that he was willing to sacrifice the lives of "300 million people" in a nuclear war to further his ambition to reunite with Taiwan.11
Former US president George W. Bush, when in 2003 he believed his mission in Iraq accomplished despite copious proof to the opposite.
Former British Prime Minister Margret Thatcher, once she stopped heeding the advice of her counsel Willie Whitelaw, started referring to herself in the royal we, e.g., “We have become a grandmother,” and began waging war against her peers.
Former British Prime Minister Tony Blair, when he gave hyperbolic speeches after 9/11, citing God as being the only one to judge his actions.
Former US president Donald Trump during most of his presidency, in particular once the pandemic struck.
President of Brazil Jair Bolsonaro, when he started flaunting and mocking recommendations from health experts regarding mask wearing and social distancing.

What can politicians do to prevent them from succumbing to hubris? Ensuring that there are strong people around them who give them open and blunt feedback. Remind oneself continuously that power is finite and not tied to oneself but only to the role. Not confuse the role with oneself.

Are there some politicians who have succeeded in this?

Some say that former German chancellor Angela Merkel did well. While there is some skepticism about her ability to communicate effectively with the electorate or see the bigger picture in how Germany should act within Europe, she seemed to be willing to continuously learn as well as admit publicly to mistakes. Not only did she announce that her government initially misjudged the pandemic but also personally took all the blame for a hasty decision to declare an extra bank-holiday to break the second wave. “This mistake is solely mine, because in the end I bear the ultimate responsibility for everything.”

In addition, she seemed only little occupied with her ego or status, going to the supermarket like any other person without jumping queues or demanding special service.

An anecdote that underscores this low self-focus comes from a 2021 John Hopkins University ceremony for an honorary doctorate. She was asked about her upcoming retirement and plans for the future. Her answer was that she needed a break to think about “what really interests me. And then I’ll try to read, then I’ll rest a bit, because I’m very tired, and then I’ll sleep, and then we’ll see what happens.”

Another example often cited by interviewees is the acting prime minister of New Zealand Jacinda Ardern. She received much praise for the respectful and heartful way in which she responded to the Christchurch Mosque terror attacks in 2019 as well as how she acted during the Pandemic. She regularly and informally connected via television and engendered a consensus on how best to deal with the situation.

In interviews she also takes a humble stand:

We need our leaders to be able to empathize with the circumstances of others; to empathize with the next generation that we’re making decisions on behalf of. And if we focus only on being seen to be the strongest, most powerful person in the room, then I think we lose what we’re meant to be here for. So I’m proudly focused on empathy, because you can be both empathetic and strong.12

Her ability to focus on the bigger picture also helped her rise above any self-doubts when she became prime minister:

I actually don’t think that there was some big moment where I suddenly found confidence, I found responsibility instead. And that actually has always been a bigger motivation for me, more than anything else; that sense of duty. I had opportunities where people would come to me and say: “We think you should do this.” And I think, “Ooh, I don’t know that I’m up for that”, but then I’d feel like I had to, that I owed it to the people, I owed it to others who are asking me, that I had a duty, a responsibility. That in the end was what overcame my confidence gap; feeling like I needed to for other people, and look, whatever it takes.13

Another leader who is seen as humble is the above-mentioned José Mojica, who was Prime Minister of Uruguay from 2010 to 2015. A former guerrilla who spent more than ten years in prison, he became known as the “poorest president” donating all but $800 of his $12,000 salary to charities. In addition, he continued to live in the ramshackle farm he and his wife owned before he became president. It is said that his default setting was love: “I do not hate. Do you know what a luxury it is not to hate?”14

While there is some dispute as to whether Mujica ended up being an effective president, an article published in 201515 posited that even though the tangible effects of his presidency were not very clearly measurable, all the poor people the author had spoken to had felt that their life had become better. They were enthusiastic that for the first time they “had been seen.”

A similar story is told of former President Obama. While of course there is also much he is seen to have failed at, many see him as one of the greatest communicators – genuinely appreciating others:

He has such great power and yet talked with such humility. He has a unique ability to connect earthly, daily activities to aspirational dreams for a greater future, and has told countless stories to help us emotionally connect with others who are separated from us by distance and time.16

A more scientific data to look at is the Gallup Presidential Approval Ratings, where Obama reached an average of more than 50 percent not only in his first year as president but also in his last year. This last data point puts him above 10 other presidents in final-year approvals. Only G. W. Bush, Ronald Reagan, Eisenhower and Roosevelt were equally good or better at generating cohesion.

Obama also admitted to having made mistakes. When in his first year he had been too hasty in appointing someone to health secretary he openly admitted: “I screwed up,” setting a new tone for the administration, which the electorate appreciated.

Gerald Ford, who acted as president between 1974 and 1977, is another politician perceived as humble. He took over from President Nixon after the Watergate affair and focused on what he called “the healing process.” Serving this bigger picture, he declared a full and unconditional pardon for Nixon, which act actually cost him re-election. Yet he believed it to be essential for the bigger picture. He also had a fine sense of what should remain private and what should be out in the open. He was very devout and had daily meetings with three other Congressmen for late-morning prayer sessions that never were publicized – on purpose: The sessions, which began in 1967 and continued off and on through 1975, were "very quiet," totally off the record, Ford said. “Talk about going to Bible study and people will get the idea that you think you're somehow better than they are.”17 He also refused to use his religion in the election campaign against Carter who won most of the vote from the evangelical community. Something that Ford might have changed but following his own values did not.

Nelson Mandela is another example of someone who became humble and managed to serve and steer South Africa through difficult times. Three anecdotes to exemplify this:

He was obviously very much aware of his weaknesses18: "It is a tragedy to go to jail, especially a white man's jail," Mandela said. But while there, "you can sit down when everyone else is asleep and distance yourself from yourself and discover how you have behaved. Some of the things I discovered made me ashamed. I was convinced I did not belong to this human race."
He could show appreciation:19 “On his first day in office he came upon an Afrikaner by the name of John Reinders, chief of presidential protocol during the tenure both of the last white president, FW de Klerk, and his predecessor, PW Botha. He was packing his boxes, when Mandela came in. ‘Good morning, how are you?’ said Mandela, with a cheery grin. ‘Very well, Mr. President, and you?’ ‘Very well, very well …’ Mandela replied. ‘But, ah … may I ask, what are you doing?’ Reinders, who was packing away his belongings into cardboard boxes, replied: ‘I am taking away my things, Mr. President. I am moving to another job.’ ‘Ah, very good. Where is it you are going?’ ‘Back to the prisons department. I served there as a major before coming to work here in the presidency.’ ‘Ah, no,’ Mandela grinned. ‘No, no, no. I know that department very well. I would not recommend doing that.’ Turning serious, Mandela proceeded to persuade Reinders to stay. ‘You see, we people, we are from the bush. We do not know how to administer a body as complex as the presidency of South Africa. We need the help of experienced people such as yourself. I would ask you, please, to stay at your post. I intend only to serve for one presidential term and then, of course, you would be free to do as you wish.’ Reinders, as astonished as he was charmed, needed no further explanations. Slowly, shaking his head in wonder, he began to empty his boxes. Reinders, whose eyes filled with tears as he recalled that story sometime later, told me that during the five years he had served at Mandela's side, travelling far and wide with him, he had received nothing but courtesy and kindness.”
And thirdly, he managed to convince his party colleagues not to strike out the old South African hymn “Die Stem” but to agree to keeping it and for the time being (1994–1997) simply adding the unofficial hymn of Black South Africa “Nkosi Sikelel' iAfrika.” Why? Because he had understood the bigger picture and that he must not threaten and loose the white people.

There are yet more examples of humble behavior observed in politicians:

Charles de Gaulle is still extolled for paying his own electricity bills when living as president at the Elysée.
Helmut Schmidt, former chancellor of Germany, in 1977 took five hours to talk to three highly valued authors (Heinrich Böll, Max Frisch, Siegfried Lenz) and the publisher Siegfried Unseld in order to understand what drives young people to terrorism.
Austrian chancellor Bruno Kreisky remained listed in the public phone directory of Vienna and publicly claimed that he wished to serve “this country as did Sonnenfels serve Maria Theresia.” Sonnenfels was a proponent of enlightenment, ensured the abolition of torture and other legal reforms.
We already saw how former Indian President APJ Abdul Kalam was mentioned as an example for a humble person. The press points out how he strongly focused on appreciating others, regardless of religion or age. For example, he made it a priority to meet one-on-one with young people setting a target of 500,000 such exchanges for his five-year term! He donated his salary to a trust, living a spartan life while communicating a clear bigger picture for a strong India, saying: “We must think and act like a nation of a billion people and not like that of a million people.”

With all these examples, it is clear that humble politicians can at times succeed.

Is it still harder than in a company? I think that political power coupled with party politics and the press creates even more challenges than is the case in normal business. The feeling of being involved in something valuable, of being dedicated to something greater - namely governing - can easily lead to taking oneself for too important. Being part of a party whose interest it is to scarcely see anything good in the other party builds up the pressure not only to see others as enemies, but also to portray them as such.

Add to this the slightly perverse pleasure that most readers take in crises, conflicts and corruption, and the result is that many politicians think little of those they are supposed to represent, which voters of course immediately sense and attribute to narcissism and arrogance.

Thus humility in politics remains a difficult business, which John F. Kennedy wisely summed up thus:

Mothers all want their sons to grow up to be president, but they don’t want them to become politicians in the process.

Take Away: Possible if hard – It is possible to succeed in politics with humility. Yet it is hard to escape external pressures toward narcissism, hubris, and partisanship.

Notes
   https://www.forbes.com/sites/niallmccarthy/2019/01/11/americas-most-least-trusted-professions-infographic/?sh=650717e7e94e. Retrieved 12.11.2022
   https://www.cv-library.co.uk/recruitment-insight/10-least-trusted-professions-uk/. Retrieved 12.11.2022
   https://www.outlookindia.com/newsscroll/armed-forces-in-india-most-trusted-politicians-least-survey/1621477. Retrieved 12.11.2022
For a good overview of the research see Jäckle, S., & Metz, T. (2017). Beauty contest revisited: The effects of perceived attractiveness, competence, and likability on the electoral success of German MPs. Politics & Policy, 45(4), 495–534.
Antonakis, J., & Dalgas, O. (2009). Predicting elections: Child’s play! Science, 323(5918), 1183–1183.
D'Errico, F. (2020). Humility-based persuasion: Individual differences in elicited emotions and politician evaluation. International Journal of Communication, 14, 20.
Dwiwardani, C., Hill, P. C., Bollinger, R. A., Marks, L. E., Steele, J. R., Doolin, H. N., … & Davis, D. E. (2014). Virtues develop from a secure base: Attachment and resilience as predictors of humility, gratitude, and forgiveness. Journal of Psychology and Theology, 42(1), 83–90.
Jarvinen, M. J., & Paulus, T. B. (2017). Attachment and cognitive openness: Emotional underpinnings of intellectual humility. The Journal of Positive Psychology, 12(1), 74–86.
Ignatieff, M. (2013). Fire and Ashes. Harvard University Press.
Owen, D. (2008). Hubris syndrome. Clinical Medicine, 8(4), 428.
   https://www.chicagotribune.com/news/ct-xpm-1988-02-23-8804010824-story.html. Retrieved 12.11.2022
   https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/may/31/jacinda-ardern-political-leaders-can-be-both-empathetic-and-strong. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Blackwell, G. (2021). I Know This To Be True: Jacinda Ardern. Chronicle Books.
   https://www.economist.com/americas-view/2014/08/21/a-conversation-with-president-jose-mujica. Retrieved 12.11.2022
   https://pulitzercenter.org/stories/jose-mujica-was-every-liberals-dream-president-he-was-too-good-be-true. Retrieved 12.11.2022
   https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/24/barack-obama-such-power-such-humility. Retrieved 12.11.2022
   https://content.time.com/time/nation/article/0,8599,1573304-2,00.html. Retrieved 12.11.2022
   https://www.nola.com/opinions/article_06f978a7-b02f-595f-8c3b-a6a24598b59f.html. Retrieved 12.11.2022
   https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/07/nelson-mandela-freedom-fighter-john-carlin. Retrieved 12.11.2022

===== FILE 20/23: xhtml%2fc12.xhtml =====

Chapter 12 Examples of Humility as an Inspiration

DOI: 10.4324/9781003358015-12

I speak to everyone in the same way, whether he is the garbage man or the president of the university.

Albert Einstein (Swiss physicist 1879–1955)

Summary

There are a number of companies and people who successfully embody humility, be it in the search for openness, the willingness to acknowledge others for what they do, to analyze one's own weaknesses or to perceive the big picture.

Pixar1

Pixar is an animation studio in Hollywood. Founded in 1979 as a subsidiary of the Lucasfilm computer department, it became independent in 1986 with investment from Steve Jobs. In 2006 it was bought by Disney but is allowed considerable freedom and independence. Pixar has produced 26 films, all of which have been hits.

One of the reasons why Pixar has become so successful has to do with something called Braintrust. This is an open feedback process which was instituted in 1999. It entails a group of colleagues meeting regularly and intensively discussing the film that is currently being developed. According to Ed Catmull, one of the core figures at Pixar, the goal is to “push toward excellence and to root out mediocrity.” Behind this phrase lies the clear recognition of own weaknesses. “Early on, all of our movies suck. Pixar films are not good at first, and our job is to make them so – to go, as I say, ‘from suck to not-suck’.”

What happens in this process is openness, openness and openness. With a few rules: The feedback to the filmmaker must be constructive. The filmmaker must not take the criticism personally and be prepared to hear the truth. The comments made are only suggestions, not rules. Very important: The feedback must be empathic – strongly peppered with praise and appreciation.

The results? A different and better ending, in which WALL-E is saved by EVE. A better storyline to explain what happens to our memories in “Inside Out.”

Ed Catmull sums it up like this:

Candor isn’t cruel. It does not destroy. On the contrary, any successful feedback system is built on empathy, on the idea that we are all in this together, that we understand your pain because we’ve experienced it ourselves. The need to stroke one’s own ego, to get the credit we feel we deserve – we strive to check those impulses at the door. The Braintrust is fueled by the idea that every note we give is in the service of a common goal: Supporting and helping each other as we try to make better movies.

And the best thing: “Sometimes, magic happens. And by magic, I mean the ego has left the room.”

Catmull himself had a strong role as a catalyst in the process, while repeatedly pointing out that he was probably the stupidest in the whole company. Yet they say about him:

The thing about Ed is, he’s one of the most brilliant guys you’ll ever meet. In the world of mathematics, he’s a demigod. The Catmull-Rom spline (a function in mathematics) is named after him. He built this place – yet his philosophy was always to hire people smarter than he is. He’s this really rare combination of incredible intelligence and zero ego.

The key realization that underlies the culture at Pixar is that everyone, absolutely everyone can contribute to an idea. Employees are thrown into different environments and processes – all so that everyone can learn to express and represent their ideas artistically. Why? Because “fear is the greatest killer of creativity. To cultivate a strong creative environment, you have to make it comfortable for people to express their ideas.”2

Zappos

Zappos was founded 1999 in San Francisco as an online shoe store. Following a first big growth spurt in an aim to reduce its high churn rate in 2004, the company moved to Las Vegas, Nevada. Nearly 80 percent of employees were willing to make the 600-mile move – all for the sake of an even better corporate culture. In order to bolster this very culture, Zappos introduced a boot camp for new employees. With a twist. After its four weeks, everyone is offered a monthly salary if they decide not to start at Zappos! You have to savor this: I apply, get accepted, get to know the company and now they offer me a month’s salary so I don't start! Why? A safety measure, so that only those people who truly fit in with the culture and who want to stay are brought on board. And not those who feel they have already invested too much. This is a clever way to prevent sunk costs from arising in the first place.

Since 2009 Zappos has been part of Amazon as an independent unit. Today Zappos has about 1,500 employees and a turnover of $2 billion.

One of its ten core values is humility. Founder Tony Hsieh (1973–2020) summed up how Zappos tries to test for humility:

The hardest to test is core value no. 10: humility. You can't just say, “How humble are you?” And you say, “I am the humblest person in the whole wide world”. One of the ways we test for this... many of our candidates are from out of town, so we pick them up from the airport with a Zappos shuttle, offer them a tour, and then they spend the whole day doing interviews. At the end of the day of interviews, the recruiter will return with the shuttle driver. The recruiter will then ask exactly how the shuttle driver was treated by the interviewees. It does not matter how well the day of the interviews went, if they did not treat the shuttle driver well, we will not hire them. It is not even a question.3

Benjamin Franklin4

Franklin, one of the American founding fathers, wrote in his autobiography:

A Quaker friend having kindly informed me that I was generally thought proud, that my pride showed itself frequently in conversation, that I was not content with being in the right when discussing any point, but was overbearing and rather insolent, of which he convinced me by mentioning several instances, I determined endeavoring to cure myself, if I could, of this vice or folly among the rest, and I added Humility to my list, giving an extensive meaning to the word.

I cannot boast of much success in acquiring the reality of this virtue, but I had a good deal with regard to the appearance of it. I made it a rule to forbear all direct contradiction to the sentiments of others, and all positive assertion of my own. I even forbid myself, agreeably to the old laws of our Junto, the use of every word or expression in the language that imported a fixed opinion, such as certainly, undoubtedly, etc., and I adopted, instead of them, I conceive, I apprehend, or I imagine a thing to be so or so, or it so appears to me at present. When another asserted something that I thought an error, I denied myself the pleasure of contradicting him abruptly and of showing immediately some absurdity in his proposition; and in answering, I began by observing that in certain cases or circumstances his opinion would be right, but in the present case there appeared or seemed to me some difference, etc.

I soon found the advantage of this change in my manner; the conversations I engaged in went on more pleasantly.

The modest way in which I proposed my opinions procured them a readier reception and less contradiction; I had less mortification when I was found to be in the wrong, and I more easily prevailed with others to give up their mistakes and join with me when I happened to be in the right.

And this mode, which I at first put on with some violence to natural inclination, became at length so easy, and so habitual to me, that perhaps for these fifty years past no one has ever heard a dogmatical expression escape me. And to this habit (after my character of integrity) I think it principally owing that I had early so much weight with my fellow-citizens when I proposed new institutions, or alterations in the old, and so much influence in public councils when I became a member; for I was but a bad speaker, never eloquent, subject to much hesitation in my choice of words, hardly correct in language, and yet I generally carried my points.

In reality, there is, perhaps, no one of our natural passions so hard to subdue as pride. Disguise it, struggle with it, beat it down, stifle it, mortify it as much as one pleases, it is still alive, and will every now and then peep out and show itself; you will see it, perhaps, often in this history; for, even if I could conceive that I had completely overcome it, I should probably be proud of my humility.

Humility in Action: Interacting with Employees5

Dan Cable, professor at London Business School, tells of an English company that supplies food, especially dairy products and bread. It was struggling with its culture: a focus on cost reduction and better delivery accompanied by dozens of meetings full of criticism had irritated the drivers.

The management noticed and decided on a change. All managers partook in training and then started “the new.” What was this “new”? Instead of getting bogged down in nitty-gritty discussion of problems, each manager simply and repeatedly asks his drivers: “How can I help you deliver excellent service?” “How exactly can I help you deliver excellent service?” What a simple idea!

In the beginning, there was great skepticism. Affection and trust in the managers had hit rock bottom. As the questions were repeated over and over again, some drivers began to make some small suggestions. For example, one driver suggested new products such as “Gogurts” (yoghurts to go) and playful string cheese that could be delivered to parents early in the day for their children's school boxes. Another driver thought about how to report stock shortages more quickly so that customers would not be left without the food they ordered.

As the drivers received appreciation for their ideas and saw how they were implemented, their willingness to engage grew, which in turn impressed the managers and increased their respect, which in turn reciprocally increased the creativity and engagement of the delivery staff and so on.

The managers also learned in this process that much of what they had previously labeled “mistakes” were in fact innovations by the drivers which they had created to streamline processes and still deliver everything on time.

As one manager summed up, the whole cultural change process:

We really thought that we knew our delivery people inside out, but we’ve realized that there was a lot we were missing. Our weekly customer conversation meetings are now more interactive and the conversations are more honest and adult in their approach.

Humility in Action: Communication

Professor and former executive: Edward D. Hess, (1947), Managing Director Arthur Anderson, Professor Darden Business School6:

I woke up one morning with the idea that I would sign all my emails as “ed” not “Ed”. A small step, but it had meaning for me. To me, it was my way to accept the mediocrity principle. I’m just one of the billions of humans on this planet, and I’m not worthy of being a legend in my own mind. It was my way to remind myself many times a day that “it’s not all about me” and that I’m just a little player in a big world. I am little “ed”, not big “Ed”. I expect that some of you may think that this is weird. I’m not advocating that you copy me. You may find your own Quieting Ego reminders.

In the beginning, signing my name “ed” had another, unexpected impact. It caused me to reread my emails to check for tone, whether I had been a positive force and whether I tried to connect and relate to the person I was writing to before I took positions or got into a “telling” mode right off the bat. Did I use a greeting and address the person by name? Did I try to leave people in a good place? I continue those practices today. That small step slows me down to focus on the messages I’m sending, not just the words.

Humility as Seen by Benedictine Monk

Albert Altenähr, Order of the Benedictines7:

Even after 40 years in the monastery and even as abbot, it is not easy for me to make the subject of humility accessible and palatable to confreres, newcomers and people in general. The word is loaded. It is not seldom associated with a “broken back’ and “kowtowing.” It does not seem to fit today's aspirations of fostering a true self or individual self-realization. I say of myself now and then: “I have been told a lot of things – but never that I am humble.” If “humility” is associated with a weakness in walking upright and with feelings of inferiority ... then I do not strive for it. Yet, humility is in my opinion, a positive value that simply belongs to a successful life. Every so often I have seen a little bit of it ... and have possibly even held it in my hand.

Benedict's 12 stages of humility have motivated me to formulate 12 sentences on humility, which inspire me – and perhaps the reader too – to think about humility anew:

Humility grows from strength.
Humility can take the head under its arm without losing face.
You cannot humiliate a humble person.
Humility looks in its own mirror.
Humility does not explain away failure.
Humility apologizes to others.
Humility is able and willing to learn.
Humility is saying yes to earth and longing for heaven.
Humility dares to step out from limitations into vastness.
Humility is the imposition of courage.
Humility practices heaven.
Humility is never possession, but always attempt.
Humility in Selected Well-Known CEOs
Admitting Weaknesses and Errors
a. Tim Cook, CEO of Apple, 147,000 employees: Apple had been criticized in China for only repairing and not replacing iPhone 4 within the one-year guarantee. Tim Cook gave out a public apology: “We express our sincere apologies for any concerns or misunderstandings this gave consumers.” Apple also changed its warranty policy in China so that customers with a faulty iPhone would receive a new handset, rather than a repair, and Cook pledged to educate local resellers of the change to avoid any repair disputes.8
b. Satya Nadella, CEO of Microsoft, 163,000 employees: In a conference, he gave an unsatisfactory answer when he was asked about the pay gap for women. There was negative reaction in social media and the press. “My chief of staff smugly read me a tweet capturing the moment, ‘I hope Satya’s comms person is a woman and is asking for a raise right now.’ I was frustrated, but I also was determined to use the incident to demonstrate what a growth mindset looks like under pressure. … A few hours later I shot off an email to everyone in the company. I encouraged them to watch the video, and I was quick to point out that I had answered the question completely wrong. Any advice that advocates passivity in the face of bias is wrong. In some ways, I’m glad I messed up in such a public forum because it helped me confront an unconscious bias, I didn’t know I had, and it helped me find a new sense of empathy for the great women in my life and at my company.”9
c. Warren Buffet, investor and CEO of Berkshire Hathaway, 391,500 employees wrote in a letter to his shareholder in 198910: “Last summer we sold the corporate jet that we purchased for $850,000 three years ago and bought another used jet for $6.7 million. Those of you who recall the mathematics of the multiplying bacteria on page 5 will understandably panic: If our net worth continues to increase at current rates, and the cost of replacing planes also continues to rise at the now-established rate of 100% compounded annually, it will not be long before Berkshire's entire net worth is consumed by its jet. Charlie doesn't like it when I equate the jet with bacteria; he feels it's degrading to the bacteria. His idea of traveling in style is an air-conditioned bus, a luxury he steps up to only when bargain fares are in effect. My own attitude toward the jet can be summarized by the prayer attributed, apocryphally I'm sure, to St. Augustine as he contemplated leaving a life of secular pleasures to become a priest. Battling the conflict between intellect and glands, he pled: ‘Help me, Oh Lord, to become chaste – but not yet.’ Naming the plane has not been easy. I initially suggested ‘The Charles T. Munger.’ Charlie countered with ‘The Aberration’. We finally settled on ‘The Indefensible’.”
d. Reed Hasting, CEO of Netflix, 12,000 employees: “Earlier in my career, in the early days of Pure Software, I was too insecure to talk openly about mistakes with my staff, and I learned an important lesson. I was making a lot of leadership mistakes and it weighed on me heavily. Beyond my general incompetence at people management, I had indeed hired and fired five sales directors in five years. The first two times, I could blame the person I’d hired, but by the fourth and fifth failures, it was clear the problem was me. One thing I have always done is put the company before myself. Certain my own incompetence was bad for the organization, I went to the board and, as if in the confessional, detailed my inadequacies and offered my resignation. But the Pure board didn’t accept it. Financially, the company was doing well. They agreed that I’d made mistakes with people management but claimed that, if they hired someone new, that person would make mistakes also. Two fascinating things happened during that meeting. One was that, as expected, I felt immense relief because I had told the truth and come clean about my errors. The other was more interesting: the board seemed to believe in my leadership more after I had opened up and made myself vulnerable to them. I went back to the office and, at our next all-employee meeting, did the same thing I’d done in the boardroom. I outlined my mistakes in detail and expressed my regret for having hurt the company. This time, not only did I feel more relief and build trust with my staff, but also people began telling me about all sorts of mistakes they made, mistakes they’d been previously sweeping under the rug. That offered them relief, improved our relationships, and gave me more information so I could do a better job managing the business.”11
Showing Strengths
a. Tim Cook, CEO of Apple, 147,000 employees: In an interview Tim Cook gave in 2014, he explained that Jobs never expected him to lead Apple in the same way that he had. “He knew, when he chose me, that I wasn’t like him, that I’m not a carbon copy of him. And so, he obviously thought through that deeply, about who he wanted to lead Apple. I have always felt the responsibility of that.” Cook says he desperately wanted to continue Jobs’ legacy and “pour every ounce that I had in myself into the company,” but he never had the objective of being the same as Jobs. “I knew, the only person I can be is the person I am,” he continued. “I’ve tried to be the best Tim Cook I can be.”12
b. Satya Nadella, CEO of Microsoft, 163,000 employees: “I seized on an upcoming meeting with about 150 of my top leaders to tell a few stories and to share my expectations with them. First off, I told them about an anonymous Microsoft manager who had come to me recently to share how much he loved the new growth mindset and how much he wanted to see more of it pointing out, ‘Hey, Satya, I know these five people who don’t have a growth mindset.’ The guy was just using growth mindset to find a new way to complain about others. That is not what we had in mind. I told these high-potential leaders that once you become a vice president, a partner in this endeavor, the whining is over. You can’t say the coffee around here is bad, or there aren’t enough good people, or I didn’t get the bonus. ‘To be a leader in this company, your job is to find the rose petals in a field of shit.’”13
c. Götz Werner, founder and former CEO of DM, 63,000 employees: “I resolved to break the habit of asking people questions. Whenever someone asks me a question, I ask a counter-question, not just one, but three – and if possible, I add one that requires a bit of work. So instead of reacting reflexively to the question ‘Mr. Werner, how should such and such be done?’ as I have done up to now, and telling them how it's done, I now answer: ‘Have you already looked into this? And this might also be relevant. Besides, I've heard there's this company somewhere else. Why don't you go there? Find out how they do it.’ My new management logic: from director to evocator. The idea behind it was compellingly simple: whenever I, as a superior, give an answer, then the employee says: ‘All right. That's what Mr. Werner said. That's how I have to do it.’ In this way I stupefy people. The new method was incredibly successful. Whoever asked me a question got three new questions. People immediately understood: ‘If I go to Mr. Werner even though I already know the solution, he will dig deep.’ This kind of instinctive redelegation worked wonders. Suddenly no one asked without having a real problem. Now people took ownership of the answer they actually already knew and also acted on it responsibly.”14
d. Dirk Rossmann former Founder and CEO of Rossmann, 56,000 employees: “The basis for trust is honesty. People, who have been working with me for a long time, know they can tell me their opinion. When I say to an employee: ‘Now tell me what I probably think of you’, most are confused, but their answers are all the more honest. My biggest quality as entrepreneur, as boss: Bringing together people. I am an integrator, feel disagreements and address them openly. In the most cases, I am successful with this.”15
Appreciating Others
a. Tim Cook, CEO of Apple, 147,000 employees: “Cook trusted and empowered his staff to make decisions for themselves. He inspired a mentality where, according to his employees, ‘everything is possible, let’s try harder, let’s be creative, let’s try to solve it. You know we can do it. There’s this can-do attitude. People at the leadership level constantly reminded us to be creative. How do you solve the problem?’”16
b. Reed Hastings, CEO of Netflix, 12,000 employees: “We are perhaps the only public company that shares financial results internally in the weeks before the quarter is closed. We announce these numbers at a quarterly business review meeting with our top seven hundred or so managers. The financial world sees this as reckless. But the information has never been leaked. When it does one day leak (I imagine it will), we won’t overreact. We’ll just deal with that one case and continue with transparency.”

“A while back, Sheryl Sandberg of Facebook spent a day shadowing me at work. She attended all of my meetings and one-on-ones. It’s something I do occasionally with other Silicon Valley executives, so we can learn from watching one another in action. Afterward, when Sheryl and I debriefed, she said, “The amazing thing was to sit with you all day long and see that you didn’t make one decision!” I felt great - because that’s exactly what we are going for. Our dispersed decision-making model has become a foundation of our culture and one of the main reasons we have grown and innovated so quickly.”17

Willingness to Learn
a. Satya Nadella, CEO of Microsoft, 163,000 employees: “He did a bunch of things that were totally un-Microsoft-like. He went to talk to start-ups to find out why they weren’t using Microsoft.”18

When Nadella began as CEO he decided: “For starters, I decided to listen. Straightaway I heard from hundreds of employees at every level and in every part of the company. We held focus groups to allow people to share their opinions anonymously as well. Listening was the most important thing I accomplished each day because it would build the foundation of my leadership for years to come. To my first question, why does Microsoft exist, the message was loud and clear. We exist to build products that empower others.”

In his book, he also describes how he had to learn empathy: “Empathy grounds and centers me. Ironically, it was a lack of empathy that nearly cost me the chance to join Microsoft as a young man some twenty years before.” In his final interview, there was one simple question.

“Imagine you see a baby laying in the street, and the baby is crying. What do you do?” he asked.

“You call 911,” I replied without much forethought.

Richard walked me out of his office, put his arm around me, and said, “You need some empathy, man. If a baby is laying on a street crying, pick up the baby.”

Somehow, I got the job anyway, but Richard’s words have remained with me to this day.19

b. Carly Fiorina, former CEO of HP, 320,000 employees: “I needed a team who would cut me some slack while I figured out what being a sales manager was all about. This was long before the days of 360- degree feedback. Nevertheless, every three months I would give Pattie, Bill and Don a little questionnaire I’d devised and ask them to tell me what I was doing right and what I was doing wrong. They took the request seriously, were thoughtful in their responses and helped me tremendously. We also had fun with it. Occasionally Bill would stray from the assignment and give me wardrobe advice. He was usually right.”20
The Bigger Picture
a. Tim Cook, CEO of Apple, 147,000 employees: In May 2014, a member of a conservative think tank, the National Center for Public Policy Research, pushed him to consider the impact sustainability programs were having on Apple’s bottom line. But he refused. “When we work on making our devices accessible by the blind, I don’t consider the bloody ROI [return on investment],” he said.

Shortly after Cook was inducted into the Alabama Academy of Honor in 2014, he personally told Representative Todd that Apple had no intention of investing in Alabama until the state passes antidiscrimination laws. “When I think of ethics, I think of leaving things better than you found them. And to me, that goes from everything from environmentally, to how you work with suppliers with labor questions, to the carbon footprint of your products, to the things you choose to support, to the way you treat your employees…. Your whole persona fits under that umbrella.”21

b. Satya Nadella, CEO Microsoft, 163,000 employees: “I like to think that the C in CEO stands for culture. The CEO is the curator of an organization’s culture.”22
c. Götz Werner, founder and former CEO of DM, 63,000 employees: “Occasionally, in the first years of my ‘retirement’, I was met with pitying looks, especially in business circles, and someone asked the question: ‘Do you really want to give up your life's work?’ I nodded in a friendly way and answered: ‘A life's work only becomes a life's work when it is set up in such a way that it can be continued by others.’”23
Notes
   https://www.wiley.com/network/professionals/leadership-skills/the-braintrust-how-pixar-fosters-candor-among-colleagues; https://slackhq.com/pixars-ed-catmull-on-taking-risks-and-checking-your-ego; https://www.fastcompany.com/3027624/building-the-next-pixar. Retrieved 12.11.2022
   https://www.fastcompany.com/3027624/building-the-next-pixar. Retrieved 12.11.2022
   https://www.reddit.com/r/startups/comments/hb5ul/tony_hsieh_of_zappos_talks_about_not_hiring/. Retrieved 12.11.2022
   https://www.ushistory.org/franklin/autobiography/page42.htm. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Cable, D. (2018). How humble leadership really works. Harvard Business Review, 23, 2–5.
Hess, E. D., & Ludwig, K. (2020). Humility is the New Smart: Rethinking Human Excellence in the Smart Machine Age. Berrett-Koehler Publishers.
   https://abtei-kornelimuenster.de/spirituelles/2012-09-06-14-19-21/grundzuege/demut.html. Retrieved 12.11.2022
   https://www.bbc.com/news/business-21996134. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Nadella, S., Shaw, G., & Nichols, J. (2017). Hit Refresh: The Quest to Rediscover Microsoft’s Soul and Imagine.
   https://www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/1989.html. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Hastings, R., & Meyer, E. (2020). No Rules Rules: Netflix and the Culture of Reinvention. Penguin Press, New York, NY.
Kahney, L. (2019). Tim Cook: The Genius Who Took Apple to the Next Level. Penguin UK.
Nadella, S., Shaw, G., & Nichols, J. (2017). Hit Refresh: The Quest to Rediscover Microsoft’s Soul and Imagine.
Werner, G. W. (2013). Womit ich nie gerechnet habe: Die Autobiographie. Ullstein eBooks.
Rossmann, D. (2018). "... dann bin ich auf den Baum geklettert!": Von Aufstieg, Mut und Wandel, Ariston.
Kahney, L. (2019). Tim Cook: The Genius Who Took Apple to the Next Level. Penguin UK.
Hastings, R., & Meyer, E. (2020). No Rules Rules: Netflix and the Culture of Reinvention. Penguin Press, New York, NY.
   https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/nadellas-cloud-microsoft-ceo-noor-ahamed/. Retrieved 12.11.2022
Nadella, S., Shaw, G., & Nichols, J. (2017). Hit Refresh: The Quest to Rediscover Microsoft’s Soul and Imagine a Better Future for Everyone. William Collins, 101.
Fiorina, C. (2011). Tough Choices: A Memoir. Hachette UK.
Kahney, L. (2019). Tim Cook: The Genius Who Took Apple to the Next Level. Penguin UK.
Nadella, S., Shaw, G., & Nichols, J. (2017). Hit Refresh: The Quest to Rediscover Microsoft’s Soul and Imagine.
Werner, G. W. (2013). Womit ich nie gerechnet habe: Die Autobiographie. Ullstein eBooks.

===== FILE 21/23: xhtml%2fc13.xhtml =====

Chapter 13 How to Implement Humility in Your Company and a Glance into the Future

DOI: 10.4324/9781003358015-13

I believe in getting into hot water; it keeps you clean.

G. K. Chesterton (English writer 1874–1936)

Summary

Anyone who wants to implement humility in a company has several levers. The most important one is the example set by the manager. It is also possible to use interventions that make the topic more acceptable. A glance to the future shows what may be possible

I just recently read a book with case studies. They were concise, well-written and detailed. Yet I found in myself the same reaction that I so often observe in my participants: “Sounds all good and well, but would not work at my company. I do not quite believe the story - I bet there is lots more behind it, that the authors are not telling us.”

Is this healthy or unhealthy skepticism? To be frank, I have no answer to this. All I know is that we humans find it very hard to imagine recreating someone’s result for ourselves. Yes, we can see that Netflix has a powerful feedback culture. But how to get there? Yes, one employee at Prudential Singapore decided to stay after having observed the humble way in which the company dealt with the crisis of having deducted too many premiums. But who knows what was the real reason for her staying?

How do I get to a culture in which I can expect my people to act humbly more or less all the time?

This leads me to the question, of how can the topic of humility be promoted in your company? How can it happen, that you think of what is possible, not of what is probable?

Interviews show considerable concern and also pose serious questions.

How can the strength of humility be recognized and used without it being – and I say this now quite deliberately – without it being too womanish.

(Interview No. 2, Female Head Talent Management, 10,000 employees)

How can we raise the humility not only of managers but also of employees. Humility also means courageously going forward and speaking out and bravely revealing ourselves. How can we encourage this - with employees, with managers and also among managers themselves?

(Interview No. 3, Branch Manager, 22,000 employees)

From my point of view, there are three steps you need to take.

First, take an honest inventory to see how you are doing with humility. Using the questionnaires in the book and others to see what barriers to humility exist in your organization. Is there no real culture for dealing with mistakes? Is there a lack of psychological safety and empowerment? Do employees feel unappreciated? Is there a pervasive mentality that change is impossible? Do employees and colleagues, as well as yourself, truly take responsibility for their roles? How is open learning practiced? What is being done to ensure that everyone sees the big picture? Do people believe they are already humble, but no one recognizes it? On all of these points, you should know where you and your team stand.

The second step is to launch some interventions to create awareness about the benefits of humility, but also the stumbling blocks along the way. This is simple cognitive work where employees and leaders can learn about transparency illusions, hubris, lack of appreciation or any of the dozens of other obstacles described in this book. More behavioral work follows in other workshops: what exactly are my strengths and weaknesses and how do I show them, how do I acknowledge others, how can we continuously learn without getting stuck in a fixed mindset, what is the bigger picture for everyone, the team and the company.

In the third step, you then promote the everyday humble culture by clearly acting humbly yourself and consistently making humility an issue. Be a conscious role model for personal growth in your everyday life. This will usually have an impact on your colleagues and superiors. If this is not possible, focus on your own team first and try to win over the peer or higher levels step by step – with all the wisdom and perseverance that your higher goals award you with. And if that fails, it may be a good idea to look for the next challenge in your work life without feeling like a victim.

What to do when you encounter resistance? Well, one option is to respond as this CEO of a media company with more than 16,000 employees did. He had suggested to his top team that they take not only strategy courses but also leadership courses at a prestigious business school. The CFO informed them that he neither needed nor wanted these courses. And the response? The CEO said, "I've been there – so you go, too." That was the end of the resistance.

And keep at it. In the long run, any culture can be changed. The important thing is that whenever you doubt that humility is possible in your part of the company or in the company as a whole, check your assumptions, look at your attitude and keep trying. Recall the examples of disgruntled leaders who felt their efforts were undermined by unwilling employees. Most of the time, it has not much to do with unwillingness, but more to do with employees lacking a sense of security and motivation. Once the manager focuses on this, life usually gets easier.

Use your communication skills and persistence to push the issue. And avoid Paul Anderson's mistake of demanding humility but only asking for numbers. Why? Because it's clear to many that financial results and humility go hand in hand.

I am convinced that a company with a healthy culture will also be financially healthy.

(Interview No. 17, CSO, 400 employees)

When you have a good culture, numbers will be good. And if we compromise somewhat that gives us pay off in people’s wellbeing.

(Interview No. 125, Group CEO, 1,200 employees).

And finally, it is reassuring to know that once the definition of humility has been established, employees and managers find this to be a highly desirable virtue. Both in my seminars and in the interviews, I have noticed a real hunger for humility. It is as if a weight falls off the shoulders of both employees and managers when they are allowed to embrace and live this virtue.

An internationally active trainer further confirmed this impression when she told me that during an exercise, participants most frequently paired the term "humility" with the word: "liberation." The second most frequent term was "purity", i.e., a kind of self-purification that is taking place via humility.

And this is exactly how humility is to be seen in the company: As liberation and purification from an obstructive ego. From an ego that blocks our view of the situation, others and ourselves and drives us towards egocentric automatisms that harm us all.

A Glance into the Future

Next to me there are other optimists among researchers and management writers. One of them is Frederic Laloux, who has written a highly acclaimed book on how companies reinvent themselves.1 For this book, he interviewed dozens of managers who, in his view, have developed a new awareness. He calls these executives by the color “Teal.”

And he describes them like this:

Today, in small but increasing numbers, leaders are growing into the next stage of consciousness…. They are mindful, taming the needs and impulses of their ego. They are suspicious of their own desires – to control their environment, to be successful, to look good, or even to accomplish good works. They develop an ethic of mutual trust and assumed abundance.

(This ethic) accepts reality and can observe facts and gather data. But is also open to other sources of knowing than just rational-analytical. Intuition honors the complex, ambiguous, paradoxical, non-linear nature of reality – and connects or discerns patterns on another level.

The new mindset transcends the either-or thinking and embraces both-and thinking.2

That sounds like a perfect description of humility. It is about recognizing yourself and trusting others. About penetrating cognitively while listening to what there is beyond cognition. About living a healthy narcissism. About recognizing when you are the best and then taking full responsibility. Like Cincinnatus within a framework that is sanely limiting – circumstances, the ability of others, your own weaknesses. With the ease of relinquishing the scepter and still remaining a person at peace with yourself.

Acknowledge duality: It is about a strong self, just as it is about one's own weaknesses. It is about the ability of others and how to support them in their weaknesses. It is about what you already know and what is to be learned. It is about the little things and how to take good care of them, while the big things are not lost and are always the central guiding principles.

In the end, it is not about an “either or” but about an “AND.” And we humans can do that.

Notes
Laloux, F. (2014). Reinventing Organizations: A Guide to Creating Organizations Inspired by the Next Stage in Human Consciousness. Nelson Parker.
   https://www.leadershipandchangemagazine.com/teal-organizations-and-cultures/; https://www.thegeniusworks.com/2018/04/reinventing-organisations-creating-a-more-agile-human-and-soulful-organisation-for-the-21st-century/. Retrieved 12.11.2022.

===== FILE 22/23: xhtml%2fappendixA.xhtml =====

Appendix A: FAQs
Is humble leadership a new leadership style?

I am often asked how humble leadership fits in with existing leadership styles of which there are many. Let us take a closer look.

Research tends to sort leadership styles into three larger categories: Relational, task-related and change-related. A distinction is made between whether I as a leader focus more on people, things or the larger process.

Amongst relational leadership styles are:

Charismatic or visionary leadership that uses charm and persuasion to convince employees of ideas.
Laissez-Faire leadership which trusts employees and lets them more or less walk alone.
Authentic leadership which requires a very personal contact between employee and manager that generates trust.
Ethical leadership which is based on personal values and respect for the values of others.
Servant leadership which sees the manager first and foremost as a tool and guide for his employees to reach their potential.

Amongst task-related leadership styles are:

Transactional management which acts through clearly defined tasks and intensive control paired with rewards and sanctions.
Authoritarian leadership which is an extreme version of transactional leadership, in which the manager accepts almost no suggestions or ideas from the workforce, but primarily decides everything by himself/herself.

The key change-related leadership style is:

Transformational leadership which attempts to inspire and lead employees to new shores by means of a vision.

There are numerous overlaps between the individual styles. Transformational leadership contains a lot of charisma and I would like to see the leadership style that completely ignores the issue of ethics and authenticity.

At the same time, it is clear to everyone that all three elements typically have to be addressed in a normal leadership role: Building relationships, completing tasks, creating change. Ergo, most managers will tend to use a number of styles at different times. This is also the focus of experts such as Daniel Goleman who proposes a leadership typology, which requires emotional intelligence for using the right style at the right time for the right person. Six distinct styles should be at hand: coercive, authoritative/visionary, democratic, affiliative, pacesetting and coaching.

In general, a differentiation between and a classification of leadership styles makes sense for research purposes (and consequently for you), because the research helps measure the effectiveness of the individual styles in different situations. Think of it, as the right clothing to wear. Some situations require a suit, others a pair of linen trousers, yet others a hiking outfit. In the same vein, the servant leadership style may be helpful for insecure employees, the transformational style in times of communicating a new strategy and – depending on the maturity of your team – either the laissez-faire or transactional style for a nitty gritty SAP implementation. The same holds true for the Goleman styles: Coercive for situations of crisis, coaching or authoritative for onboarding and pace-setting for situations, where it is important to level differences within the team.

As a summary, the recommendation is clear: it is worth your while having your wardrobe stocked in such a way, that in whatever leadership situation you find yourself, you will never be stark naked in front of your employees.

What now about humility? I do not want to claim that humility is a style of leadership that could be described as an egg-laying wool-milk sow (a useful German expression for something that is ideal) – that would be truly presumptuous in a book about humility.

Instead, I follow a group of researchers who see humility not as a leadership style at all, but as a virtue that forms the basis of every action and thus of every leadership style.

This view has a lot to offer because the four core points of humility are about a fundamental approach to life. To recognize yourself, appreciate others, be willing to learn and see the bigger picture is less a style than a general view of the world and oneself with a liberating effect. After all, humility rejects any label that one so readily gives oneself: “I am more of a relationship person” or “I am a transactional type.” Humility does not permit a manager to use the excuse of internalized or inherited behavioral patterns. Instead, a humble leader who is willing to learn will use any style of leadership that is known to him/her wherever it is justified.

Ergo: Humility is not a leadership style, but a basic attitude, a virtue with which the leader enters the world.

The additional bonus of this view is that humility is therefore also a virtue for employees. A common language can be generated around this concept – something that you cannot do with a leadership style – since those are confined to … leaders.

What is the difference between the concept of humility and servant leadership?

When Robert K. Greenleaf published his seminal book on Servant Leadership, he defined it as follows1: “The servant-leader is servant first… It begins with the natural feeling that one wants to serve, to serve first.” The CEO of the Greenleaf Center for Servant Leadership Kent Keith elaborates further: “A servant-leader loves people and wants to help them. The mission of a servant-leader is, therefore, to identify the needs of others and try to satisfy those needs.”2

Since 1977 hundreds of academic articles have been published on the topic citing numerous positive effects of servant leadership for employees, such as more psychological safety, more commitment, more innovation, less exhaustion and cynicism.3

You can quickly spot the similarities with humility in that both concepts are other-focused. Both see less room for the leader’s ego, for arrogance or narcissism. On the other hand, the differences also emerge quickly.

Firstly, only managers can be servant leaders, while also employees can be humble.

Secondly, for many managers the challenge in servant leadership is that the focus is ONLY on employees and their growth. This neglects the company and also the person of the leader him- or herself. In humility, one of the key elements is to perceive the bigger picture and lead with that in mind. The bigger picture includes the needs of the department, the company, the society as well as the self. This does not square with the definition of servant leadership that both Greenleaf and research propose.

Yet, in many conversations it seems that managers have for themselves extended the definition of servant leadership to also cover these two points. Which actually turns it into humility, which as you now know not only focuses on the person of the follower but also on the bigger picture including one’s own person.

Thirdly, servant leadership is seen to be effective by actions that are taken to foster the growth of employees, while humility works indirectly by the manager modeling growth.

So, while the concepts have some similarities, I humbly propose that the differences make humility the more attractive option for all.

Are there sub-categories of humility?

Research singles out two sub-categories of humility, namely intellectual and cultural humility.

Intellectual humility is about people accepting the fact that they are not always right and provides them with the willingness to listen to the opinions of others while possibly even changing their own. It focuses the topic of humility on individual convictions and views of the world and is thus somewhat narrower than the general concept of humility.

Cultural humility, on the other hand, has something to do with how much we succeed in not considering our own culture, our own background, our own experiences as superior to others. This is of course relevant for every manager who has contact with other cultures. Do you catch yourself thinking that the English, Chinese, German or Italian way of doing things is the best of all? Then this form of humility is for you.

It does, of course, not stop you from openly agreeing with your business partners on, for example, an “English” understanding of responsibility, a “Chinese” understanding of respect, a “German” understanding of time or an “Italian” way of relationships. But it also means that you accept in principle that excellence and valuable cooperation can take place in other cultures and that these cultures are equal to your own. Neither is yours better nor theirs – each has its advantages and disadvantages and if you interact humbly with each other, then success will ensue.

Notes
Greenleaf, R. K. (1977). Servant Leadership: A Journey into the Nature of Legitimate Power and Greatness. Paulist Press, New York.
Jacobs, G. A. (2010). Book review: Kent M. Keith’s (2008) The case for servant leadership. International Journal of Leadership Studies, 6(2), 297–300.
Eva, N., Robin, M., Sendjaya, S., van Dierendonck, D., & Liden, R. C. (2019). Servant leadership: A systematic review and call for future research. The Leadership Quarterly, 30(1), 111–132.

===== FILE 23/23: xhtml%2findex.xhtml =====

Index
A
Active listening, 230
Age, 23–43, 245–271
Ambidextrous organization, 68
Appreciating others, 13–14, 157–175
Army Leadership Manual, 88–89
Assessing yourself correctly, 13
Atmosphere and stress, 63–64
B
BEAR model, 169–170
Beliefs, 73, 188
Benedict’s 12 stages of humility, 293
Benefits of humility, 45–100
The BET model, 169
Bigger picture, 15, 211–226
Biology, limits of, 120–121
Blood sugar levels, 121
Braintrust, 289–290
Britain, 251–252
Business press, 4–5
C
Charismatic leadership tactics, 186
China, 252–253
Competence, 240
Contagion effect, 63
Covid-19 changes, 41–42
Create culture of learning, 204–207
Creativity and innovation, 56–60
Culture, 73–76
The Culture Map (Meyer), 263
Curse of knowledge, 238
Customer loyalty, 83–84
D
Deep acting, 60–61
Demography, 234–237
Differentiating behavior, 64–65
Diversity, 40–41, 80–81
Dunning-Kruger effect, 116
E
Emotional exhaustion, 231
Empathy, 296
Employees stressfulness, 240–241
Evil, 62–63
Excessive self-confidence, 107, 117
Exchange of knowledge, 59, 239
Exhaustion, 89–90
F
Fault lines, 237
Feedback, 121–123, 137, 179
Female manager, 33, 36, 38, 236
Female top managers, 117
Female vs. male employees, 234–235
The Fifth Discipline (Senge), 191
France, 253–254
Franklin, Benjamin, 291–292
Future, 137, 301–302
G
Gartner hype cycle adapted, 223
Gender, 264–265
Germany, 254–255
Get appreciation right, 166–175
Give and Take (Grant), 83
Good parent, 236
Grandiose narcissism, 110
Growth Mindset, 195–195, 197
H
Healthy narcissism, 110
Hearsay, 168–169
Hedonic editing, 143, 147
High-power distance, 233
How to Win Friends and Influence People (Carnegie), 132
Hubris syndrome, 282–283
Humble-bragging, 229
Humble enquiry, 53
I
Implementation humility, your company, 299–301
Imposter syndrome, 19, 118–120
Improvement of non-verbal behavior, intervention, 187
India, 255–257
Individual performance, 51
Ingroup bias, 271
In-group bias by gender, 234
Insecure overachiever, 119
Inspiration, 289–297
Intellectual humility, 193–195
Italy, 257–258
L
Lack of appreciation, 13, 165, 172, 175, 230
Laziness, 181
Learning, 262–264
Learning ability and openness, 187–207
Learning Organization, 206, 223
Length of time spent in a position has no impact on humility, 40
Limits and disadvantages, 227–242
Limits of biology, 120–121
M
Male managers, 24, 33–36, 38, 235, 236, 265, 269, 278
Market performance, 3
Measuring humility, 18–20
Meditation tool, learning and humility, 202–204
Memory chips, 86
Micro Expressions Tool, 162
Military, 71–72
Mindfulness, 202–204, 228
Morals and ethics, 61–64
N
Narcissism, 109–115, 268–269
Narcissists, 87–89, 97–98, 110–115, 268, 275–279
Nationalities, 246–261
Negative feedback, 122, 168–170, 261
Netflix, 170–171
The Netherlands, 258
Non-judgmental, 202, 204, 238
No Rules (Hastings and Meyer), 263
Nutrition, 120
O
Openness and willingness, learn, 14–15
Overconfidence, 97, 115–118, 256
Overestimating self, 28–30, 123–131
Own values, 62–63
The Oz Principle, 79
P
Performance, 85–86
Personality traits Big Five, 190
Pixar, 289–290
Politics, 273–286
Positive effects of appreciation, 159
Positive feedback, 168–170
Power distance, 232–234, 257–258
Priming, 196
Professional investors, 2–3
Psychological safety, 56–59, 74–75, 239
Pygmalion effect, 159–160, 165, 197
Q
Questionnaire, 18–19, 184, 197–198
R
Real and not fake, 229–231
Recognizing emotions, 162
Recognizing strengths, 166
Relationships, 48–50, 89–90, 92–93, 233–234, 303–305
Responsibility, 76, 128–129, 214–215, 217
Role of chance and luck, 127–131
Role of team, 125–126
S
Selected well-known CEOs, 293–297
Self-efficacy, 53–56, 241
Self-expansion, 234–235
Self-image, 56, 90–91, 242
Self-perception, 109–120
Servant leadership, 304–305
Set-Up-To-Fail-Syndrome, 163
Showing strengths, 146–151
Showing weaknesses and mistakes, 107–151
Singapore, 259–260
Sleep, 120–121, 284–285
Social dominance orientation, 280
Spotlight-effect, 123–125
Status evaluation, 165
Strengths and weaknesses, 107–151
Stress, 88–89, 241
Sub-elements of humility, 25–30
Successful strategy, 68–72
Switzerland, 260–261
T
Thinking obedience, 71–72
Top team and humility, 237–239
Turnover, 82, 112, 290
U
Underestimating, own knowledge, 238
Understanding of employees, 93–97
Unhealthy narcissism, 110–113
US, 261–262
V
Vulnerable narcissism, 110
W
Willingness to learn, 14–15, 62, 180–183, 296–297
Z
Zappos, 290–291
