TITLE: becoming-resilient
ISBN: 9781637424438
FILES: 18


===== FILE 2/18: text%2fHalfTitle.xhtml =====

Becoming Resilient

===== FILE 3/18: text%2fTitle.xhtml =====

Becoming Resilient

Staying Connected Under Adversity

Daniel Schutzer

===== FILE 4/18: text%2fCopyright.xhtml =====

Becoming Resilient: Staying Connected Under Adversity

Copyright © Business Expert Press, LLC, 2023.

Cover design by Charlene Kronstedt

Interior design by Exeter Premedia Services Private Ltd., Chennai, India

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means—electronic, mechanical, photocopy, recording, or any other except for brief quotations, not to exceed 400 words, without the prior permission of the publisher.

First published in 2023 by

Business Expert Press, LLC

222 East 46th Street, New York, NY 10017

www.businessexpertpress.com

ISBN-13: 978-1-63742-442-1 (paperback)

ISBN-13: 978-1-63742-443-8 (e-book)

Business Expert Press Service Systems and Innovations in Business and Society Collection

First edition: 2023

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

===== FILE 5/18: text%2fDescription.xhtml =====

Description

Recently, we have seen several catastrophic events causing huge disruptions, losses, and panic. There is a growing likelihood that these natural disasters and physical and cyber warfare attacks will increase in frequency and lethality, increasingly impacting civilian infrastructure, due to global warming, increased civil unrest, and global tensions as international competition increases.

Imagine if two or more occur at the same time? Certainly, cyberattacks can be planned, rehearsed, and launched during the middle of one or more natural events. Up until now, we have dealt with each of these events by trying to build systems that are better at detecting, preventing, and protecting us against them. Sadly, we have learned that these events cannot be totally prevented or stopped and have taken their toll.

There is a rising chorus arguing that we must learn to, both individually and collectively, become more resilient in the face of these disastrous events. But how? The author believes we can learn to do better by becoming more resourceful, innovative, collaborative, and by taking a page from how we fight wars. This book details how these measures can be adapted to keep our systems operational and to rapidly reconstitute lost infrastructure.

The need to become more resilient is growing more important than ever as we spend more of our working, learning, and social lives on the network, with our dependence on digital technology growing. The trends and events leading to this dependence are not going away but accelerating. This includes the dramatic increase in remote working, learning, and playing accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic. Future digital innovations made possible by communications technology advances such as 5G, 6G, and Wi-Fi 6, and low Earth orbiting satellite communications are likely to add to the momentum of this increased dependence as they gain traction and greater acceptance. But, as the threats grow, we are likely to experience an increase in the frequency and duration of our systems being damaged and/or shutting down. It will become increasingly apparent, and of increased importance and urgency, that our systems become more resilient, and that they are able to continue to function during and after the onset of natural disasters and successful physical and cyberattacks.

To make our underlying digital infrastructure more resilient, we need to not only learn how to build, maintain, and operate more resilient systems, but to become more resourceful and innovative. We need to learn to apply lessons learned by studying how we fight wars. For example, when a warship takes a devastating hit, the Navy continues fighting. Flooded compartments are sealed off. Surviving ships and aircrafts assist, lending a hand, providing vital communications, protection, and repair to the damaged ships and their supporting infrastructure, and rescuing stranded sailors. This sort of collaboration is an essential component of being resilient. When under attack and sustaining losses, the military goes into minimum essential fighting mode with the remaining resources, comes up with innovative work arounds, while rapidly reconstituting and rebuilding. So, dynamic prioritization of resources is also critical.

The good news is that many of the incredible technology advances that have increased this dependence can also be harnessed, when accompanied by people with the proper training and mindset, to achieve systems resiliency, where systems remain sufficiently up and running to meet critical prioritized needs, including being rapidly reconstituted to full service. This book goes into depth about how these sorts of measures can be adapted to keep systems and resources operational and resilient in the midst, and during the aftermath of natural disasters and physical and cyberattacks. As the awareness of the importance of our building and maintaining resilient systems grows, the demand for this book and others like it will grow.

Keywords

resiliency; survivability; rapid reconstitution; systems recovery; adaptability; cybersecurity; cyber warfare; environmental disaster; system availability

===== FILE 6/18: text%2fContents.xhtml =====

Contents

Testimonial

Chapter 1 Communications and Other Enabling Technologies

Chapter 2 21st-Century Trends and Their Impact on Our Daily Lives

Chapter 3 The Growing Threat

Chapter 4 What Is Resilience, and How Is It Measured and Tested?

Chapter 5 A Blueprint for Becoming More Resilient

Chapter 6 Concluding Remarks

Bibliography

About the Author

Index

===== FILE 7/18: text%2fTestimonial.xhtml =====

Testimonial

“The book Becoming Resilient: Staying Connected Under Adversity by Daniel Schutzer provides an excellent overview of the coming technology improvements in computing and communications with its inevitable interweaving of computing in every aspect of our lives. This interweaving breeds extreme dependency; individuals and society cannot function without connectivity. Resiliency to inevitable disasters, both natural and human (cyber), will be a matter of life and (potentially large-scale) death. This isn’t hyperbole, but the natural consequence of extreme dependency. The book provides a plethora of example applications that will bridge and blend the virtual and physical worlds.

It will be critical, therefore, for the ‘super’ internet to be designed and built to be resilient to any potential attack, even those that are not foreseen even by the best visionaries. Resiliency is in some respects more important than any other property we might demand of the coming internet. Resiliency must be a first-class principle in the design of every layer in the communications stack. The book provides a clear description of what resiliency means, and how it is not the same as security, fault tolerance, and business continuity. It is a topic that stands on its own and that future architects and system designers should study and think about deeply.

This book is an excellent grounding in the topic, and will grow in importance, especially when failures in our current systems demonstrate just how hard it is to keep operating in the face of major outages.”—Salvatore Stolfo, Professor at Columbia University

===== FILE 8/18: text%2fChapter01.xhtml =====

CHAPTER 1

Communications and Other Enabling Technologies

The last decade has seen amazing technology innovations that make possible and are motivating us toward the digitalization of everything. As our digital infrastructure has evolved and its performance improved, it has made possible exciting new applications, and our adoption of these applications has dramatically grown. As these new applications become embedded into our daily lives, so has our dependency on these marvelous technologies increased. Consider how the Web and browsing have changed. Web 1.0 was largely static and about providing information. Generally, this meant knowledge was captured and put on the Web for users to consume. With Web 2.0, the Web became dynamic, social, and interactive, with everyone both consuming and publishing knowledge, buying things, and playing online. The much-touted Web 3.0, although still being defined, is envisioned to make the Web smarter, more distributed, more democratic, embedded into every device, and even more indispensable. Recent events such as the COVID-19 pandemic have caused an acceleration of this digitalization movement. To best understand the threats we face in the 21st century, it is important to review why and how this trend toward digitalization has changed the way we live, work, and play, and what would happen if we were suddenly denied the enabling technology, and cut off from the network.

Network Trends and the Need to Be Resilient

As digital communications form the foundation upon which most of these technology changes are based, the author believes it is a key enabler of this change and critically needs to become more resilient. Ensuring that communications networks continue to function when faced with natural disasters or malicious attacks has become a key priority for both government and private industry. This includes resilience against not only environmental disasters and cyberattacks but also jamming and other forms of electronic warfare, physical destruction, supply chain interruption, and its use in misinformation campaigns. Acknowledging this need, the National Science Foundation is partnering with other federal agencies and private industry to fund RINGS—the Resilient and Intelligent Next-Generation Systems program. As stated in its description, central to NextG systems is resiliency to survive, gracefully adapt to, and rapidly recover from malicious attacks, component failures, and natural and human-induced disruptions. Private-sector partners include Apple, Ericsson, Google, IBM, Intel, Microsoft, Nokia, Qualcomm, and VMware. On the federal side, the U.S. Department of Defense’s Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering as well as and the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) are taking part.

The Importance of the Layered Communications Model

An important feature of current communications architectural models, which they all have in common, is the notion of defining communications in terms of independent layers that communicate in abstractions through standard interfaces defined in terms of services and protocols, where a service is a set of actions that a layer provides to the higher layer, and a protocol defines a set of rules that a layer uses to exchange information with peers. Two examples are:

The Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) is a seven-layer architecture defined in 1984, namely:

1. Physical layer, Layer 1, which is responsible for transmitting individual bits of information from one node (physical point) to another

2. Data link layer, Layer 2, which makes sure that the data transfer is error-free

3. Network layer, Layer 3, which takes care of finding routing a message from one location, the source, to another, the destination

4. Transport layer, Layer 4, which interfaces with the application layer to ensuring the end-to-end delivery of a complete message

5. Session layer, Layer 5, which is responsible for establishing the connection and maintenance of sessions, authentication, and ensuring security

6. Presentation layer, Layer 6, which extracts data from the application layer, manipulates it to an appropriate format for transmission over the network

7. Application layer, Layer 7, which produces and consumes the data transmitted over the network to perform some function, such as Web browsing, video conferencing, e-mail, and file transfer

The earlier Internet’s Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP), developed in the 1970s, had only four layers. It was missing the physical layer and combined Layers 5, 6, and 7 of the OSI model.

One important aspect of this architecture, described as the Internet hourglass model (Figure 1.1), is a systems architectural approach to design that seeks to support a great diversity of applications and allow independent implementation of the application versus the network. At the center of the hourglass model is a distinguished layer in a stack of abstractions that is chosen as the sole means of accessing the lower-level resources of the system. This distinguished layer can be implemented using services that are considered as lying below it in the stack as well as other services and applications that are considered as lying above it. The components that lie above the distinguished layer cannot directly access the services that lie below it. It should be noted that this hourglass model has been successfully applied in many other areas, such as biology and risk management, in addition to communication networks.

Figure 1.1 The Internet hourglass

The advantage of a network layered approach and the hourglass model is that they enable innovations and technology substitutions to be selectively introduced at one layer without impacting the other layers. For example, they allow for the selective introduction of a communication technology advance at the physical layer, such as replacing 4G transmission links with the faster 5G transmission link, without impacting the rest of the communications application and their interfaces. Also, in the case of a severed and/or degraded wired communications link, they would allow the rapid deployment and replacement of a degraded communications link with a rapidly deployed wireless link (such as employing an existing low orbiting communications satellite, such as Starlink, or a rapidly deployed drone wireless communication link). They also allow for the selective introduction of advanced routing algorithms that can operate with greater resiliency and resistance to cyberattacks, without impacting implementations built on top of another layer, such as Web browsing and e-mail applications. This allows advances in physical wireless communications and routing to be easily integrated into existing networked applications to selectively improve resiliency.

Advances in the Physical Layer

There are several existing and planned advances at the physical layer that have the potential for making new applications possible that were previously impractical, thus fostering further digitalization, and offering the potential for improving resiliency. The layered network architecture allows for these communications advances to be selectively and easily introduced without disrupting existing applications, except to allow them to operate at greatly increased speed and with lower latency. These communications advances will impact how people will use the technology and will make possible many new applications. They have both strengths and weakness that can affect both overall systems security and resiliency.

Mobile Networks

5G (fifth-generation mobile network) is the successor to 4G (fourth-generation mobile network). It first came out in early 2019, and currently, still lacks complete global coverage. Remote areas may not get the full global coverage for some years, so 5G’s full economic effect will likely not be realized until about 2035. 5G represents a significant improvement over 4G in several important respects. It supports much faster data transfer rates and a greater number of simultaneous data connections. It also has much lower latency (delay before data transfer starts). 5G’s foundational technologies are virtual, software-based (network function virtualization and software-defined networking). This virtual nature makes 5G more customizable and gives the user more control over their network speed and security.

Some key performance metrics for 5G: Up to 10 gigabits per second (Gbps) data rate—10 to 100× speed improvement over 4G networks; 1 millisecond latency; 1,000× bandwidth per unit area; able to connect 100× more devices per unit area than 4G; 99.999 percent availability; supports low-power Internet of Things (IoT) devices; employs orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) and sub-6GHz (millimeter wavelengths). Although it operates on the same mobile networking principles as 4G, 5G’s increased performance and virtual software implementation open the mobile ecosystem to many new applications. The greatly increased number of devices (billions) that can be simultaneously connected allows 5G to support IoT applications, where most of the billions of devices that connect to 5G will not be smartphones, but things that range from simple monitors and meters to sophisticated robots. It is estimated that there will be more than 22 billion connected IoT devices by 2024. Whereas, 4G supports applications such as realtime messaging, video calling and streaming, mobile TV, and popular services such as ridesharing, and food delivery applications, 5G can additionally support applications such as augmented and virtual reality (AR/VR), seamless IoT, automated cars, remote surgery, and multiplayer cloud gaming. 5G enables real-time video translation, collaboration, and streaming. It can support instant cloud access and more effective and customizable remote enterprise applications. There is no doubt that many emerging and new applications, which haven’t yet been fully envisioned, are likely to be defined in the future. Both 4G and now 5G have created new businesses, and improved our lives, but they have also contributed to our increased dependency on the network being up and available to support our everyday living and working. Although actual upload and download speeds vary by carrier and how many people are connecting, 5G generally delivers up to 20 Gbps peak data rates and 100+ megabits per second (Mbps) average data rates. It supports average upload speeds ranging from 3 to 50 Mbps (compared with 5–6 Mbps up to 15 Mbps for 4G). Average 5G download speeds vary from 150 to 200 Mbps (compared with 8–40 Mbps for 4G). The roughly comparable speed, potential for customization, and its flexibility make 5G a viable wireless alternative to a hardwired network for connecting the home and office to the Internet, and it is being marketed that way. As 5G allows the user (companies and individuals) to easily switch between wireless mobile network and hardwired, it gives the user a greater range of options for restoring lost communications and the potential for increased resiliency.

As millimeter waves work only over short distances, requiring a line of sight between the transmitter and the user, 5G’s signal won’t travel as far 4G. Because of its shorter wavelength, tall buildings and trees may block the frequency of the 5G network, resulting in various propagation problems. Rain can also cause problems for 5G coverage. Because of this decreased broadcast distance and increased obstacles to its propagation, 5G requires more towers for coverage, and this could possibly hurt attempts at reconstitution when communications nodes go down or lose power. Besides requiring an increased number of communications nodes, 5G operations require more complex software. Its greater bandwidth, added complexity, and greater number of network entry points complicate security monitoring solutions and allow cybercriminals to steal data and attack the network more easily. This increased vulnerability to cyberattack is recognized, and efforts are being taken to improve the security. This causes additional user security-related expense, necessitating security operations center, end-to-end encryption, keeping all IoT devices updated with security patches, and investing in consumer education, to help overcome these potential security problems. A 5G connection will also result in a greater battery drain that could significantly reduce a phone’s lifespan. Many phone users say that they experience more heat on their devices while running 5G. As a result, manufacturers are investing in new battery technologies to protect the battery from damages and other problems.

6G (sixth-generation standard for wireless communications technologies) is the planned successor to 5G (Figure 1.2). While still in development, 6G is contemplated to operate at terahertz frequency bands (frequencies between 100 GHz and 10 THz, or wavelengths between 3 mm and 30 μm). Operating at these frequencies would make 6G significantly faster than 5G, capable of delivering a peak data rate of 1,000 Gbps, about 100 times faster than 5G, with latency less than 100 microseconds. Its greatly increased data transfer rates and capacity supports a connection density as high as 10 million devices per square kilometer, allowing almost every imaginable device to be simultaneously connected. Its higher frequencies can support innovations such as zero-latency local networks, wireless data rates comparable to that of fiber optics, between local devices, wireless data center networks (reducing infrastructure cost), on-chip wireless networks, and nano-networks (which connect nano-devices).

6G is still relatively far in the future, and its full impact is still speculative, but it could revolutionize many industries and applications. It has the potential to support applications such as automated surgery, the rapid transfer of medical data, implantable devices, and intersatellite communications. Combined with embedded artificial intelligence (AI) technology, 6G allows the creation of a smart application layer of interconnected devices, from autonomous vehicles to medical implants to geolocation sensors, all of which will communicate with one another in real time. Built on top of this intelligent sensing layer, 6G could result in a Web of sensing and detecting technologies that rapidly collect and analyze huge quantities of relevant data from these interconnected devices. It could result in a world where every piece of life is connected, and every accompanying bit of data is collected. 6G’s widespread deployment will not only have the potential to revolutionize how we live, work, and play but will dramatically increase our dependence on its enabling communications infrastructure, making even a temporary loss, devastating, even life threatening. It has been predicted that when 6G hits the market, sometime after 2030, the smartphone will likely be supplanted by future communications devices that more closely resemble smart glasses or a neckband or chips embedded in our skin, and that we’ll interact through the metaverse, with users entering virtual worlds where their actions are reflected in the real world.

Figure 1.2 6G frequency range

Credit: TOPTICA Photonics AG/www.toptica.com

Many of the shortcomings of 5G are amplified in 6G. While the frequency regions immediately below and above this band (the microwaves and the far infrared, respectively) have been extensively investigated, the terahertz range is one of the least-explored frequency bands for communication. It has some unique properties such as being able to look inside plastics, textiles, paper, and cardboard, penetrating thin layers of materials, but is blocked by thicker objects. It is absorbed by water and many organic substances and has high chemical sensitivity. As terahertz radiation is strongly absorbed by the gases of the atmosphere, and in air is attenuated to zero within a few meters, it is challenging for terrestrial radio communication. And, as it is anticipated that 6G will have a transmission distance below 200 meters, a full 6G implementation would require about 100 billion base stations globally, or one per block in many U.S. cities. However, unlike 4G LTE and 5G networks, which use cell towers and small cells (small transmitters installed on street corners and utility poles) to beam Internet and cellular data to our phones and other wireless devices, edge computing devices (devices where data processing, analysis and, in some cases, actions occur locally) could themselves become 6G network antennas. These edge computing devices could include sensors, autonomous cars, and industrial robots. As these devices could serve as their own antenna, they could be used to rapidly reconstitute service. This vastly increased number of devices serving as their own antennas could improve resiliency by maintaining your Wi-Fi connection in a fluid, ever-shifting collection of users and their devices. Edge computing devices serving as their own antennas can also be used effectively for solutions to keep one’s applications running, even when their systems have been cut off and are operating inside an isolated island. However, sustainably powering all these devices is a big challenge. Also challenging are some agricultural systems that operate in rural areas that may lack high-bandwidth network connections.

As with 5G, there should be no health concerns with using 6G as unlike X-rays, terahertz waves do not have any ionizing effects and are generally considered biologically safe. However, both 5G and 6G pose other regulatory challenges. In the United States, there are currently two separate federal agencies tasked with regulating these higher-frequency spectrums, namely the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), which governs private use of spectrum, and the National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA), which manages the federal government’s spectrum use. As both agencies have jurisdiction over these higher-frequency spectrums, meaningful coordination between the two agencies will be required. In addition, the Federal Aviation Agency (FAA) gets involved in the communications interference with aircraft operations, especially around airports. The presence of multiple regulatory agencies can have downsides, as agencies can fight over territory, credit, and decision-making authority. In March 2019, the FCC voted to open frequencies up to 3 THz, saying it had “launched the race to 6G,” and created experimental licenses, intended to allow researchers to experiment in this range over the next 10 years.

Wi-Fi

Most homes and businesses have Wi-Fi routers installed. Wi-Fi is a family of wireless network protocols, based on the IEEE 802.11 family of standards, which are commonly used for local area networking of devices and Internet access. Wi-Fi allows nearby digital devices to exchange data by radio waves. Any communications connection allows for the sending and receiving of data, but a full duplex fixed wireless system allows for two-way, simultaneous data transmission. An example of full duplex would be a telephone line, which allows you to hear the person on the other end talking, even if you’re talking yourself. Wi-Fi is a half-duplex form of data transmission, which is to say, data packets are sent back and forth in sequence. It happens so quickly that it mimics seamless, two-way data transmission, but in fact, data cannot be both sent and received simultaneously over Wi-Fi. Most people will never notice a delay in data transmission and reception because Wi-Fi speeds are so fast these days; however, it would be faster to send and receive data simultaneously. Theoretically, full duplex is a superior means of sending and receiving communications, but until it becomes more prominent, Wi-Fi may be a better choice in terms of cost and availability. There are some potential drawbacks to choosing a full duplex solution over Wi-Fi. Cost is one issue, but the biggest issue is the internal interference, or self-interference, that can occur when signals are being sent and received at the same time. One solution is to send and receive signals at different frequencies. The choice depends largely on your priorities, budget, and ultimate goals.

Local Wi-Fi networks can connect to global networks, such as the Internet, through a router that is connected to the larger global network. A router is a device that connects two or more packet-switched networks or subnetworks. It manages traffic between these networks by forwarding data packets to their intended IP addresses and allows multiple devices to use the same Internet connection. The connection between a router and the global network can be either wired or wireless. Examples include physically connecting the router through wires to a service provider such as Verizon, AT&T, or Comcast, or by means of a wireless mobile network to a service provider, such as AT&T, Verizon, or T Mobile cellular. Large organizations and companies that operate in multiple locations across the country need separate local area networks (LANs) for each location, which then connect to the other LANs to form a Wide Area Network (WAN), necessitating multiple routers and switches. Just as a cellular user can share their connection with someone within range of the cellular user’s phone, by tethering or using a hotspot, a Wi-Fi user can share their connection by providing someone else within range of the Wi-Fi, with the Wi-Fi ID and password. Let’s now review some of the current Wi-Fi offerings and standards.

Wi-Fi 6

Wi-Fi 6 (otherwise known as 802.11ax) is the newest available Wi-Fi network offering. It brings faster throughput speeds, better battery life, and less bandwidth congestion than what you get with the older Wi-Fi 5 (802.11ac) technology. Wi-Fi 6 is capable of a maximum throughput theoretical speed of 9.6 Gbps, although practically, this speed will often be slower. 9.6 Gbps is comparable to the lower end of 5G, and much faster than 3.5 Gbps on Wi-Fi 5 and 600 Mbps on Wi-Fi 4. Wi-Fi 6 enables 2.4 and 5 GHz to operate at the same time, delivering high bandwidth and low latency for high-definition video systems. Wi-Fi 6 access points (APs) are designed to optimize the efficient reuse and sharing of spectrum in dense deployment scenarios and provide greater resistance to interference, even in public places with a high density of devices, by using a range of techniques, including BSS coloring, enhanced multiuser multiple input, multiple output (MU-MIMO), and it adds orthogonal frequency-division multiple access (OFDMA). BSS coloring intelligently color-codes or (marks) shared frequencies with a number that is included within the PHY header that is passed between the device and the network. These color codes allow APs to decide if the simultaneous use of spectrum is permissible, such as when a channel is not currently busy and unavailable. This determination is accomplished by negotiation among spectrum-sharing devices, along with the ability for APs to assess if a channel is clear for use by measuring and adjusting threshold parameters, including energy (adaptive power) and signal detection (sensitivity thresholds) levels. Wi-Fi 6’s MU-MIMO capabilities are significantly greater in Wi-Fi 6 than in Wi-Fi 5. MU-MIMO enables a wireless AP to divide its bandwidth into separate channels and broadcast to multiple clients at once. Wi-Fi 5 Wave 2’s MU-MIMO feature supports up to four spatial streams (allowing communication with up to four clients at a time via separate antennas). Wi-Fi 6 boosts that number to eight. This capability currently works only in the downstream direction. Uplink MIMO is still single user, although that is expected to change in the second wave of the Wi-Fi 6 standard. MU-MIMO essentially adds more traffic lanes to the wireless highway between AP and clients. It flexibly subdivides each available channel into smaller subcarriers or resource units, which the AP can then dynamically assign across dozens of devices. This enables an increase in efficiency, reducing network overhead, making better use of available bandwidth, and dramatically increasing capacity. OFDMA is particularly relevant in high-density environments, like entertainment venues, as well as networks with many small packet transmissions, such as those from IoT devices. Its extra efficiency can result in better battery life and many other benefits. Wi-Fi 6 also employs power management features, such target wake time (TWT), which allows for lower battery consumption. For example, sensors in traffic lights or buildings will only wake up when needed. These performance enhancements (greater speed, lower latency, better spectrum sharing, and better power management) enable use cases beyond what is possible today. This includes better support for applications such as AR/VR devices, high-quality streaming platforms used for conference video calls and gaming and the ability to support millions of machine components being connected, and real-time data points operated at low-power consumption, resulting in consistent real-time data exchange, and thousands of people and devices to connect and exchange real-time information. Furthermore, as a Wi-Fi 6 connection has comparable speed to 5G, it can wirelessly connect to a 5G network to achieve its connectivity to a larger global network, such as the Internet, without experiencing any loss of speed.

An even newer version of Wi-Fi 6, dubbed Wi-Fi 6 Extended ( Wi-Fi 6E), could deliver even better service, faster speeds, and lower latencies than Wi-Fi 6. The IEEE 802.11ax (Wi-Fi 6) standard was limited to the 2.4 and 5 GHz bands. These bands have just three nonoverlapping channels, generally requiring users at different locations to share bandwidth. In April 2020, the FCC unanimously voted to make the 6 GHz band available for unlicensed use. Wi-Fi 6E takes advantage of this and expands Wi-Fi 6 to cover 6 GHz frequency. The major difference between Wi-Fi 6 and Wi-Fi 6E is that Wi-Fi 6E devices have up to seven additional 160 MHz channels, while Wi-Fi 6 devices share the same congested spectrum, and only two 160 MHz channels, with other legacy Wi-Fi 4, 5, and 6 devices. This opened significantly more airwaves, which routers can use to broadcast Wi-Fi signals. The jump from 5 to 6 GHz has the potential to quadruple the number of channels available for routers and smart devices. Besides increasing capacity, this reduces signal interference. Improvements such as Wi-Fi HaLow further improve things by doubling the distance covered and cutting the power consumption of traditional Wi-Fi.

Wi-Fi 7

Wi-Fi 7 (802.11be), also referred to as Wi-Fi Extremely High Throughput, or the seventh-generation, is currently under development. Wi-Fi 7 could possibly hit the market in 2023. Qualcomm has unveiled its Wi-Fi 7 chipset and the Networking Pro Series platform, which can deliver up to 33 Gbps of quad-band connectivity over 16 streams. Partners are already working on integrating its technologies into devices. Broadcom and MediaTek have also announced Wi-Fi 7 technologies. More vendors will undoubtedly announce their plans in the coming months as the new standard is firmed up and officially designated by the Wi-Fi Alliance. Wi-Fi 7 is expected to achieve higher data rates (more than 30 Gbps, or four times faster than Wi-Fi 6) and lower latency. It is expected to include support of 320 MHz transmissions (double the 160 MHz of 802.11ax), the use of higher modulation orders, such as 4096-QAM (quadrature amplitude modulation; up from 1024-QAM used in 802.11ax), and the allocation of multiple resource units (such as groups of OFDMA tones). Wi-Fi 7 is being designed to enable even more efficient spectrum utilization than Wi-Fi 6, to further tackle congestion and interference, bring tangible benefits to areas with densely packed devices or neighboring networks that overlap, making it ideal for enterprise space as they continue their digital transformation. These performance improvements will help deliver higher-quality video streaming. It also will provide better support of applications such as cloud gaming, AR and VR, IoT and industrial IoT (IIoT) applications that also require high throughput and low deterministic latency, high reliability, and quality of service (QoS). As it matches the higher end of 5G, it will be easier for home networking to be achieved by a combination of wired and wireless communications with better interference mitigations, higher capacity density, and higher cost efficiency.

Several features that help Wi-Fi 7 achieve much higher performance than Wi-Fi 6/6E include wider channels, QAM, and multilink operation (MLO). Wi-Fi 7 uses the same three 2.4, 5, and 6 GHz bands as Wi-Fi 6, but it uses wider channels. Each band is broken into channels. The 2.4 GHz band comprises 11 channels of 20 MHz each. The 5 GHz band has 45 channels, but instead of being limited to a width of 20 MHz, they can combine to create 40 or 80 MHz channels. The 6 GHz band supports 60 channels, and with Wi-Fi 6E, they can be as wide as 160 MHz. Wi-Fi 7 supports channels that are up to 320 MHz wide. The wider the channel, the more data it can transmit. QAM is a method to transmit and receive data in radiofrequency waves. The higher it is, the more information you can pack in. Wi-Fi 7 supports 4K-QAM, Wi-Fi 6 supported 1024-QAM, and Wi-Fi 5 was limited to 256-QAM. The potential benefits are complicated by signal strength, background noise, and interference. Consequently, as QAM goes up, the range drops, and you need a stronger signal. So, the jump to 1024-QAM in Wi-Fi 6 offered around a 25 percent data rate increase over Wi-Fi 5. The leap to 4K-QAM in Wi-Fi 7 translates to a 20 percent increase in peak performance. Every previous Wi-Fi standard establishes a connection between two devices on a single band. Even a tri-band Wi-Fi 6E router connects two devices on a single band on a fixed channel (the router decides whether to connect on the 2.4, 5, or 6 GHz band). MLO can combine several frequencies across bands into a single connection. A Wi-Fi 7 router can connect to a Wi-Fi 7 device across two or more channels in different bands simultaneously. MLO potentially enables wider channels capable of transmitting more data, allowing for both greater speed and more efficient performance. This allows a Wi-Fi 7 router to take congestion and other interference into account and transmit on the best channel to bypass it, switching to maintain a stable connection and low latency.

Like previous standards, Wi-Fi 7 will be backward compatible, but you will need to upgrade your devices (new routers, APs, smartphones, laptops, TVs, and so on) to take advantage of the new features and improved performance. Qualcomm announced the first chip supporting the standard, the FastConnect 7800, effectively turning Wi-Fi 7 into a real thing that’s officially on the horizon. It offers both a new radiofrequency front-end (RFFE) connectivity solution with Wi-Fi 7 front-end modules that are expected to advance the company’s RFFE connections into the automotive, eXtended reality (XR), wearables, mobile broadband, and IoT arenas. These new RFFE modules are targeted toward enhancing experiences for Wi-Fi 7 and Bluetooth users. This is accomplished by combining essential mechanisms between the Wi-Fi baseband chip and antennas for the expressed purpose of optimal wireless transmission. The modules will enable 5G/Wi-Fi coexistence capabilities to augment unified capabilities around the two connections and to better support applications such as the smart home, digital health care, and connected cars.

Summary of Impact of These Wi-Fi Advances

Wi-Fi 6 and 7 have the capacity to improve performance in dense and congested environments, making networks up to four times faster in these crowded areas. This allows Wi-Fi 6 and 7 to support a wider set of services. For example, stadiums and convention centers, which typically host tens of thousands of users, can improve customer experience and bolster customer interaction with value-added services, such as streaming instant replays on fan’s devices, or allowing food to be ordered from the customer’s seat. Libraries, classrooms, and universities will also benefit from Wi-Fi 6 and 7 as they can support education trends such as video-based learning, connected devices, and an increased number of IoT devices to pervade the learning environment. In nonpublic venues with little congestion, such as an individual using a Wi-Fi router with a single device, maximum potential speeds should be up to 40 percent higher with Wi-Fi 6 than with Wi-Fi 5. Wi-Fi 6’s faster speeds on individual devices will help support a wide range of applications such as VR, AR, and IoT, helping to drive innovation around high-bandwidth and latency-sensitive use cases that work better when untethered, like AR/VR, gaming, and video communications, and will enable the proliferation of medical IoT devices, AR/VR-based immersive training, and automatic guided vehicles in warehouses. The TWT feature for Wi-Fi 6 allows a device to put Wi-Fi to sleep when not in use and wake it up for the next transmission. This should result in smartphones, laptops, and other Wi-Fi-enabled devices having longer battery lives due to better conservation of power. As Wi-Fi 6 devices are required to support WPA3 (Wi-Fi Protected Access), an updated security protocol, to receive certification from the Wi-Fi Alliance, its security is likely to be much better, and will make public, open Wi-Fi safer and enable stronger protections against brute force attacks even when the user’s password is weak. As 5G, Wi-Fi 6, and the advances that will follow (such as 6G and Wi-Fi 7) offer faster speeds, greater capacity, and better performance, they will positively impact consumers today when using their existing applications and lay the foundation for emerging uses. They also provide the speed and capacity needed to better support resiliency initiatives discussed later in this book, such as collaborative sharing.

Wi-Fi Versus Mobile Wireless?

To understand how Wi-Fi and mobile wireless networks will likely evolve with respect to their adoption by the end user and by the device manufacturers, it is useful to understand how we got where we are today with these two overlapping technologies and how their technology advances may change things. When Wi-Fi was emerging in the late 1990s, mobile network operators questioned why the users needed Wi-Fi. 3G was progressing well and promising high data rates, and 3G modems connected to or integrated in laptops would provide ubiquitous connectivity. As Wi-Fi ran over unlicensed radio bands and was able to satisfy the needs for wireless connectivity indoor, in-home, or in-building, where 3G was not able to penetrate buildings very well, Wi-Fi found a niche in home and office. Wi-Fi rapidly increased its data rate and expanded its capabilities by moving from the 2.4 GHz (0.11b) band into the 5 GHz band (0.11a/g) and is expected to further extend these by going into the 6 and 60 GHz bands. Range extender technologies and, more recently, the concept of distributed Wi-Fi (Wi-Fi Mesh) have also contributed to Wi-Fi’s success and adoption. Furthermore, cellular data communications require a paid subscription to mobile network operators and a data plan that initially led to hefty bills, and roaming charges. By comparison, the incremental cost for Wi-Fi was free, and the cost differential becomes greater when metropolitan areas and public places, like libraries and Starbucks coffee houses, began offering free Wi-Fi. As a result, 3G-licensed radios (and their successors) were rarely integrated in computers or tablets because Wi-Fi offered a cost-effective and versatile Internet connection, to the more expensive integrated 3G radio alternative. At the same time, cellphone companies, such as Ericsson and Nokia, developed ways to use the radio spectrum to improve phone connectivity when connecting to a hotspot for information downloads and when connecting wireless headsets and other devices to the phone. The Bluetooth standard was created for this purpose. The Bluetooth promoters, along with the cellphone network providers, declared Wi-Fi redundant. But, after a few years, it became clear that Wi-Fi and Bluetooth had different sweet spots, and separate, defined application domains. Wi-Fi’s better range and higher capacity and better technology for hotspot made it better fit for networking. Bluetooth grew to be increasingly used for connecting to peripherals. Most devices now support both Wi-Fi and Bluetooth, with Wi-Fi for high-speed networking and Bluetooth for connecting devices. With advances in both technologies, there is a renewed competition between Wi-Fi and Bluetooth. Zigbee, the low-power variant of Wi-Fi (based on IEEE 802.15.4), is under threat from Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE), the low-power variant of Bluetooth. The Bluetooth SIG is developing a networking variant (Bluetooth Mesh) that is supposed to compete with or even displace Zigbee. However, because of the considerable complexity that would need to be added to BLE to achieve what is already available with Zigbee, it is likely that Zigbee will remain the preferred solution.

With the advancements in Wi-Fi (Wi-Fi 6 and 7) and mobile networks (5G and 6G), it is worth thinking once again about how the relationship between these two technologies is evolving, how this may change their usage and adoption, and how they can both contribute to making us more resilient. The spectrum available for 5G is split over two frequency bands: 3.4 to 3.8 GHz called sub 6 GHz and 24 to 30 GHz called mm Wave. The lower band has better propagation properties, but the higher band offers a huge capacity advantage. Both require major investments in technology development and in infrastructure capacity. The mm Wave technology represents a clean break with existing technology, making its integration into existing portable equipment like phones difficult. Wi-Fi technology may well prove an attractive alternative. To further bolster its position, the Wi-Fi Alliance has decided to strengthen its Wi-Fi branding by giving sequential names to the various Wi-Fi standards: Wi-Fi 6 is the name for the new IEEE 802.11ax standard, 0.11ac will be called Wi-Fi 5, and 0.11n will be Wi-Fi 4. Both 5G and Wi-Fi 6 support comparable high data rates (Gbps), both require high levels of power to get good range, and both are trying to infringe on each other’s territory. 5G is claiming that its sub 6 GHz radios will have better indoor penetration, while Wi-Fi 6 is throwing out the slogan, “5G has arrived and it is called Wi-Fi 6.” Wi-Fi 6 is an evolution of Wi-Fi 5, but it offers new, additional capabilities that greatly improve its capacity and its ability to share spectrum efficiently and without hang-ups that sometimes occur in high-density, high-load situations. However, with this evolution, the range is reducing. Wi-Fi has addressed this disadvantage by focusing this new standard on distributed Wi-Fi (Wi-Fi Mesh), which enables multiple channels to connect multiple APs in different rooms to the main router. The focus of Wi-Fi 6 is on complete indoor coverage, connecting every nook and cranny in your house or office building with the same high data rate, creating an experience that will not be easy to match with 5G. With Wi-Fi mesh enhancements, the range of Wi-Fi could be extended to enhance the potential for users in nearby locations to share. 5G’s higher data rates create a penalty on its range, necessitating closer spacing between 5G stations. Confusing the comparison is the relationship between half duplex and full duplex, which could give cellular wireless an advantage over Wi-Fi. Most wireless devices today are half duplex because the signals a wireless device transmits are more powerful than the ones it receives, which overwhelms the input signal and creates self-interference. Currently half-duplex cellphones and base stations are forced to operate on different frequencies if users require simultaneous transmittal and reception of information. Transmittal on the same frequencies means full-duplex systems could double the capacity of signal transfer and half the conversation time. Newer wireless communications, such as 5G, are being developed that can be designed to suppress this interference and to operate in such a full-duplex mode. However, while full duplex could decrease the signal transfer time and increase the amount of data that are transferable by enabling the transmittal and reception of signals simultaneously, and simplify frequency planning, it could also double the amount of interfering streams, leading to intercell interference. With the respective improvements in both Wi-Fi and mobile networks (e.g., 5G and Wi-Fi 6 and their respective follow-ons), both have very particular characteristics that are beneficial for connecting computers and other devices to the Internet, making the choice between them unclear. This will likely cause some users to favor mobile cellular networks, while others to favor Wi-Fi, with devices capable of connecting to both, and with many homes and offices even subscribing to both. The result will be their likely coexistence, often in the same home and office, but also in neighboring locations within communications reception of each other. This offers increased networking options and the opportunity for collaborative sharing between neighbors and business partners to enable continued operation when one or the other of these services goes down and the other remains operational.

Satellites

Back in 1945, Wireless World magazine published an article titled “Extra-Terrestrial Relays: Can Rocket Stations Give World-Wide Radio Coverage?” by the now well-known science fiction author, Arthur C. Clarke. At the time, Clarke was only 27 years old and a Royal Air Force officer. It wasn’t until the late 1950s that satellites were used to provide communications. In December 1958, the United States successfully launched its first communications satellite, SCORE. Then President Dwight D. Eisenhower used SCORE to send a Christmas message to the entire world. SCORE could only remain in orbit for a few months as its enormous surface area and very low Earth orbit (LEO) forced reentry after only 500 complete orbits due to aerodynamic resistance. SCORE relied on a passive reflector, which greatly reduced signal strength as it did not amplify the signal before sending it back to earth. In 1961, AT&T built Telstar. Telstar, an asynchronous satellite, operated at a Perigee altitude of 592 miles, and Apogee altitude, 3,687 miles, and was used for the transmissions between the United States and Europe from launch until November 1962 when the radiation from the Starfish Prime detonation (Starfish Prime was a high-altitude nuclear test conducted by the United States) affected the command channel, which began to behave erratically. On November 23, 1962, the command channel stopped responding. On December 20, the satellite was successfully reactivated, and intermittent data were obtained until February 21, 1963, when the transmitter failed. Today thousands of satellites, both synchronous and nonsynchronous, are in Earth orbit relaying analog and digital signals carrying voice, video, and data, used for television, telephone, radio, Internet, and military applications (Figure 1.3). Synchronous satellites orbit at 22,236 miles above the Earth’s surface. At this altitude, the satellite maintains a geostationary orbit, moving at the same speed as Earth’s rotation, remaining in a fixed position relative to a point on Earth. This allows an antenna on the ground to point to a satellite 24 hours a day without having to track its position. Because of this property, only three such satellites, spaced equidistantly in geostationary orbit, are needed to provide worldwide coverage, with the sole exception of some of the polar regions, and inter-satellite handoff is not needed. The first successful commercial communication satellite, Intelsat 1, also known as Early Bird, launched on April 6, 1965, was a synchronous communications satellite. Its initial global network was completed with the stationing of a satellite over the Indian Ocean in mid-1969, in time to televise the first moon landing around the world. It was used for broadcasting and multipoint distribution applications.

Figure 1.3 SATCOM

Credit: Photo: European Space Agency (ESA).

The advantage of lower orbiting, nonsynchronous satellites is that, because of its lower altitude, the earth-based receivers and transmitters can be lower in power, harder to jam, do not require as much energy to launch, and provides better signal strength (less than 1 watt is needed for transmission). They also have less propagation delay (about 10 ms) compared with other orbits due to closeness to the Earth. They do require tracking antennas on the ground, more complex processing, steering, and a greatly increased number of satellites for global coverage. This requirement is less of an issue than it was in the 1960s because of the advancement of more powerful, affordable data processing, and the reduced cost for satellite launch.

The Van Allen Radiation Belt, named after James Van Allen, who is credited with their discovery, is a zone of energetic charged particles (most of which originate from the solar wind) that are captured by and held around a planet by that planet’s magnetosphere. By trapping the solar wind, the magnetic field deflects those energetic particles and protects the atmosphere from destruction, but they endanger satellites whose sensitive elements (electronic components and solar cells) can be damaged by this radiation, even when protected with shielding, if they spend significant time near that zone. Earth has two main such belts—the inner belt (about 1,000 to 8,000 miles above the Earth’s surface) and the outer belt (about 12,000 to 25,000 miles above the Earth’s surface). LEO satellites are placed in orbit at an altitude between 100 and 1,000 miles above Earth. The lower altitude range is above the Earth’s atmosphere where there is almost no air, so the satellite’s speed reduction and drag down is minimized. LEO satellites still experience some atmospheric drag leading to the satellite’s eventual loss of orbit and shorter life spans. The higher altitude range is limited by the inner Van Allen belt. Medium Earth orbit (MEO) satellites operate 6,300 to 12,500 miles from Earth to avoid the outer Van Allen Belt.

Starlink, developed by Elon Musk (the developer of the electric vehicle, Tesla) and operated by SpaceX, is an example of an LEO satellite. It consists of many thousands of mass-produced small satellites, which communicate with designated ground transceivers. By February 2022, SpaceX had launched 2,091 Starlink satellites and announced Starlink Business, which provides a larger high-performance antenna and listed speeds of between 150 and 500 Mbps, with a cost of $2,500 for the antenna and a $500 monthly service fee. In March 2022, SpaceX announced that Starlink reached 250,000 subscribers and is offering Internet service in 29 countries. Its lower orbits both help ensure the satellites reenter the atmosphere in a shorter time in case of failure and enable them to broadcast signals at reduced power levels because they are closer to Earth. SpaceX said the reduced power levels will allow the fleet to be compliant with limits to reduce radio interference with other satellite and terrestrial wireless networks. Although the cost of the decade-long project to design, build, and deploy the constellation was estimated by SpaceX in May 2018 to be at least $10 billion, SpaceX expects more than $30 billion in revenue by 2025 from its satellite constellation, and revenues from its launch business were expected to reach $5 billion by 2025. The Starlink satellite network operates between 10.7 and 12.7 GHz. This is higher than 5G, comparable to Wi-Fi, but way under 6G frequency ranges. While the technical possibility of satellite Internet service covering most of the global population exists, actual service can be delivered only in countries that have licensed SpaceX to provide service within any specific national jurisdiction. Starlink also has the potential to meet growing user demands that include connectivity on the move, such as while driving a recreational vehicle across the country, moving a freighter from Europe to a U.S. port, or while on a domestic or international flight.

Satellites not only offer an alternative means of providing communications, but they offer the opportunity to provide rapid reconstitution of lost or degraded communications. Starlink has already demonstrated its ability to rapidly reconstitute and restore lost communications. On February 26, 2022, Elon Musk repositioned the Starlink satellites over Ukraine to help the Ukrainian government replace Internet services destroyed during the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. By March 22, 2022, SpaceX had sent over 3,500 of Starlink terminals to Ukraine to allow Ukrainians access to the Starlink network.

Communications satellites, such as Starlink, are vulnerable and are targets for both physical and cyberattack. Ren Yuanzhen, a researcher with the Beijing Institute of Tracking and Telecommunications, was the lead author in an article published in China’s peer-reviewed journal Modern Defense Technology in 2022 that argues that the Chinese military should develop ways to counteract any threat posed by Starlink, stating that “A combination of soft and hard kill methods should be adopted to make some Starlink satellites lose their functions and destroy the constellation’s operating system.” He justified such an attack by citing the hidden dangers and challenges such a communications system poses to China. The article warned that Starlink could go on the offensive and use its satellites’ ion thrusters to knock China’s spacecraft or satellites out of their orbits. There is also the potential for laser weapons to blind satellites in orbit, as well as inflict thermal destruction on a drone in mid-air from miles away. According to a Reuters news story on May 18, 2022, Russia reports a mobile laser weapon called Peresvet can blind all satellite systems of a likely enemy in orbits of up to 1,500 km, disabling them during flight due to the use of laser radiation, and perhaps even take down LEO communications satellites, such as Starlink. As discussed, another downside of LEO satellites is the increased drag. In the case of Starlink, on February 11, 2022, just one day after launch, there was a significant increase in atmospheric drag caused by a G2-rated geomagnetic storm, and 40 of the 49 satellites located 130 miles above the Earth reentered the atmosphere, while the remaining continued to raise their orbits.

As the number of communications and other types of satellites increase, there is the risk of a proliferation of satellites, which will create a host of issues, from the creation of clouds of space junk that increase the risks of satellite collisions, to the stoking of tensions between world powers over interstellar dominance. Astronomers have raised concerns about the constellations’ effect on ground-based astronomy and how the satellites will add to an already congested orbital environment. SpaceX has attempted to mitigate astronomy concerns by implementing several upgrades to Starlink satellites aimed at reducing their brightness during operation. The satellites are equipped with krypton-fueled Hall thrusters, which allow them to de-orbit at the end of their life. Additionally, the satellites are designed to autonomously avoid collisions based on uplinked tracking data.

Drones

Drones are expected to perform many important tasks ranging from delivery services to safety inspection, to assisting in emergency services, to performing 3D mapping, to aiding the police, and more. To perform these tasks, drones need to be in long-range communication with a ground transmitter because the drone may need to communicate beyond its visual line of sight. Long-term evolution (LTE) networks already support the initial deployment of some low-altitude drones. The significantly improved capabilities of 5G networks will provide large-scale drone deployments with more efficient and effective mobile communications connectivity. Radio-controlled drones currently work in the 2.4 to 5.8 GHz range, which is compatible with 5G cellular networks, so an effective solution for controlling drones in a long-range communication system would be to connect the drones through a cellular network that is constantly available with nationwide coverage. Connecting drones to 5G networks will not only ensure greater situational awareness, accurate positioning, and help to avoid collisions, but will make it easier to use drones to set up emergency communications and for rapid reconstitution of degraded and lost communications. Several efforts are positioned to make this a reality. The 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) is an umbrella term for several standards organizations who develop protocols for mobile telecommunications. After the completion of the 3GPP Release 15 work on connected drones, there has been a surge of field trials for connected drones around the globe, supported by standards organizations such as GSMA and CTIA, who have set up special drone interest groups to develop new use cases and help create an open and trusted regulatory environment to align mobile and aviation industries in support of the use of drones for communications. This has included growing efforts from governments to safely integrate civil and public drone operations into airspace systems. The result has been significant effort to align mobile network capabilities with drone communication and traffic management requirements. The potential to use drones for communications is part of the IEEE Communications Society Emerging Technologies Initiative on Aerial Communications and the IEEE Vehicular Technology Society Ad Hoc Committee on Drones and has led to several research projects. 5G drones are flying over California as a research project and, if approved, will eventually move from California to Hawaii’s Lanai Island (currently 97 percent owned by Larry Ellison, Founder and Chairman of Oracle) for final testing, and may soon after be delivering 5G access to remote areas of Hawaii. The drones used are a solar-powered HAWK30. It is an unmanned, low-speed drone, which can fly above jet traffic at 65,000 to 80,000 feet. It is propelled by 10 electric fans, boasts a massive 260-foot wingspan, and is designed to carry 5G communications relays, and can operate up to six months in a single flight, covering approximately 150 square miles. Ultimately, it is envisioned as providing wireless services to inaccessible areas, including deep valleys, remote lands, and over the ocean, where cellphone service is currently unavailable, but it could also be used for rapid restoral of emergency communications. Watershed conservation and agricultural development are two additional services contemplated to be provided by the HAWK30 program. The Qualcomm Flight RB5 5G Platform, which is powered by the Qualcomm QRB5165 processor, is another effort to provide low power 5G drone communications. It is envisioned as supporting several evolving applications, including film and entertainment, security and emergency response, delivery, defense, inspection, and mapping. Verizon announced a plan to enable as many drones as possible to be connected via 5G to transmit video footage in real time and to relay other intelligence such as levels of stock in a warehouse situation. Still another effort is the Aerial Experimentation and Research Platform for Advanced Wireless (AERPAW) testbed platform for 4G/5G drone communications testing. This is anticipated to lead to designs and standards that enable drones, among other things, to provide video surveillance of rural network infrastructure and secure wide-area wireless connectivity.

Higher Layers of the Communications Model

Although current Internet routing and networking protocols have inherent survivability due to their distributed nature, they are likely to continue to have for the unforeseen future, cybersecurity vulnerabilities that may result in major portions of the global network being brought down or severely degraded. The increasing complexity of our network’s applications will increase our vulnerability of these applications and their supporting network to cyberattacks and major outages. As new networked applications are developed, which promise to make our lives better, healthier, and more efficient, they will make us still more dependent on the global network remaining operational. This makes it more urgent than ever to find ways of maintaining service and rapidly restoring lost communications links. Examples of these application trends include the development of Internet-powered control systems for automated cars and factories, and the continued evolution and growing pervasiveness of the Web. Web 1.0 was characterized by read-only relatively static information pages. It relied on the IPv4 address class, which has a limited number of Web addresses. It was, however, relatively decentralized and democratic. Web 2.0 introduced more dynamic, interactive content with secure payment using government-issued currency. Although it allows easy user content publishing, it moved the Web to a less democratic, more centralized world because it has become characterized by centralized services underpinned by databases and managed by Internet giants like Facebook (now renamed Meta) and Twitter running social networks; ecommerce sites like Amazon; and traditional banking sites. Under Web 2.0, the Internet protocols have been enhanced and extended. IPv6, successor to IPv4, has a large enough address space to allow billions of devices to each have their own public addresses, which enables the IoT. Another example of Web 2.0 changes to the Internet protocol is the QUIC transport layer network protocol that was developed to provide more resilience, performance, and scalability. Initially designed, implemented, and deployed in 2012 by Google, QUIC is currently supported by Google Chrome, Microsoft Edge, Firefox, and Safari browsers. QUIC improves the performance of connection-oriented Web applications by establishing several multiplexed connections between two endpoints. It uses HTTP/2, a major revision of HTTP published in May 2015, which allows the server to respond with additional data not requested by the client. This allows the server to anticipate data requests and to supply data it knows a Web browser will need in advance of it being requested, minimizing data transfer overhead. QUIC also supports the multiplexing of requests and responses and moves congestion control algorithms into the user space at both endpoints, rather than the kernel space. This allows these algorithms to improve and be updated more rapidly, reducing connection and transport latency. Additionally, the QUIC protocol can be extended with forward error correction (FEC) to improve performance when errors are expected. In May 2021, the IETF standardized QUIC in RFC 9000, supported by RFC 8999, RFC 9001, and RFC 9002. It has replaced TCP at the transport layer for many applications, earning the nickname TCP/2.

Web 3.0 is still evolving and being defined, so we are still unsure of what it will ultimately look like, but it is predicted to change how the Web works and to result in new Internet standards. Web 3.0 currently has a focus on decentralization and aspires to become more democratic with less centralized control by employing edge computing, direct peer-to-peer exchanges without middlemen, distributed consensus, exchanging and buying nonfungible tokens (NFTs), and by employing technologies such as blockchain’s immutable ledger technology, smart contracts, cryptocurrencies, and AI and machine learning to make things more autonomous, smarter, and easier to use. It also is envisioned as enhancing the Web to support living more fully in the metaverse, which melds physical, VR, and AR. One example of the shift toward being more democratic and decentralized is the concept of decentralized autonomous organizations (DAOs) as a new form of managing and governing structure for Web services and organizations. DAOs rely on distributed consensus to make decisions rather than a centralized authority. This decentralization trend could disrupt existing services, such as traditional banking and existing centralized social networks, through the emergence of decentralized apps that make use of technologies such as blockchain, cryptocurrency, and smart contract. A word of caution regarding current blockchain and cryptocurrency implementations. They have proven to be not quite as decentralized, secure, and anonymous as originally believed. A 2022 report titled Are Blockchains Decentralized? Unintended Centralities in Distributed Ledgers, June 2022, published by Trail of BITS, documents the results of a study, which reveals that blockchain is not really decentralized, and that it is generally running outdated software vulnerable to attack. Although the case has been made for blockchain as the ledger of truth for financial services, a driver for operational resiliency, and a key Web 3.0 technology leading to a more democratic Internet, there are questions as to whether blockchain is really the silver bullet that many people claim it to be, and its eventual role in a more decentralized Web 3.0. Accepting all these caveats, Web 3.0 will likely provide a richer experience that requires more communications bandwidth, and that will increase our dependence on the network staying up and running. If it also achieves greater decentralization and more democratic control, it has the potential for allowing our networks and network applications to become more resilient and better able to support cooperative sharing among end users in the event major portions of the network go down.

Research Trends and Enabling Technologies

Network Architecture Research

There is ongoing network research that has the potential for making the Internet architecture more secure and resilient. This research includes both incremental improvements to the current architecture (brownfield) and research into a new clean slate Internet architecture (greenfield). One such architecture, contemplated by the Open Grid Alliance, is looking at evolving the Internet to become a global, shared platform that distributes compute, data, and intelligence to where it’s needed, on demand, rebuilding the Internet from the edge in, rather than the core out, recognizing that the diversity of surviving communications and sharing at the edge can overcome, major global outages at the higher-level layers.

Another example of a clean-slate Internet architecture is SCION, which is designed to offer high availability and efficient point-to-point packet delivery, even in the presence of actively malicious network operators and devices. SCION organizes existing autonomous systems into groups of independent routing planes, called isolation domains, which interconnect to provide global connectivity. Isolation domains provide natural isolation of routing failures and misconfigurations, give endpoints strong control for both inbound and outbound traffic, provide meaningful and enforceable trust. SCION end hosts learn about available network path segments and combine them into end-to-end paths that are carried in packet headers. It employs embedded cryptographic mechanisms that constrain paths to the route policies of Internet service providers (ISPs) and receivers, offering path choice to authenticated parties: senders, receivers, and ISPs. This approach enables path-aware communication as a way of keeping unwanted unverified intruders out. These features also enable multipath communication, which is an important feature that enables rapid failover in case of network failures, increased end-to-end bandwidth, dynamic traffic optimization, and resilience to distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks. These SCION architectural features provide strong resilience and security properties as an intrinsic consequence of its design and would work well supporting some of the resource sharing and network reconstitution schemes described later in this book, and would help to address a situation where we might find our networks degraded to the point, where communities are relegated into separated disconnected, isolated networks. Even if such an architecture is not implemented in a global fashion, a residual degraded network could default to this new architecture, much like when a corrupted operating system starts up in safe mode, to continue running and to restore communications.

Enabling Technologies

There are several enabling technologies, discussed next, that are important to understand both because they represent key drivers for change that will further increase our dependence on the network, while at the same time, offering us the potential to become more secure and resilient. The growing diversity and improved performance of the communications advances discussed earlier, when combined with the enabling technologies discussed next, provide the potential for maintaining continuous connectivity, despite communications loss and degradation, a means for rapid reconstitution, restoral, and sharing of critical resources.

AI and machine learning technologies continue to grow in use and capability. Although many issues with using AI need to be resolved, such as lack of transparency (inability to get an explanation for why AI systems make the recommendations they do), built-in bias (such as in facial recognition for certain ethnic groups), and growing privacy issues as more personal data about you gets captured to feed AI systems, AI continues to make contributions and strides. AI augments and assist humans in processing the huge growing collection of available data, in automating routine tasks, and in helping to make better decisions. AI can be employed to help keep our systems up and running by assisting in emergency rerouting, collaborative sharing, and restoral planning and management. AI software has proven helpful in anticipating, detecting, and deterring cyberattacks. This includes processing mountains of data to detect warning signs of possible attacks and disaster events. Because it can learn our habits and patterns, it can help anticipate information and services we are likely to use and plan for ways to make the data and services available even when key systems and communications are degraded or go down, such as prefetching desired information so that they can be accessed locally offline. It can also assist us in planning the best way to continue to operate in a degraded mode, to prioritize applications and services, and to restore interrupted service. In some backup implementations, data corruption can replicate across multiple nodes and into the backups. This makes it difficult to achieve the desired recovery point objective (RPO) because one first needs to know at what point the corruption took place. AI can help determine that data corruption took place and help with recovery of the corrupted and altered data, and to help firms and individuals determine exactly what data have been exfiltrated or altered following a cyberattack, and then assist in and speed up the painstaking work to map these changes and resulting impacts, which can otherwise greatly increase the time to recovery. For example, you can’t simply unwind every debit/credit transaction that occurs after the point of tampering without some penalty. If the log data are corrupted, AI can help detect and repair this corruption. It is worth noting that despite these strides, there will likely be a continued need for some level of human involvement and oversight. Of course AI can also be used by attackers to break and disrupt systems.

Cryptography, not to be confused with cryptocurrency such as bitcoin, is used to meet the four basic security needs: confidentiality, nonrepudiation, integrity, and authenticity. Confidentiality ensures that only the intended recipient can decrypt a message or data and read its contents. Nonrepudiation prevents the sender of the message from backtracking in the future and denying they sent or created the message. Integrity allows the user to be certain that the original information contained within the message was not modified while in storage or transit. Authenticity enables the sender and recipient to verify each other’s identities and the destination of the message. Cryptographic algorithms are used to secure communications and data from outside observers. They accomplish this by encrypting information in files, folders, and exchanged over network connections, and ensure that the encrypted information is only accessible (decrypted) by authorized users. Encryption involves using encryption algorithms to convert the original message/data (known as plaintext) into ciphertext, which is not understandable. These algorithms generally involve the use of key(s) used by the algorithm to encrypt and decrypt the message in a way that ensures that only the intended recipient (someone who has possession of the decryption key) can read the message. The strength of the randomness of an encryption algorithm measures how hard it is for anyone to guess the key or input of the algorithm. There are three different types of cryptography: secret key cryptography, public key cryptography, and hash functions. Secret key cryptography, or symmetric cryptography, is where both encryption and decryption use the same key (Figure 1.4). Its algorithms are generally faster than public key cryptography, but the secret key needs to be sent to the recipient, which can lead to compromise if the key is captured. Examples of symmetric cryptography algorithms include AES, DES, and Caesar Cipher.

Public key cryptography, or asymmetric cryptography, uses two keys. One key, the private key, should not be distributed and should remain with the owner only. The other is shared publicly and can be used by anyone; hence, it is known as the public key (Figure 1.4). The mathematical relation of the keys is such that the private key cannot be derived from the public key, but the public key can be derived from the private. If the user encrypts a message or data with someone’s public key, then only the owner of the private key can decrypt the message using their private key. If the user encrypts a message with their private key, then anyone can decrypt the message if they use the owner’s public key. By successfully decrypting the message with the owner’s public key, the recipient can verify who the message was sent by and that the message was not changed or corrupted because it knows the owner of the private key who sent the public key that is paired with the private key. Examples of public key cryptography include ECC, Diffie–Hellman, DSS.

Figure 1.4 Symmetric versus asymmetric encryption

Hash functions are irreversible, one-way functions that transform a given string into a fixed length value, usually shorter than the original string. A good hashing algorithm will produce unique outputs for each input given, although there are ways to handle situations when multiple strings hash to the same value. The only way to crack a hash is by trying every possible input, until you get the exact same hash. Hashing can be used as an index or placed in a hash table for retrieval of the original string. Hashing is also used to verify the integrity of a file after it has been transferred from one place to another, typically in a file backup program. To ensure the transferred file is not corrupted, a user can compare the hash value of both files. When the hash is encrypted with a private key, it can also be used to verify the originator of the data. So, a hash can be used for hashing sensitive data such as passwords and certificates. Examples of hashing algorithms include MD5, SHA-1, SHA-2 family, which includes SHA-224, SHA-256, SHA-384, and SHA-512, SHA-3, Whirlpool, Blake 2, and Blake 3. Salting is a technique that is generally used for things like password hashing. A unique value, sometimes randomly generated, is added to the end of the password to create a different hash value. The additional value is referred to as a salt. The salt adds a layer of security to the hashing process, specifically against brute force attacks. A brute force attack is where a computer or botnet attempts every possible combination of letters and numbers until the password is found.

Today, public key encryption systems are widely used to provide the security needed for online banking, e-mail software, and to ensure websites and messages are inaccessible to unwelcome third parties. They are also used to allow the secure exchange of a secret symmetric key. In this case, the symmetric key is encrypted with the intended recipient’s public key, so only the intended recipient can decrypt the key. Public key systems get their security by relying on math problems that conventional computers would find intractable to break. To break these systems would require a brute force trial-and-error approach to find the plain text from the ciphertext without possessing the key, and this would take too long using today’s fastest conventional digital computers. The RSA, Diffie–Hellman, and elliptic curve Diffie–Hellman algorithms rely on the difficulty for classical computers to solve certain mathematics problems to protect sensitive data. These mathematical problems include factoring a key’s large composite number (usually denoted as N) to derive its two factors (usually denoted as P and Q) and computing the discrete logarithm that key is based on. While it’s easy to generate keys that can encrypt and decrypt data at will, it is many orders of magnitude more difficult for an adversary to calculate the numbers that make them work. However, researchers have known for decades these algorithms are vulnerable and have been cautioning the world to prepare for the day when all data that have been encrypted using them can be unscrambled. In 2019, a team of researchers already factored a 795-bit RSA key, making it the biggest key size ever to be solved using conventional computers. Quantum computers increase the vulnerability of these algorithms. We already know that a quantum computer could potentially factor large numbers and compute discrete logs and break the RSA and Diffie–Hellman public key algorithms in all the useful key sizes. Although still in the experimental phase, research results have already made it clear that quantum computers can in principle solve the same mathematical problems instantaneously. Using a quantum computing technique developed in 1994 by Peter Shor, a sufficiently capable quantum computer, not yet practically implemented, could successfully attack these public key systems by quickly performing a brute force trial-and-error approach. Increasing the size of the keys won’t help, either, as Shor’s algorithm works orders of magnitude faster in solving integer factorization and discrete logarithmic problems.

In 2016, U.S. NIST called upon the world’s cryptographers to devise and then vet encryption methods that could resist an attack from a future quantum computer. In 2022, NIST announced that it has chosen the first group of encryption tools that are designed to withstand the assault of a future quantum computer and made them available on their website. The four quantum-resistant algorithms (CRYSTALS-Kyber, CRYSTALS-Dilithium, FALCON, and SPHINCS+) rely on math problems that not only conventional computers but also quantum computers should have difficulty solving. The CRYSTALS-Kyber algorithm has been selected for general encryption, encryption used to protect information exchanged across a public network. Its advantages include comparatively small encryption keys that two parties can exchange easily, as well as its speed of operation. CRYSTALS-Dilithium, FALCON, and SPHINCS+ use digital signatures to verify identities during a digital transaction, to sign a document remotely, and to detect tampering of a digital document. Because of its high efficiency, NIST recommends CRYSTALS-Dilithium as the primary algorithm, with FALCON for applications that need smaller signatures than Dilithium can provide. SPHINCS+ is somewhat larger and slower than the other two but is valuable as a backup because it is based on a different math approach. The first three algorithms are based on a family of math problems called structured lattices, while SPHINCS+ uses hash functions. An additional four algorithms are still under consideration. They are designed for general encryption and do not use structured lattices or hash functions in their approaches. NIST recommends that users inventory their systems for applications that currently use public key cryptography, which will need to be replaced before cryptographically relevant quantum computers appear.

On August 2, 2022, an attack was announced that breaks supersingular isogeny key encapsulation (SIKE), which is one of the four additional algorithms NIST announced as potential candidates pending further testing. The attack has no impact on the four PQC algorithms selected by NIST as approved standards, all of which rely on completely different mathematical techniques than SIKE (Goodin 2022), but illustrates the importance of taking time to develop and gain confidence in any security algorithm. This is the reason NIST began a competition to create a postquantum cryptographic standard in 2016, even though the engineering advances required to build a functionally useful quantum computer seems still quite a while away. The idea is to standardize on both a public key encryption and digital signature algorithm that is resistant to quantum computing, well before anyone builds a useful quantum computer.

Quantum computing not only presents a threat to public key cryptography, but it presents a way to replace the current approach of securely exchanging symmetric keys without using public key cryptography. Quantum key distribution (QKD) was first proposed in the 1970s by Stephen Wiesner at Columbia University who came up with the idea of quantum conjugate coding (Wiesner 1983). Another method based around quantum entanglement was later proposed (Ekert 1991). Prepare-and-measure protocols and entanglement-based protocols are currently the two main categories of QKD. Prepare-and-measure protocols measure unknown quantum states. It can detect eavesdropping, as well as how much data were potentially intercepted. Entanglement is when the measurement of one object affects the other. Entanglement-based protocols are based on quantum states in which two objects are linked together, forming a combined quantum state. In this method, if an eavesdropper accesses a previously trusted node and changes something, the other involved parties will know. Integration of QKD systems into the current infrastructure faces several challenges that prevent it from being in more widespread use. Modern fiber optic cables are typically limited in how far they can carry a photon. Although secure in theory, in practice, imperfections in tools like single photon detectors create many security vulnerabilities. QKD relies on already having a classically authenticated channel of communications established. This generally requires one of the participating users to have already exchanged a symmetric key in the first place. However, QKD continues to improve and overcome these challenges. By 2018, Quantum Xchange launched the first quantum network in the United States, offering 1,000 km of fiber optic cable and 19 colocation centers along the Boston-to-Washington, D.C., corridor, and metro hubs (Gillis 2020). Most recently, researchers demonstrated a complete QKD protocol, using entangled particles, that is immune to the vulnerabilities and defects of physical devices and can detect third-party security breaches (Nadlinger et al. 2022). The main factors currently preventing wide adoption of QKD outside high security areas include the cost of equipment and the lack of a demonstrated threat to existing public key exchange protocols. However, as quantum computers becomes more practical and in widespread uses, the possibility that an attacker could utilize quantum computing’s ability to crack into current encryption methods increases, making QKD more relevant.

Quantum computing is not the only threat to our security systems. For example, on February 21, 2023, Crystals-Kyber, one of the NIST recommended quantum-resistant algorithms was reported broken by researchers from KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden by using AI to effect side channel attacks applying deep learning analysis with recursive training. It didn’t require quantum computers and can potentially be applied to other LWE/LWR PKE/KEM schemes (Townsend 2023). The good news is that side channel attacks generally require close proximity to the transmitting or receiving device, and once detected countermeasures can be applied. Keeping things secure involves more than just physics and mathematics. Human ingenuity has been able to find workarounds and ways to break security despite cryptography’s intractable mathematics. One must remain vigilant, constantly testing new security measures and tools and slowly gaining confidence only after extended use and experience. This is a lesson for any resilient tools, techniques, and practices that get developed. We will need time for them to be adequately tested and before they mature enough to grow confident in them. We will need to constantly test them to ensure that some new attack has not been found to defeat our latest technical and procedural measures.

Passwords have traditionally been the primary way we have remotely (e.g., over the Internet) authenticated people, but they are increasingly subject to successful attack and compromise and are becoming unwieldy to manage. There are just too many to remember, although password managers can help in this regard. Because of this growing vulnerability, stronger authentication methods are needed to replace passwords. This includes the use of biometrics (something you are) as well as something you own (a device such as a smart card or your cellphone). Biometrics can be used to confirm a person’s identity and to authenticate that person through the analysis of the person’s unique biological and physiological characteristics. Examples of biometric identifiers include fingerprints, facial, voice, iris, and palm or finger vein patterns. Behavioral biometrics, which are related to the measure of uniquely identifying and measurable patterns in human activities such as signature dynamics, the unique pattern of your voice, keystroke dynamics, gait, and gesture, credit card use, and location patterns, is also used for confirming identities. Apple, Microsoft, Google, and others have declared their support for Fast IDentity Online (FIDO) Alliance standards. These standards are designed to enable universal authentication across devices and Web services, using a combination of biometrics and encrypted passkey credentials that can work across different vendor devices (Apple, Google, and Windows devices) and Web service providers. Its goal is interoperability and the elimination of the need for passwords for user authentication.

In addition to all their other revolutionary and innovative uses, drones and robotics are capable of operating in a decentralized autonomous mode when central computing and communications facilities fail or are degraded to repair and restore service. This was discussed earlier in the section on communications. Drones can also be used by an enemy to destroy and disrupt critical facilities such as communications and power lines/facilities.

As more computing power moves to the edge, we could move more processing and data storage to locations close to the user. This would help free us up from our dependence on communications, remote servers, and processing systems, enabling operations to continue for as long as we have power even if we lost communications or access to remote cloud servers. It would also serve to reduce communications demand, enabling us to operate better under degraded reduced communications capacity by doing more of the processing locally.

Use of the cloud increases our dependence on communications as we need access to communications to access data and processing capability housed in remote servers in the cloud. However, having data and services residing on the cloud also provides us vital backup and the ability to restore service when local processing systems fail and degrade, although the cloud does present an attractive target to attack.

Cryptocurrency and other decentralized technology trends have been much promoted as a more democratic processing model. They have been touted as allowing people to become less dependent upon central authorities and centralized recordkeeping by allowing peer-to-peer exchanges of data and money. They would allow people the ability to pay each other and conduct commerce even when they are separated into isolated noncommunicating islands. However, most current cryptocurrencies’ technical solutions are not as decentralized as they appear at first blush. They generally require remote access to a common digital ledger and remote exchanges to store, retrieve, and convert these digital currencies. They also require huge amounts of processing power to validate transactions. These dependencies need to be addressed, or some new more truly decentralized implementation approach deployed, before they could be seen as that big a help in becoming more resilient. As previously mentioned, cryptocurrency should not be confused with cryptography. Their only relationship is that cryptocurrency schemes, such as bitcoin, employ cryptography in their design and implementation to enhance their security.

Blockchain technology is used by many cryptocurrency schemes. It has been proposed to help solve the issue of immutability. Blockchain technology generally employs cryptographic message digests to establish immutable ledgers where it can be assured that the data are accurate and that they haven’t been tampered with. Current implementations, however, cause other problems and issues. They generally introduce large overhead, which impacts system performance, and there are questions about where the data are kept on the blockchain ledger, and whether they are being replicated so that they can be recovered if destroyed or corrupted. These challenges can render blockchain solution to be a nonstarter for any high-volume transactional system. And if the data span several legal jurisdictions, especially if they are cross-border, they raise legal and regulatory issues around data replication and residency.

A digital twin is a virtual representation that serves as the real-time digital counterpart of a physical object or process. Among other things, this technology allows us to simulate and study our systems, their vulnerabilities, and how to take actions that can improve their resilience and survivability when under attack and disruption.

Advances in software development and integration tools, including low-code development platforms, hold promise to allow nonprofessional programmers (end users without many computing coding skills and design skills) to rapidly develop and field many new and important applications. This could include developing software needed to get degraded and/or corrupted systems up and running and helping to restore service and functionality in the event we become isolated without the ready assistance of computer specialists. It also has the potential to write more secure software that is more difficult to hack.

Open interoperable systems—as our systems become more open, our access to information and computing resources will become greater and less dependent upon single proprietary platforms. This make it easier for us to restore and continue operation, in the event we are denied previously relied-upon systems. It would especially make it easier for someone with degraded communications and processing to tape into someone else’s processing and communication systems.

The goal of the IoT is to equip all physical objects (fitness trackers, thermostats, locks, appliances, even light bulbs) with sensors, processing, software, communications, and other technologies that allow them to exchange data with other devices and systems over the Internet, or other communications networks. We already have smart shoes that track your heartbeat … and can flag potential health problems. As all our devices become interconnected, through global standards, and capable of directly communicating with each other, the less dependent we will be on centralized proprietary assets, and the more inherently capable we will be of operating in a total decentralized/distributed fashion. For these reasons, the emergence of a global IoT offers us the potential to become more resilient and survivable.

Concluding Remarks Regarding Communication Trends and Enabling Technologies

An important takeaway is that increasingly, there are many options in providing needed communications diversity in the face of disruption, destruction, and denial of existing communications connectivity. For example, if a user is hardwired to the Internet, and loses physical wired connectivity, the user has the option of resorting to wireless communications that can deliver comparable speeds. These wireless options include terrestrial-based wireless communications (both mobile cellular and Wi-Fi), satellite communications, and drones, which can be rapidly deployed. Having this capability of connecting to the Internet through wireless mobile networks and shared Wi-Fi connections, along with the use of drones and satellites as additional fallback options (both permanent and emergency), provides important resiliency and restoral communications alternatives if one’s primary communications is lost or severely degraded. And increasingly, these devices are being built with their own power, such as built-in solar panels and rechargeable batteries. As our mobile phone networks increase in data throughput through initiatives such as 5G and higher, individuals who maintain both cellular phone and home Internet options will have at least two diverse options, allowing them to have continued connectivity even if one of these options fail. For example, the mobile hotspot feature of most cellular services allows anyone with a PC, smartphone, or tablet to connect to the Internet by using their cellphone as an access point (AP) using the sim card Internet connection. However, cost considerations may cause increasing number of users to eliminate one of these two options and depend upon the option offered by their chosen ISP.

One concern is connecting to the Internet. Because of industry consolidation, most individuals and companies are dependent upon only a small number of companies (Xfinity Internet, Verizon Internet, AT&T Internet, Spectrum Internet, Astound Broadband, Cox Internet, Mediacom Internet, HughesNet Internet, Frontier Internet, CenturyLink Internet, ViaSat Internet, Suddenlink Internet, and Optimum/Altice) known as ISPs, to provide Internet access. They serve as a gateway to provide the user their access to everything on the Internet (including services such as Internet transit, domain name registration, Web hosting, Usenet service, and colocation), as well as TV and phone service. Companies like AT&T and Verizon got into this business by beginning to provide Internet access over their existing infrastructure used to provide voice telephone service. Cable companies like Comcast and Time–Warner do something similar over the infrastructure originally designed to provide cable TV. Because it is not easy to be an ISP, people have resorted to relying on these ISPs, who, because of political lobbying, have created a situation where a local residence normally only has one or two ISP options. An individual, or group of individuals, could become their own ISP, but it is not easy. One needs to rent a cabinet at an Internet exchange point, get a block of IP addresses from the American Registry for Internet Numbers (ARIN), connect to other ISPs that provide the backbone of the Internet, and forward Internet traffic, which includes negotiating peering and transit interconnection agreements directly with a backbone provider or two, and set up and configure some not-cheap routers that handle border gateway protocol (BGP) routing, resolving domain names and maintaining the network infrastructure that enables Internet access. While the primary function of an ISP is to provide access to the Internet, many ISPs do much more such as providing critical phone and TV service. This cost and complexity, coupled with additional costs of running an ISP business, are why startup ISPs are so rare, and why AT&T and Verizon (and Comcast and Time Warner) have so little competition. For this reason, even many entities, such as many small and regional ISPs, that one would think might have direct connections to the Internet, don’t. These small, regional ISPs often find it cheaper to lease long-distance circuits from the larger ISPs. The failure of these large ISPs at various points and regions, with little alternative options, contribute to our lack of resiliency.

Although, as discussed, the option of becoming one’s own ISP, even temporarily, is a complex and costly option, there are ways an individual or business can continue to maintain global network connectivity without becoming their own ISP. This includes the use of public Wi-Fi when available. An increasing number of communities are building their own broadband networks as an alternative to the existing ISP status quo. Already more than 750 communities across the United States have embraced operating their own broadband network and making at least some portion publicly available. This includes many local rural electric cooperatives. This initiative is being led and encouraged by the Institute for Local Self-Reliance, a nonprofit that advocates for local economies.

And, though still rare, there are some new ISP options. Google Fiber, part of the Access division of Alphabet Inc., provides fiber-to-the-premises service in the United States, providing broadband Internet and IPTV to a small and slowly increasing number of locations. IBM Cloud Internet Services, powered by Cloudflare, provides a fast, highly performant, reliable, and secure Internet service for customers running their business on IBM Cloud. And satellite and drone options, equipped with their own alternative ways of connecting to the global network, provide similar emergency options for rapidly restoring global connectivity. There are also initiatives being started by large tech companies to address this need for increased resiliency and alternative connectivity options, which do not necessarily cut out the ISPs but work to support and enhance these options and possibly improve resiliency if the ISP and higher layers of the network stack are lost. For example, Facebook revealed plans for its solar-powered, laser-connected, Internet-beaming Aquila drones. Facebook confirmed it’s not going to compete with ISPs but plans to work with carriers around the world to equip them with these drones so that they can sell Internet connectivity to the 10 percent of the population in remote areas out of reach of existing mobile networks. National governments have expressed interest in getting Aquila drones for their countries.

Additionally, emergency collaborative sharing arrangements could provide the needed diversity and backup. If willing, neighbors who are still connected can share their Wi-Fi and/or mobile hotspots with others who have lost connectivity. Local businesses, such as banks, have backup facilities and alternative routing that they could temporarily share with their customers on an emergency basis. This sharing can be preplanned or ad hoc. Such collaborative sharing arrangements could be made quicker and be more effective if planned for in advance.

As discussed, researchers are starting to look at a major rearchitecture of the Internet to improve the resiliency of the higher layers of the Internet, keeping them more resilient in the face of loss due to natural damage, and cyber-physical attack. While these may not succeed anytime soon in completely replacing the existing Internet, they could, in the short term, be deployed on an emergency basis, to restore service and form the basis of a more secure and resilient subnet to overcome major network disruptions and threats.

The succeeding chapters will look at key application areas, with the aim of better understanding how they are changing, and the factors driving this change. We will see how these changes are increasing our dependence on having an always on network and making us more vulnerable to and magnifying the negative impact of damage and loss of communications. As a result of these changes, the need for a more resilient infrastructure is becoming more urgent. We will next discuss remedies that can ensure their resiliency.

===== FILE 9/18: text%2fChapter02.xhtml =====

CHAPTER 2

21st-Century Trends and Their Impact on Our Daily Lives

To fully understand our growing dependency on global networking, communications, and information technology, and the critical need to becoming more resilient that it creates, it is instructive to examine how and why several key applications and activities are changing. This chapter only discusses a representative subset as most illustrative of the digital transformations that have taken place across all sectors and the dramatically increased need to be resilient.

Health Care

Health care is experiencing a shortage of needed medical personnel, and it is becoming increasingly unaffordable to many. It is predicted that there will be a shortage of up to 9.9 million physicians, nurses, and midwives globally by 2030. COVID-19 revealed how unprepared the health care industry can be in responding to unplanned medical emergencies. As a result, health care has begun to enter a period of rapid change driven both by these needs and by advances in technology that is expected to result in a transformation in how we prevent, diagnose, and cure diseases, and in how medical services get delivered. Another factor driving change in health care is our aging population. By 2050, 83 million Americans are expected to be 65 or older, nearly double of what it was in 2012. This large growth in the aging population is putting strains on the available supply of geriatric health care providers to care for them. Older populations are more vulnerable to serious complications from disease. Another factor affecting health care is the change in the prevalence of various diseases. Except for the COVID-19 pandemic, chronic or noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) are replacing infectious diseases as the leading threats to health worldwide according to the World Economic Forum Global Risk Report. Managing NCDs requires complex and often lifelong treatment. These trends have the potential to drive up the overall cost of health care, increase physician burnout, and put limits on access to health care services. COVID-19 accelerated the move to remote telemedicine for routine medical services. Additionally, people have been motivated to take more of their health matters into their own hands as access to their traditional care providers was challenged, and medical advice is increasingly available online. These trends, and the resulting increased burden on the health care system that they cause, cry out for a paradigm shift in how medicine is practiced. As a result, health care systems are beginning to offer alternative ways to deliver more services outside traditional hospital settings. This is likely to continue because moving long-term health care into the home-setting is the most cost-effective and patient-preferred way to address the future health care needs of our aging population. Caring for a person in their own home costs much less than a nursing home and could result in saving the U.S. Medicare and Medicaid systems millions while better addressing seniors’ health needs. Technology advances in medicine are helping to drive change by making possible new ways to treat and deliver medical services, including making one’s home the center of care. The development of affordable advanced monitoring by software powered personal devices, equipped with health sensors, allows patients to watch over themselves as part of an interconnected ecosystem, which allows remote monitoring by patient’s physicians to provide them with a real-time wellness report. These devices include smartphones, wearable devices such as smart watches, micro-devices mounted on the body, and fully implantable devices. Increasingly, these smart devices are also being used for the automatic dispensing of needed medication. In 2022, The U.S. Food and Drug Administration cleared the first mobile iOS and Android app (t:connect, www.tandemdiabetes.com/products/software-apps/tconnect-application) capable of controlling a user’s insulin pump. An earlier version allowed users to view their pump information on their iPhone, showing the last 24 hours of glucose trends, pump status changes, and insulin therapy data. The new FDA-approved version allows a user to program and cancel bolus insulin requests through their compatible smartphone, using Tandem Diabetes Care, Inc’s t:slim X2 insulin pump. As smart wearable and implanted devices grow in usage, we will likely see a shift from treatment-based reactionary care to more of a focus on wellness, prevention, and well-being. Networked devices will give people the tools to help themselves maintain their wellness and to provide vital health data to health care professionals when they need it. Physicians and other medical professionals will use these networked devices to help people actively sustain their well-being. When people do get ill, physicians will be able to identify it earlier, intervene proactively, and better understand its progression. Health information obtained from traditional annual physical check-ups and other tests previously only available in a surgery or lab will be augmented, possibly replaced, by data from sensors on/around our smart bodies (in our clothing and, eventually, skin and blood). Artificial intelligence (AI)-augmented analysis of medical data derived from these sensor devices will help provide early warnings of physiological trouble or indications of disease giving physicians 24/7 real-time reports of their patients’ well-being and alert them to any change in patients’ data that requires urgent attention.

Patients are increasingly turning to the Internet for medical advice. According to a report by the Wharton School, Google, and McKinsey, one in 20 searches on Google today is for health-related information. The result is an increased demand for transparency and higher expectations from patients when it comes to the level of digital services and convenience offered by their health care providers. The resultant change in consumer behavior and attitude toward health care, will, in turn, likely change the nature of the doctor–patient interaction. In a 2019 Digital Health Consumer Survey by Accenture, only 55 percent of Generation Z (born 1997 onward) had a primary care physician, versus 84 percent of Baby Boomers (born 1946–1964). And the younger generation is generally much more dissatisfied by the traditional care model than older generations. Regardless of age, health care consumers are demonstrating dissatisfaction with many aspects of traditional care, including effectiveness, convenience, and transparency.

Telemedicine, increasingly able to provide online urgent care, lifestyle, and pharmacy services, is rapidly growing. If you have flu-like symptoms, you should be able to resolve this via remote monitoring and video chat and avoid having to drive to an urgent care center. Using technology for remote routine patient diagnosis and care reduces the load on hospitals and provides them the opportunity to use their scarce expertise where it is most needed.

The availability of data gathered through digital technologies such as mobile health applications and wearables, accompanied by advanced health analytics using these data, has the potential to transform health care delivery and lead to improved patient care. It has the potential to improve diagnostic efficiency and derive insights that go beyond what medicine is currently capable of. AI has the potential to not only assist in helping to analyze the vast amounts of data previously not possible, but in helping to derive better actionable insights from it. These advances will need to pay special attention to patient safety and data security as top priorities. It will be important to ensure this protection of sensitive health information. Health care organizations need to establish a culture of data security, where privacy is assured, and where the AI programs are free of bias and able to explain it’s recommendations.

The increased use of telemedicine and personal health devices likely transform health care facilities, creating integrated virtual and physical spaces capable of providing consumer-centric delivery of products, care, wellness, and well-being. Consumer-centric health players will provide virtual, personalized wellness and care; encourage behavior change; and drive consumer and caregiver education. This is likely to lead to smaller more distributed medical facilities and the increased use of embedded sensor and robotics (mini robotic objects that can get inserted into a patient’s body to perform less obtrusive tests and operations). These smaller more distributed health facilities will employ advanced high-speed communications (5G and 6G) supporting the rapid transfer of medical data, analysis from central data processing hubs with access to remote specialists. This would reduce the wait time to get to needed medical care as well as the availability of more effective specialized centers. Logistics providers will run just-in-time supply chains, facilitate device and medication procurement operations, and get the product to the consumer faster. Except for some specialty care, most health care will likely be delivered in these localized health hubs that will serve as centers for education, prevention, and treatment in a retail setting. These local hubs will connect consumers to virtual, home, and auxiliary wellness providers with specialty care operators when needed to provide essential specialty care and interventions when in-home wellness and care efforts are insufficient.

Treatment will also likely experience innovative change. We can expect to see increased use of robotics in the operating room, including the ability to insert miniature robots inside the patient’s body to enable more insight into health problems and the ability to perform less invasive micro-surgery. Some of the surgery may become fully automated. Stem-cell medicine will become a powerful new tool. For example, replacement human organs for transplant will be grown on demand from stem cells in the lab, with minimal risk of rejection. Nanomedicine and DNA analysis will allow scientists to create designer drugs that are far more powerful than today’s drugs. AI bots equipped with deep learning algorithms could relieve emergency room personnel of tending to large numbers of walk-in patients with nonemergencies (e.g., sore throats, UTIs).

Health insurers will start to be able to drive reductions in care costs by leveraging advanced risk models, consumer incentives and market power, and custom tailor their health care coverage packages.

This increased use of technology and remote medicine could create a never-before-seen tidal wave of liability. Medical malpractice liability concerning defective devices has already become an issue. For example, Stryker paid over $2 billion to settle lawsuits stemming from their defective hip replacement therapy. 6G-enabled technologies have the potential to explode these potential liability costs. Consider the implementation of a 6G-powered brain–computer interface (BCI) that allows individuals to control machines with their brains. This could result in such innovations as sophisticated prosthetic limbs and improved memory for patients suffering from Alzheimer’s. But these innovations come with enormous potential liability. Individual brain-damage medical malpractice suits can result in judgments of millions of dollars. A brain-damage class action could cause manufacturers to go bankrupt. And, as is common with medical device litigation, the liability extends beyond the manufacturers and software designers. Any party in the distribution chain, from manufacturers, to hospitals, to doctors, needs to beware this potential tidal wave of liability and the need to secure liability insurance.

To effect these changes, several challenges and issues will need to be addressed. Patients pay approximately one-third of health care and coverage costs each year in the United States and indirectly pay even more, yet patients have never been the primary customer for the health care industry. It is anticipated that, as we see a shift to a more patient-centric health care business model, this may change. Health care providers will increasingly need to listen more to their patients, put them at the center of their solutions, and make their health care service more convenient, accessible, and user-friendly to stay competitive.

These changes and more (even designer babies and 3D printed organs) are forecast for health care, and they all depend heavily on the availability of technology and communications. The loss of communications and data processing for any extended period can be catastrophic. This adds emphasis to the need to our finding solutions to keeping at least an essential minimum communications and technology capability available even during disasters and cyberattacks, as well as adding to the urgency of restoral of full service.

Education and the Future of Learning

Dramatic advances in computer-aided and remote learning tools and a growing dissatisfaction with the current status quo are primary drivers of change in the field of education. The COVID-19 pandemic necessitated a greater reliance on out-of-classroom learning, which accelerated the development and use of computer-aided and remote learning tools. As these tools have had more widespread use, they have been evaluated and improved. Poor student performance under the existing educational system is serving as further motivation for making a change. Despite our spending more on education, student test scores and graduation rates are declining, and dropout rates are increasing. There have been no gains in literacy since the National Assessment of Educational Progress began in 1971, and no improvement in performance in math since 1990. These dismal statistics cannot be attributed to racial or ethnic differences as literacy scores for white students peaked in 1975, and in math, scores peaked in the early 1990s. Furthermore, while traditional school student test scores have shown little improvement in reading and no improvement in math since 1973, charter school students around the country have shown steady improvement. In a study of 1.5 million charter school students, Stanford University researchers found that the average charter school student posted achievement scores that are the equivalent of eight additional days of learning in reading compared to peers at traditional schools. This is a significant improvement from 2009, when the same researchers found that charter students posted scores that were the equivalent of seven fewer days of learning. Another impetus for change is the explosion of knowledge and information and a growing shortage of teachers. Some argue that there is not enough time to teach everyone every topic in depth, that there needs to be more choice and less uniformity in what subject matter a student chooses to learn, as well as where and how they learn, once they progress past the reading, writing, and arithmetic basics. Based upon these trends, many are criticizing our schools as being set up like factories, a model better fit for the 20th century, and not suitable for ensuring personalized, quality education and learning opportunities in the 21st century, and demanding change. Based on these trends, we are seeing a shift in the teacher’s role from keepers of knowledge, which they uniformly provide the same way to all students, to teaching paced and personally structured to the individual student. In this new education model, teachers act more like a mentor and assistant to a student’s personal learning journey rather than a purveyor of single set of knowledge taught in a particular order, way, and pace. Lower pay than in other comparable professions, a growing demand on teachers due to the shift in teaching methods, along with population declines has led to a shortage of teachers, which increases the reliance on computer-assisted teaching aids and hybrid learning.

Despite gains made in the science of learning, our knowledge of how people learn remains imperfect, with many unknowns remaining regarding the best ways of transferring knowledge. We lack a good understanding of the cumulative effect of learning, what skills establish a strong foundation for other skills to build on, how we know when someone is ready to learn the next set of skills, or whether there a preferred order of topics to teach. We are not good at being able to assess a student’s individual progress and to understand the best way to educate them. Although we don’t know enough about the science of learning, we do know that educational tools, such as the online learning tools, flipped classrooms, and remote and hybrid schools, have demonstrated successes, and challenge the notion that we must devote more resources, time, and training to traditional classrooms. While not all students can be expected to thrive in a self-paced environment, many are benefiting, and clearly, not all students succeed in a structured classroom. Khan Academy, a YouTube channel with educational videos, is a good example of the success and growth of online learning. It provides a free online resource where students watch lessons, take quizzes, and track their progress. It covers subjects ranging from multiplication to the French Revolution, to cryptography, biology, and chemistry. Students sign-in to the site with their e-mail address and set up an account. The site tracks their progress through different lessons. Some schools have even incorporated Khan Academy into their curriculum and use it to monitor the progress of all the students in their classes. For example, the entire Los Altos School District, in Santa Clara County, California, along with students at Summit Prep, KIPP Academies around the country, Eastside Prep in Palo Alto, California, and Oakland Unity Charter School in Oakland, and others, use Khan Academy as a part of their school curriculum. Khan Academy is supported by Microsoft’s founder, Bill Gates, and corporate titans like Google.

In a flipped classroom, students prepare to participate in class by watching video lessons, reading articles, and doing other tasks that prepare them for the activities that will take place during class time. This allows them to spend more of their class time working on applications of what they learned in their homework. As an example of a flipped classroom, Los Altos students watch Khan Academy lectures and videos at home, then come to school the next day to work on their assignments. In class, teachers review the lesson from the previous evening and help students as they finish their exercises. Students who struggle with different subjects can spend more time on the material they are having difficulty with, while others in the class can move on to the next topic. Some teachers using this method report that it gives them more time to teach concepts that students need help with and not having to spend time on skills that students already know. Station rotation has also proven to be effective both in the classroom and online. An example of station rotation is where one group of students work on a virtual lab project, while others are in a breakout session with the instructor, and a third group watches and discusses an instructional video. This allows every student to have face time with the teacher and with their classmates. Another teaching method begins with a question posed in class that is designed to engage the students toward thinking about, researching, and finding answers in advance on the material a class session will be focused around. This gives the students an opportunity to start looking for the answer on their own. The instructor then introduces a video, either self-made or from a third party, that teaches the concepts discussed at the beginning of class. Following the video, the class reviews the material together with the teacher elaborating on the vaguer areas or points of confusion. When the instructor senses that students understand the material, a summary quiz is given to assess learning.

Blended learning, also known as hybrid learning, combines much of the aforementioned. It includes educational materials and opportunities for interaction online, as well as in traditional physical classroom methods. While students still attend brick-and-mortar schools and online sessions with a teacher present, these face-to-face sessions are combined with computer-mediated activities regarding content and delivery, allowing some student control over time, place, path, or pace. Preliminary research concludes that student achievement was higher in blended learning experiences than either fully online or fully face-to-face learning experiences, with most students spending time working on their own with new concepts. Digital instruction is matched to the student’s personal progress and mastery of the subject matter through periodic assessments. This approach, when done properly, has been found to improve communication between lecturers and students, and students are better able to self-evaluate their understanding of course material through qualitative and quantitative computer-based assessment modules. Teachers have more time to circulate and support individual students who may need individualized attention, and to personalize their instruction to help all students reach their full potential, rather than teach to the lowest common denominator, or to ignore slow learners. The availability of online learning materials has the potential to reduce educational expenses by replacing expensive textbooks with electronic devices that students often bring themselves to class. E-textbooks also have the potential to reduce needed physical classroom space. Blended learning seems to better support a more personalized education, replacing the model where a teacher stands in front of the classroom, and everyone is expected to stay at the same pace. To be effective, this approach requires the programs being implemented to be high quality, available to, and used by all. It also requires additional effort on the part of the educators as providing effective feedback in real-time personalized response to a student’s online answers is more difficult and time-consuming (therefore more expensive), than with traditional (static paper test-based) assessments. Furthermore, although these changes allow students to work at their own pace and, using self-assessment tools make sure they fully understand new concepts before moving on, the students need to be motivated to use the online lecture materials and not fall behind. And this is not always the case. In a study performed across four different universities, it was found that only half of the students watched the lecture videos on a regular basis, and nearly 40 percent of students watched several weeks’ worth of videos in one sitting, binge learning.

Despite many remaining unknowns, it is probably more important in our changing world that a person be capable of continuous self-learning throughout their lifetime than to learn a particular set of knowledge at a given point in time. And although there is still ongoing debate regarding the best way to achieve this choice, including how much choice should be offered, who is best equipped to make that choice, and what should be considered the common core that should be mastered before more individual choice is allowed, it is likely that in the future, education will allow for more choice and individually paced instruction and learning, making use of educational tools made possible by advances in technology. There are already changes occurring that will allow every student more choice in the schools they go to. And this choice would allow students to combine credits earned in classes held at different learning locations to complete their course of study. And where all students will have access to self-paced instructional tools. We are also beginning to see programs where education funding is becoming more student- and parent-directed, based on student outcomes, with where students and parent are provided better tools to assess these outcomes. Similarly, we are seeing the teacher’s role shifting from a lecturer of knowledge presented in a particular order in a particular way, to becoming a mentor and assistant who adapts to each student’s individual learning process. In short, it is likely that in the future, more students will be free to choose the best classes, tutors, and extracurricular activities for them from a menu of choices, no matter where they live or where the subject is taught. For example, children might take math, English, and art classes and swim at a local school where they can sit with friends, they have known most of their life, study Spanish and music online, and prepare for the SAT in an evening class at a nearby specialized school. There are already examples of how this change is already occurring Arizona has developed a program where parents and students are provided with a bank account worth 90 percent of the state portion of a child’s per student funding from a school funding formula. Parents can use the accounts to enroll their child in an online class, buy textbooks, pay tuition at a K-12 private school, pay for individual public school classes, hire a personal tutor, or even pay for college. Families have taken advantage of the accounts’ flexibility in creative ways. Some have subscribed to online education websites such as BrainPOP. Others have bought Saxon curriculum materials to use for home-schooling, along with Rosetta Stone software to help with foreign language instruction. Families are keeping unused funds to save for their child’s college tuition and for hiring individual help for their student in different subjects. New Hampshire students have been able to use K-12 private school scholarships to either find a school that meets their needs or pay for home-school expenses since 2012. New Hampshire families can use their scholarship money to buy home-school materials and textbooks or to pay private school tuition, allowing them to choose where and how their child learns. Legislators in Florida, Iowa, Montana, Utah, Oklahoma, and Missouri have introduced education savings account legislation. In many of these programs, the scholarships are currently only made available to students who meet certain criteria. For example, in Mississippi, only children with dyslexia are eligible for scholarships. But as these programs grow in popularity, with good results, similar programs are likely to spring up in many other states, and current restrictions removed. These evolving laws and programs offer a glimpse of the next generation of educational innovation.

As these sorts of changes evolve and gain in acceptance, education will become increasingly more dependent on a ubiquitous computer network infrastructure. Just as today we are dependent on there being a teacher in the classroom, we will need to ensure that these tools and their supporting infrastructure are easy to use, up to date, affordable, and always available for all citizens. Although the digital divide is narrowing as the Internet becomes more pervasive, many students still do not have ubiquitous access to the Internet, even in their classrooms. The student needs access to these tools, even when the Internet is down, or their computers are compromised. Additionally, e-learning platforms not only need to be affordable and available, but understandable to all. All students need to possess sufficient IT literacy, as lack of IT literacy can serve as a significant barrier for students attempting to get access to the course materials. Cost can also be an issue as using and developing e-learning platforms can be more time-consuming for educators than traditional methods, require better skills, and can also come with new costs as e-learning platforms and service providers charge user fees to educators. More parental effort and involvement are also required. We have grown accustomed to the routine of parents sending their children to an assigned public school where these schools employ administrators, teachers, and other staff who receive their pay regardless of how many children learn to read or drop out. Although these changes allow for a more effective, distributed, and inherently survivable educational system, they increase our dependence on networks and technology being available and resilient in the face of disaster and attack.

Entertainment and Social Networking

The digital media and entertainment industry is fiercely competitive, always coming up with new offerings and disruptive business models. Entertainment changes are brought about by the introduction of new innovative offerings, business models, behavioral changes, demographic shifts, and advances in technology. What is unknown is exactly how it will evolve and how essential it will be viewed in terms of where it ranks in importance to restore in the event of loss or degradation in networks and processing infrastructure.

The COVID-19 pandemic caused people to access more media and entertainment at home and avoid larger in-person events. Whether this trend brought on by COVID-19 will persist as the pandemic declines remains to be seen. Some predict that with the decline of COVID-19, there will be a strong reversal and a rejection even of the time that used to be spent online for entertainment. They point to the recent drop in Netflix subscribers and Peloton sales. Others believe that such drops are temporary, and that the online entertainment industry will continue to adapt, evolve, grow, and take advantage of the underlying communications becoming faster, richer, with new more novel forms, requiring greater bandwidth capacity, and delivered with greater reliability. They believe that the COVID-19 pandemic accelerated an already ongoing digitalization trend that had been brought about through advances in technology and competition pressure on existing business models to keep up with innovators, and that any slight dip resulting from the decline of COVID-19 will be temporary. What is clear is that there will be change.

Video on demand and streaming providers will continue to compete for the time, attention, and bank of accounts of viewers, both among themselves and against other established home providers, such as traditional cable. Customers are increasingly juggling multiple subscriptions and are becoming more sensitive to the cost as it becomes a bigger share of their available funds. The availability of wireless wide bandwidth communications into the home is accelerating the trend for many customers to cut the cord completely abandoning the near monopoly (typically only one- or two-wired Internet to the home providers) and extend access to this entertainment outside the home, while at work, and on travel, and vacation. As this competition continues, one likely fallout will be the top players becoming unable to spend billions on content development and global expansion using their current business models. The business models that got them this far may not provide the future profitability needed for the industry to grow. Providers are under pressure to keep producing hit content, get it in front of the right audiences, figure out how to keep subscription prices low enough for a given market, and determine how much advertising is needed to subsidize operating expenses and subscription costs. Meanwhile, subscription churn is growing among users, at times averaging as high as 35 percent. The challenge is in finding profitability among all these costs in a business that offers nothing near the margins of cable TV. For example, in response to a drop in subscribers, Netflix announced changes to its business and pricing model. And streaming industry metrics are evolving beyond subscriber counts to lifetime customer value.

In-person entertainment and the businesses and venues that rely on it are also facing greater pressure to evolve and differentiate themselves from other competitive offerings and online alternatives such as video streaming and social media. Even after the pandemic subsides, it will likely leave a mark on behaviors for some time to come. Entertainment venues such as concert halls, sports stadiums, and movie theaters may find people will be less eager to venture outside the home, especially as video, audio, and augmented reality improve with the increased bandwidth and other technical advances. Can innovative new in-theater venues be created that people will find the in-person onsite experience they offer sufficiently enhanced beyond those available at home to warrant the time, cost, and travel? One way for entertainment venues to drive revenue and increase foot traffic is to evolve into flexible spaces. Large sports stadiums can be deployed as multipurpose spaces, hosting sports games, concerts, and trade shows all in a single weekend. Venues could include offering more mixed media, live streaming, and augmented reality/virtual reality (AR/VR) experiences. Experiences that embrace a hybrid approach, integrating in-person experiences with options like remote viewing, live streaming, and virtual copresence, can appeal to both those who can’t wait to leave home and those who’d prefer to stay within their own four walls. Can entertainment companies cater to everyone and create experiences that blend the in-person with the virtual? Can in-person venues broaden their scope and offerings to become in-demand, multipurpose places? What exclusive, insulated VIP experiences can venues offer to high-paying customers interested in live events? As the pandemic recedes, and theaters become more active, streaming providers, who may also be studios operating a streaming platform as just one vehicle for their content, will likely struggle to balance windowed theatrical releases with direct-to-streaming releases for their subscribers. Large studios will need to determine if they are suited to being content aggregators and streaming providers, or if they should focus on content development and licensing. Streamers will need to experiment with finding innovations in pricing tiers, paid content, and loyalty programs that can help reach and retain a larger number of customers and grow revenue. Digital media providers will continue to experiment with finding ways for lowering content production costs and de-risking larger productions.

The online media, in the search for more avenues of profitability than advertising, need to consider, among other things, finding ways to integrate shopping into their user experiences, finding companies to partner with that will enhance the shopping experience, and seamlessly integrating shoppable media environments (interactive buying enabled at the intersection of content and commerce). This includes the integration of mobile and digital payments into their environment with minimal friction. Imagine scrolling through a social media feed and encountering a post for a new clothing brand that enables purchasing after just a few clicks. Or seeing an ad pop up while playing a video game on your smartphone, which you can act on. These sorts of integrated experiences have the potential to not only boost revenue opportunities for both advertisers and creatives, but to increase consumer engagement and brand loyalty. To achieve these sorts of experiences, companies need to rethink integration across content, even acquiring or partnering with existing supply chains, and payment systems. And social media is under pressure to find new sources of revenue and to pay more attention to concerns regarding loss of privacy and promulgation of divisive, misleading false information that is capturing the attention and concern of users and regulators. Moving to shoppable media may shift the commerce ecosystem to favor smaller, more nimble creators, rather than more established brands. It also needs to offer new ways for both the digital social media and entertainment sites to tap the creator economy. Moving to shoppable media may make these applications more critical to continue to operate and restore in the event of a disaster. Entertainment can move to embed shopping experiences by allowing viewers to purchase that dress or car they just saw in a movie and liked.

Metaverse is an evolving concept that has the potential to greatly impact future entertainment venues and offerings and the existing competitive lineup. Metaverse is envisioned by many to be a 3D digital place where people interact through digital images and representations of themselves. It represents both an alternative world to the physical one and one that augments the physical world, with activities, events, and virtual goods that are compelling enough to gather users and businesses. It could include AR, VR, and mixed reality (MR) experiences that operate across physical and digital spaces. It could incorporate trends like shoppable media, virtual meetings, social camera filters, motion capture, AR for clothing and furniture shopping, spatial computing, immersive learning, and an array of brand and enterprise experiments in AR and VR, which could all converge toward a metaverse. It currently often involves wearing a cumbersome head gear, which can cause dizziness. And, to get it to work smoothly with many partners and integrated competitive offerings will require significant adoption, standardization, and interoperability challenges, such as being able to move one’s avatar (the digital image they wear in a metaverse), and its identity, across possibly many different metaverses and social medias, as well as handling the tax, accounting, and broader regulatory implications, and establishing the necessary trust and safety. So the broad adoption of the full metaverse vision could take many years and even fail to materialize. However, we could see a more piecemeal version of this technology get established earlier and evolve over time to include the more advanced, fuller vision. And the integration will be simpler and progress faster, if it becomes dominated by just a few large giants such as Google, Apple, Microsoft, and Meta (Facebook). Regardless of how the competition sorts itself out, we are likely to ultimately see a widespread deployment and incorporation of AR hardware and software devices by users as a natural part of their life. As the metaverse experience evolves and gets better defined, it will impact existing media and entertainment companies that will need to think about how they can differentiate from or participate in creating the metaverse experience, what applications besides entertainment might be incorporating the metaverse, and whether they should be partners or competitors, or something in the middle. For example, video conferencing and entertainment backdrops such as those now used in Zoom sessions, and live streaming entertainment could be replaced by more dramatic and animated backdrops, with mixed hybrid conferencing options where different clusters of participants in physical meeting spaces are virtually merged. New immersive technologies, such as cellular surfaces, connected retina implants, and wireless BCIs, could become popular, and entertainment and media companies will have to wrestle with how they could be best employed and integrated into their offerings. If smartphones fall by the wayside, replaced by smart wearables, headsets, and implants that take direct sensory inputs from human senses, entertainment and media companies will need to figure out how they can adapt their streaming media and live entertainment venues to include these new interface devices, and whether that could influence the content being developed. As we move closer toward the metaverse (or metaverses), where people will spend more of their time in immersive, social, digital worlds, we are likely to see the lines between physical and virtual entertainment venues continue to blur and merge, fueling competitive pressures and the ultimate integration of what is currently separate virtual and physical entertainment venues.

Nonfungible tokens (NFTs) will likely generate innovations and revenues beyond collectibles, and the emerging ecosystem should make it easier for more people to participate. An increasing number of content creators will likely experiment with NFTs to sell directly to fans while innovating on the kinds of additional value they can attach to the asset. Music labels and rights holders are trying to understand how NFTs, and the blockchains that support them, may impact their business models. Gaming companies will likely continue experimenting with NFT virtual goods and play-to-earn games. The popularity of NFTs could possibly open the door to the use and adoption of decentralized ledgers, like blockchains, and cryptocurrencies that contain the potential to radically recompose many aspects of the economy. On the other hand, current shortcomings of these newer technologies could slow their acceptance, while more established currently entrenched payment technologies could successfully adapt, innovate, and remain dominant. Media and entertainment companies need to think about what their role could and should be with respect to NFTs, and whether they can and should make it easier for people to buy and sell NFTs. This includes thinking about what existing assets are good fits for NFTs, including whether NFTs can add additional value, exclusivity, and transparency to those assets. It also involves thinking about the role NFTs and blockchains could play in supporting virtual economies and asset ownership as well as alternatives to these technologies.

Some predict that as the entertainment industry and its supporting technologies evolve, we will increasingly see entertainment products and services become more democratic, part of a more decentralized Web, possibly employing some combination of blockchain, cryptocurrency, and open standards-based social network implementations. But, no matter how the industry evolves, we are likely to see dramatic change in how future entertainment venues get fulfilled and delivered, and what the future competitive landscape will look like. Not only is it uncertain as how entertainment industry will evolve, but, in the event of disaster or cyberattack, when systems and resources go down, it is unknown how critical, and how much priority users will place on restoring and getting online entertainment backup and running compared to other competing applications. Will online entertainment, especially when integrated into physical venues, possibly merging with what are currently separate industries, evolve to become a more indispensable part of a person’s daily life and routine? Will digital entertainment change from being what for many is a currently a luxury, a nice-to-have, to becoming more of a necessity? Will it represent a greater priority to keep up and running after a service disruption? Regardless of its ultimate ranking in the list of services that need to be restored in case of loss or degradation, changes are occurring that could impact its priority. There are lots of questions and issues surrounding the future of the entertainment and media industry as it continues to evolve and increase its dependency on the network and digital infrastructure. An important question for this book is regarding the importance for this industry to remain available and resilient to attacks and failures due to natural disasters. As the industry evolves, will it, or some segment of it such as the news and weather reporting, succeed in establishing themselves as not just a desirable augmentation of an individual’s daily life and routine, but as an essential need that is critical to keep up and running? And if just a segment, will the industry infrastructure have evolved in such a way that critical segment can be easily decoupled and kept up and running without also requiring the entire industry infrastructure?

Commerce—Buying and Selling Over Remote and Hybrid Environments

E-commerce continues to grow and to gain a larger share of the consumer’s and business’s wallets. E-commerce is convenient as everything is merely a click away and the expenses are far lower than traditional businesses, making business conducted over the Internet more affordable, enabling more competitive pricing. It’s estimated that e-commerce purchases will rise from 14.1 to 22 percent of all purchases by 2023, totaling $4.8 trillion. By 2040, almost 95 percent of all purchases will be via e-commerce, with mobile purchasing becoming the new normal. The commerce marketplace, already a highly competitive environment, is expected to grow in intensity and experience new entrants. For example, in the previous discussion of likely changes in the entertainment and media business, the possibility of social media and entertainment sites moving into the ecommerce space leading to disruptions and unanticipated alliances was discussed. Recognizing these changing dynamics, Jeff Bezos of Amazon, the leader in the field, feels insecure enough that he has said “Amazon is not too big to fail … In fact, I predict one day Amazon will fail … Amazon will go bankrupt. If you look at large companies, their lifespans tend to be 30-plus years, not hundred-plus years.” This intense competition has resulted in e-commerce companies constantly innovating and upgrading its offerings as technologies improve. This is leading to a greater dependence on communications and the supporting information technology infrastructure.

There is a growing diversity of devices being used to buy and sell stuff over the Internet. Four out of five Americans are already online shoppers, with more than half of them are shopping using their mobile phones, and this is likely to increase. As a result, attention will continue to be focused on making mobile device users’ shopping experience faster and easier. This includes mobile-friendly search and order experience with fast loading time and simple and easy-to-navigate design. Many people have online voice-enabled search assistants (Amazon Alexa, Google Assistant, Siri, or its Android equivalent—Bixby) installed in their home. About 50 percent of all online searches are currently voice-based using these assistants as users find it is always on, fast easy, interactive, and personal. These voice assistants are already being used to allow not just search but purchase and payment. This trend is likely to continue, along with the increased use of newer integrated voice and video devices such as Alex Echo Show to further enrich the experience.

We can expect to see the increased use of advanced analytics and AI to help keep track of customers’ preferences and for tailoring their e-commerce experience based on the things they like and are interested in. One such example is the recommended products section in most online stores that give customers recommendations based on their search and order history. As previously discussed, boundaries between e-commerce and social media platforms will likely blur.

Drones and autonomous vehicles are already starting to deliver orders to customers, quicker and more cost-effectively. Drones are faster than humans, can operate around the clock, and can significantly cut the delivery time and reduce the cost of delivery. Their use will likely increase with the goal of going beyond next-day delivery to same day. Advertising and marketing on social media are increasing. Influencers are rising in importance as a marketing tool as people rely on and are influenced by social media celebrities and personal friends.

In total, $54 billion is already spent every year by people buying virtual goods in what is being called a metaverse. There are likely to be more than one metaverse world. As innovations such as metaverse take off, they will present an additional location where consumers meet and where shopping can occur, with some objects to buy and sell, like NFTs, that are unique to the virtual online experience. This trend will increasingly attract the attention of e-commerce sites, financial institutions, and many other of the traditional real-world institutions, all exploring different ways to establish themselves in this new value chain.

New strategies such as pop-up shops for creating brick-and-mortar stores along with an e-commerce business will likely be an important area, which, if gotten right, can further increase sales. As some people still prefer buying in person, e-commerce companies will continue to experiment with the concept of pop-up shops to accompany the products they sell online to take advantage of a passing fad or seasonal demand, and to augment the online shopping experience. The location and products selected for the pop-up shop are extremely important decisions to the success of this strategy, as well as an estimate of the potential new customers who prefer shopping in physical stores.

Consumers are becoming more environmentally aware. This is beginning to result in an emphasis on sustainability by e-commerce. This includes the use of reduced waste packaging and more sustainable supply chains, where businesses reduce the amount of waste using minimalistic packaging that uses more sustainable and reusable materials or less materials in general.

The use of blogs, videos, and even memes to expand knowledge on a certain topic, market, and sell (known as content marketing) is increasing, and being extended to making a purchase, as statistics show that content marketing not only gets more clicks, but it’s also less expensive than traditional marketing.

Attribution modeling will increasingly be used to help businesses determine the channels most beneficial for marketing and to invest in the channels that make the most profit.

Image recognition apps are not only for user authentication by facial recognition (used to unlock your phone by scanning your face), but its use is increasing for other e-commerce applications. This includes giving the user information on objects they point the camera at, or show a photo of, and for reading labels and barcodes. This information provided can include where you can buy the item and even allow you to buy the item with a single click. Image recognition will also be used to determine the degree of interest a user is showing or what on screen they are looking at.

E-commerce is increasingly innovating to improve the purchasing experience. This includes ensuring safe Internet transactions, 24-hour online stores, and finding the right product in a shorter amount of time. As online stores have lower operating costs, e-commerce businesses can use that money in other aspects of the business, the result of which will be a greatly improved shopping experience for the consumers.

These trends and statistics promise a bright future, with ecommerce accounting for an increasingly larger share of sales through the innovative use of technology. But these new innovations require greater bandwidth, and reliable and resilient communications and online access to processing.

It does little good to offer slow, hard to use e-commerce, or e-commerce that is not reliably available. As we begin to depend on networks being up for most of our day-to-day commerce, keeping the Internet and remote processors up and running becomes more critical.

Transportation

The population of earth is both growing and moving into increasingly concentrated urban areas. The result is more traffic congestion on roadways. Many roads were built well over 20 years ago and cannot sustain the increased demand and are often in need of repair. Climate change is both driving the transportation industry to become more environmentally friendly and accelerating the need to repair our aging roads and bridges due to an increasingly warming world weakening and damaging them. On top of this, the cost of energy is increasing. Significant innovations and change are already occurring to address these challenges. These changes fall into one or more of three common themes; namely: electrification, smart technology, and autonomy.

Electric vehicles (EVs), electric trucks, and electric bikes are becoming the dominant form of vehicle propulsion as they allow for a more environmentally friendly transportation solution and ends our dependence on finite sources of energy such as oil. The Tesla is the posterchild of EVs, but most automobile manufacturers are now offering and shifting to electric propulsion.

Ridesharing, which is growing rapidly, is offered though companies such as Uber, Lyft, Car2Go, Zipcar. This trend could be accelerated and made more affordable if they were autonomous and did not need drivers. These options offer the potential to make our lives easier and change existing use patterns. Car owners’ habits will change as their cars become self-driving. It gives the owner the option of sending their car home after arriving for a dinner, a show or party, and then having it return to pick you up when you are ready to go home, eliminating the need to find scarce and costly temporary parking. It will also make vehicle lending and sharing easier as one can send their car to a friend or associate to use during hours while they are at work. Self-driving cars also offer an attractive transportation option for seniors, youths, and intoxicated who are unable to drive safely or legally. Currently, autonomous cars are still largely constrained to testing environments and pilot projects. A few are active in cities like Las Vegas, where Lyft offers autonomous rides for a fare, in their fleet of 30 Aptiv vehicles. It is widely believed that due to the high cost of vehicle ownership and the trend to smarter self-driving cars, which enable greater sharing and commuting options, the individual ownership of cars globally will decrease significantly over the coming decades. Many auto manufacturers recognize this possibility and are working to accommodate the coming industry revolution into their business strategies and plans.

The transportation options are not just restricted to ground-based vehicles. Autonomous aerial vehicles (AAVs) and drones designed for transporting passengers will also increase as a means of addressing the growing congestion problem. Most configurations of these flying vehicles use vertical takeoff and landing (VTOL) through horizontal rotors, which require no runway. AAVs allow commuters to take off from congested roadways to their destinations, greatly cutting travel times and avoid congestion. One example is the Ehang 184 Air Taxi currently under test and demonstration for urban transport. It is 5G-connected and controlled through a command center. Another interesting example the VTOL S3 2019 Hoverbike, battery-powered, with a one-piece carbon fiber frame, four rotors (quadcopter) capable of carrying one person and flying 96 Kmph at 33 ft. of altitude. At $150,000, however, it is currently cost prohibitive.

Other transportation examples include differing versions of autonomous MagLev (Magnetic Levitation) trains suspended above city streets; cable cars far above urban skylines; hybrid cars with wings; skateboards and other personal mobility devices; autonomous buses; even Falcon 9 Rockets to leverage the speed of space flight to get people around the globe quickly.

The Hyperloop (first envisioned by Elon Musk in 2012) offers an alternative to trains and planes for longer-haul transportation between cities, countries, and even continents. Hyperloop moves people in capsules or pods that travel at high speeds though tubes over long distances. Inside the tubes is a low-pressure environment void of air. The pods use MagLev technology for propulsion. The low pressure and MagLev create a very low friction environment allowing the pods to travel upward of 600 mph. Virgin Hyperloop One currently has a 500-meter test track in Apex, Nevada, called the DevLoop. Hyperloop projects are now being considered in India, the United States, the UK, Canada, and Mexico.

There are also likely to be other related changes to the transportation infrastructure in response to these alternatives. This includes widening sidewalks and increasing the number of protected cycleways, as well as highways that can charge electric vehicles while they are traveling on them. Many of these infrastructure changes have environmental, health, and economic positives, and are likely to be aided by more wearable and personal technology, which enables travel by foot and pedal to be accessible and efficient.

Considering these attractive alternatives, some predict that current public transportation options such as bus use may decline by 2040. However, by harnessing the power of big data and AI, bus operators can make more informed decisions to better match vehicle supply with passenger demand and dramatically improve punctuality and reliability, leading to a better onboard experience for passengers, while significantly reducing operating costs. If the resultant reductions in operational costs are passed on to the customer, bus services may continue and even grow in quality, frequency, and coverage.

These trends form part of a larger vision for the future of transportation. One such vision is Transport Vision 2050, which predicts a connected future, where autonomous vehicles are equipped with 7G sensors that communicate to optimize journeys and prevent collisions. Data transmitted between motor vehicles and road infrastructure, called vehicle-to-everything (V2X), is already operational in some cars. There is even some call for pedestrians and cyclists to be equipped with beacons so that the driverless cars of the future spot them when cameras, LIDAR, and similar technologies can’t. In the future, vehicles will be able to communicate with each other, smart infrastructure, and Internet of Things (IoT) devices. Futuristic taxis will be able to gather mass amounts of data to drive further efficiencies while they move around smart cities. As vehicles become increasingly interconnected and smart, the vulnerability resulting from lost communication and cyberattack dramatically increases. This greater use of autonomous and semi-autonomous vehicles will need to be implemented to be safe, resilient, and effective while not creating concerns around cybersecurity and a big brother society collecting sensitive data about our whereabout and travel patterns.

Power

Resiliency is becoming a major concern for the electric power and gas utilities because extreme events such as wildfires are increasing in frequency and impacting both the availability and demand. In addition to wildfires, events have included severe heat waves, deep freezes, sea-level rise, floods, and more intense storms. The unprecedented frequency, intensity, and unpredictability of these extreme climate and weather events due to global warming are causing increasing demand, and frequent, more crippling, and longer lasting power outages. In total, 51 percent of utilities, say extreme weather, has affected the reliability of electricity delivery in their territory more than usual in the past year. Experts agree that global weather patterns are in uncharted territory, and planners can no longer use the past to predict the future.

Cyberattack against our power infrastructure also continues to grow in frequency, severity, and sophistication, as this industry is increasingly becoming a target for both cyberattack and sabotage as global tensions rise. This was most recently witnessed during the Russian–Ukrainian conflict. The power industries’ vulnerability to cyberattacks is increasing due to the growing dependence of the industry on communications and information technology as the industry continues to invest in and deploy new more advanced technology solutions to address environmental concerns, reduce cost, improve efficiencies, and shift to electric power and other clean sources of energy. One example of how the electric power sector’s dependence on communications is increasing as it continues to modernize the grid is its use of 5G to move data from smart meters, sensors, and other devices to the cloud, where they can more effectively and efficiently analyze and act on it. According to a 2021 Deloitte survey, 58 percent of respondents are already deploying 5G or running pilots, with the goal of achieving more flexible load programs to reduce cost of operation, achieve decarbonization, and execute resiliency strategies. Besides the industries’ increasing vulnerability to cyberattacks, we are starting to see the increased occurrence of sabotage and physical attacks often employing drone technology as central power grids provide an attractive target. Another concern is that the growth of load flexibility programs is hampered by the need for improved distribution system control technologies, communications standards, and incentives for stakeholders.

More utilities, driven by environmental, social, and governance (ESG) goals, evolving state clean energy mandates, and potential federal legislation, are likely to be including and announcing plans for decarbonization goals and interim targets. Most U.S. investor-owned utilities have committed to reduce carbon emissions, many by 2050.

Building electrification is already impacting utility planning. In California and the Northeast, some utilities are already adjusting operations to support growing building electrification, and more will likely follow in the coming year. Many expect that the grid will be able to handle increased electricity demand, but additional investment may be needed in home weatherization and grid-responsive appliances to help manage energy use and shape load. Additional energy storage will likely be needed as well, both in front of and behind the meter.

Although most of these decarbonization and improving resiliency efforts are being addressed by the utilities as something they can provide, individual consumers and businesses are increasingly making their own investments, primarily in solar arrays and windmill/turbine technology, and home generators both as a means of reducing carbon emissions and in response to the growing unreliability of power from the utility company. Rather than selling the excess power back to the utility for credit, they are also increasingly investing in batteries to store the excess power generated during periods of when demand is light so that they can be used later during nighttime or calm periods or if power is lost. Critical home and office communications, computing and security devices are also beginning to include built-in solar panels and other forms of energy to ensure their continued operation, despite loss of power due to severe climate and cyberattack threats. These investments liberate and free the customer from the power utility company as the excess power these local investments create doesn’t have to be sold back to the utilities for credit toward their power bill but can be stored in individual homes and business and called on when needed for their personal use and/or sharing. Sharing arrangements with neighbors and business partners can be either planned for in advance or through ad-hoc temporary arrangements in response to emergency situations. These decentralized approaches have their own share of vulnerabilities, but as discussed later in this book, could hold the key to significantly improved resiliency. In summary, given the growing environmental, cyber, and sabotage threats, power utilities are expected to continue to proactively prepare for a more uncertain future, with an emphasis on resiliency and improved security, accompanied by an increase in options, the individual consumer and business can independently take on their own initiative by investing in backup power solutions to ensure they maintain power and stay resilient.

Business, Finance, and the Future of Work

Businesses constantly innovate in response to technology advances, threats of disruption, economic and climate uncertainties, rising global tensions, and increased competitive pressures. These innovations are causing the traditional business functions lines, such as finance, operations, marketing, sales, and production, to blur and to shift to a more dynamic cross-function, team-based structure. Work is being done both on site and from home, with a mix of workers varying from primarily full time to part time, to individuals and teams hired for a specific task (gig workers), all augmented by intelligent processing, powered by AI software.

As technology becomes more embedded into the business operating fabric (its processes and organizational units), employees can spend more time focused on innovation and experimentation in the pursuit of improved business models. This includes figuring out how to best create value in a digitized economy, tracking cost, and prioritizing technology investments to grow their businesses in the years ahead. It requires a clear understanding of key megatrends and evolving a digital strategy, which includes harnessing and exploiting the exponential growth in data (structured and unstructured); applying emerging technologies such as cognitive computing and AI to better process and analyze this growing mountain of data to provide better business insights; improve customer interactions and satisfaction, augment human capabilities in planning, reasoning, and learning; and exploiting the IoT and robotic process automation to execute routine tasks.

Traditional business processes and the silos around them will blur. Digital technology, especially the use of algorithms and cognitive agents, embedded in desktops and systems, will enable finance, and other traditional vertical, specialized business functions, to become more integrated and embedded into the basic business operations. With operations becoming more automated, time currently spent in performing rote routines will free up, giving employees the time and capability to focus on more strategic roles such as supplying business insights and acting as catalysts and strategists. Processes such as budgeting, planning, and forecasting and reporting have historically required manually intensive end-of-month and quarterly processing. As they become increasingly routine and automated, business functions such as finance will be able to focus more on scenario planning and using advanced analytics to help solve problems and develop predictive capabilities. Periodic reporting will be replaced by technology designed to enable the continuous tracking of sales, cash flow, and inventory levels to better drive strategic and operational decisions. Reporting, monitoring, and reconciliation processes will run continuously, automatically updating databases in real or near-real time. To support this transformation, most employees will need to have some finance and accounting backgrounds and technology acumen, including data science and coding. Real-time processing will likely result in organizations becoming flatter and more agile, designing, and driving change throughout the business. These changes will place a premium for attracting and retaining interdisciplinary talent with technology skills. The growth of digital assistants, chatbots, and other digital tools will make self-service the norm. For example, an executive will be able to directly pose questions to an intelligent software agent, such as asking for the outstanding AR (account receivable) balance or aging analysis. The software agent will query various databases and large datasets, both structured and unstructured, and relay the findings to visualization software to create a dashboard illustrating the query results. These powerful self-service tools will necessitate cross-platform security models and advanced authentication and authorization technology and processes, as they would threaten the future viability of the company if they fell into the wrong hands. New diverse and dynamic cross-disciplinary teaming arrangements will likely emerge, including experts in robotics and cognitive technologies, manufacture, marketing, and finance, to address challenges too complex for any single individual or group to tackle alone. Their activities will be project-based and cross-functional, and generally require fresh, out-ofthe-box, thinking. This includes figuring out how and where work gets done, across remote and hybrid work environments, considering alternative talent models, and looking for opportunities to further integrating intelligent digital technology into the workforce. It is harder to manage a diverse team of workers, including part time and those hired to perform onetime special tasks, but if planned and managed correctly and securely, it offers the potential for dramatically improving the cost-effectiveness and competitiveness of the company.

The corporate digital infrastructure is moving from in-premise to the cloud. Focus will shift from data capture and data storage and infrastructure maintenance to enterprise performance management, with more time devoted to identifying and tracking of key performance indicators (KPIs) and performing profitability analysis. The cloud is also driving the need for services to integrate more rapidly and in real time the various enterprise services such as HR, performance management, and analytics. This real-time integration will create new and unique ways to drive value and allow business teams more time to focus providing leaders the information they need to make smarter and speedier decisions. With the exponential growth of enterprise data and the proliferation of application program interfaces, companies will face the challenge of cleaning up data and aligning them in a way that drives value and enables analysis not only for an individual business function (e.g., finance) but for the overall business. This emphasis on data for decision making will make it even more important to maintain high data quality, create robust yet efficient governance, and to protect and secure the data and analysis results. Because of the need to think across previously siloed departments and functions, organizations will seek to hire individuals, capable of breaking down silos to enforce collaboration and data sharing across teams.

These dramatic changes will likely transform current employee roles, functions, and needed skills. For example, there will be greater call for talent in data science, business analytics, and storytellers, as well greater use of gig workers. As the nature of work transitions broadly from routine duties to knowledge-based responsibilities, all employees will need to develop a customer service mentality and create opportunities for better collaboration across traditional business function silos. This will increase the reliance on the digital and communications structure and will make it harder to continue to operate and function in the face of debilitating loss brought on by both cyberattack and natural disaster events. The network will become essential for a more distributed workforce to communicate, collaborate, and access enterprise resources remotely. This makes the business operations and management more vulnerable to both physical and cyberattack, and environmental-induced disruptions. However, a more distributed workforce, where the employees are increasingly cross-trained and skilled in more than one aspect of the business, is inherently more survivable and resilient. If surviving islands of employees and portions of the infrastructure remain running and connected, it is possible that innovative workarounds can be found to keep the business functioning, at least performing critical functions, and working to restore and recover data, communications, and processing infrastructure.

The 21st-Century Battlefield

The threats and challenges faced today by our military in time of conflict is increasingly a precursor to the types of threats and challenges our civilian, nonmilitary organizations, will face in the future, as the lines between warfare and threats to the civilian infrastructure and population blur. Not only are criminals and terrorists increasingly adopting nation state cyber weapons and tactics, but the civilian population and infrastructure are increasingly being targeted, damaged, and attacked in time of war. With the continued urbanization of the world’s population, future battles will more often be fought within city limits. Civilian damage in war is increasing not just due to accidental collateral damage, but the opposing military and terrorists are increasingly purposefully targeting civilian targets, through both physical and cyberattacks, to break the spirit of its opponents and their economy, weaken their resolve and their ability to resupply and rebuild. Climate and other natural disasters affect both civilian and military operations equally. The civilian community can learn how to become more resilient by studying the tools, tactics, and processes developed and employed by the military to overcome their threats and remain resilient when under fire. They can also become more resilient by adopting the military state of mind, their training, resourcefulness, independence, willingness to take risks, to adapt and to innovate in the face of these threats and attacks, and by adopting the teamwork and collaboration spirit instilled in the military.

Warfare is always in a continuous state of change, in a constant arms race, where weapons, soldiers, tactics, and strategies constantly improve and adapt to changes in circumstances, policies, and changes in the enemies’ strengths, weaknesses, weapons, resources, strategies, and tactics. Civilians need to do the same to remain resilient. Our military prepares for the unknown and unexpected, through both intelligence collection and knowledge gained from past encounters. The military prepares and is ready for many different contingencies, threats, and situations. The military must be able to handle operations by forces ranging from a very large size, to forces for special operations involving just a few soldiers, sailors, or airmen. They must be able to handle the entire spectrum of geographic features and weather conditions. The modern battlefield is facing a 360-degree threat, with the potential of new high-tech weapons, the possible use of chemicals and biologicals, nontraditional forces, and terrorism. Their missions and situations include the need for force dispersion and the use of smaller nontraditional tailored force structure to aid in surviving. They face and need to withstand structural damage, local industrial hazards, loss of mobility, and degradation of communication links. They must be able to succeed against simultaneous operations in more than one geographical region. The specific risks can be different depending upon the geography and environment, and the relative hostility and capability of the opposing force in each region. The military must be able to operate under environmental conditions that can range from arctic conditions, oppressive desert heat, flatlands and rolling hills, impassable mountain terrain, arid and dusty landscapes, and tropical rain forest and jungles. Contingency planning and training need to be constantly updated in response to changing political, environmental, technical, and fiscal considerations. As the military puts itself in harm’s way, they know they will be attacked and are prepared to be able to fight through considerable structural, industrial, and cyber damage. The threats, strategies, and available weapons, tools, and resources at their disposal are constantly changing and being updated. Weaponry is becoming more accurate, mobile, and lethal, requiring intensive technical and operational training to use and defend against, and rely on seamless interoperability of multidisciplinary and multiservice forces. Cyber warfare operations can be expected to occur in concert with the physical weaponry, focused on disabling not only critical military command and control, but increasingly civilian operations, designed to install panic, fear, and anxiety. The earliest example of this strategy can be found in the military treatise The Art of War attributed to the Chinese military strategist, strategist Sun Tzu, written in the 5th century BC. A more modern example of the growing importance of cyber/information warfare is evidenced by a book written in 1999 by two Chinese Army Lt. Colonels Qiao Liang and Wang Xiangsu, titled Unrestricted Warfare, where they laid out their plan for using information warfare against their adversaries as a means of evening the odds against a superior army. In 2010, Richard Clarke, National Coordinator Security Infrastructure Protection and Counterterrorism for the United States from 1998 to 2003 wrote a book on the subject entitled Cyber War: The Next Threat to National Security and What to Do About It, hoping to wake up the public against this growing threat, and in May 2010, the U.S. Cyber Command, one of the 11 unified combatant commands of the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD), was founded. It unifies the direction of DoD cyberspace operations and strengthens DoD cyberspace expertise and capabilities. Recently, the Marine Corps produced their information warfare doctrine, called the Marine Corps Doctrinal Publication 8, which explains concepts like the information environment and prevailing narratives and how these fit into accomplishing military objectives. In this doctrine, the U.S. Marines elevate information warfare to a warfighting function, incorporating it into wargaming and training. The doctrine instructs marines to become more knowledgeable with how competitors, in particular Russia and China, view information warfare, which includes the use of media to influence and affect the friendly and opposing military and civilian’s state of mind and determination. The doctrine incorporates examples from the ongoing Russian invasion of the Ukraine, such as the U.S. preemptive release of satellite images and other intelligence information, and the Ukraine President Volodymyr Zelensky’s “masterful use of digital media and inspirational messaging.” Three types of advantages noted in the document are systems overmatch, prevailing narrative, and resiliency. An example of systems overmatch is how Ukraine President Zelensky has been able to maintain communications channels, thwarting attempts by Russia to deny that form of communication using Starlink terminals.

To understand better the challenges of maintaining resiliency in time of war, consider the potential threats faced. Whenever possible, the deployment or insertion of ground forces into hostile areas are preceded by an air campaign, using not only manned aircraft but air- and sea-launched cruise missiles and drones. Once air superiority or air supremacy is established, stealth and conventional aircraft can be safely used for precision bombing of specific targets, with fighter aircraft and those carrying anti-radiation missiles like the HARM missile providing cover for these attacks, along with the employment of electronic warfare to disable the effectiveness of any enemy defenses, followed by aerial and satellite reconnaissance to assess bomb damage. Throughout this campaign, there is extensive jamming of communications and cyberattacks, launched against civilian as well as military targets. If successful, the air campaign will result in the destruction and disablement of the enemy’s command, control, and communications capabilities; their industrial base needed to produce weapons, power, fuels, and war-fighting materials; and the infrastructure needed to produce power, distribute water, handle waste material, and provide transportation such as roads, bridges, railheads, and docks. This destruction also puts the enemy at risk for industrial hazards. In most situations, ground forces are still required to occupy specific territories. These forces are equipped with highly reliable and secure communications and positioning equipment. The overall battlefield, or theater of operations, is likely wide and dispersed, so the deployed forces must be aware of their location relative to friend and foe and must be prepared to move and fight in any direction, and maintaining secure communications is critical.

The individual soldier is usually provided with lightweight protective material and an assortment of sophisticated equipment for physiological sensing, threat presentation, weapons control, and communications. Intensive training, using both simulations and exercises under field combat conditions, under a variety of different situations, is conducted. The forces are trained how to repair and restore equipment as rapidly as possible if damaged prior to their deployment. This makes these actions more instinctive and minimizes having to learn or think about how to do so under the inevitable data load and stress of battle.

For a variety of reasons, some political and economic, the use of overwhelming force against an enemy in a linear fashion will often be replaced with expeditionary forces tailored to meet specific tactical and strategic objectives. These type forces are generally smaller and more specialized, and more easily become cut off from support forces, lines of supply, battlefield reserves, and medical units. To remain resilient, they must be capable of effective independent operation, singly and in isolated groups. Generally, these units are trained as a unit and kept together to form strong bonds and to develop a sense of comradery. A commander might also use the dispersion of his/her forces to get greater utilization of modern weaponry and to disallow the enemy a simple single-targeting solution. If possible, data will be securely presented to the individual fighter relative to his/her position on the battlefield, the positions of other elements of the friendly forces, the enemy’s location and weapon array, and his/her order of battle. As previously mentioned, the individual fighter might experience anxiety, a sense of isolation, and information overload degrading his/her ability to process the information presented to him/her, so training to overcome this anxiety as well as the ability to restore even limited communications to enable at least partial contact with the outside world and reassurance is key.

As previously mentioned, it is highly likely that military operations will occur in urban areas, and urban fighting comes with several unique challenges, threats, and advantages. Urban warfare can quickly equalize the relative abilities of a small defending force opposing a large attacking force, especially if the attacking force does not wish to destroy completely the city with an air campaign or artillery. Unfortunately, the latter objective does not seem to concern the Russians in their current attack on the Ukraine. The ability for the defending force to use the cover of a city for sniper fire and similar operations can quickly demoralize an attacking force. The use of armored vehicles, logistic resupply, and medical care by the attacker are restricted, whereas the defending force is presented with excellent fields of fire. Structural damage, falling debris, building fires, the resulting smoke and poor visibility, booby traps, mines, use of nonlethal incapacitants, and civilian refugees limit the attacking force’s progress and might cause considerable injury and stress. The defending force is likely to attempt to degrade the striking forces communications links and make them ineffective and unusable. If hit, it is imperative to restore at least partial communications, using rapidly deployed radio communications that can not only communicate with neighboring radios but get extended coverage with the help of drones and satellites, despite jamming and continued physical targeting. Tall structures will severely hamper locating the enemy force, limit the routes of attack for the occupying force, and severely restrict the location and evacuation of injured and wounded for both sides. Attempts at evacuation will encounter difficulty in moving over rubble-strewn streets using current vehicular technology. The city presents the attacking force with the additional potential for disease and industrial contamination from the destruction of the city’s infrastructure. Large urban areas are likely to have been mapped in detail and surveyed for industrial production, and that information will likely have been provided to the attacking commander.

Military forces will also continue to be deployed and used for other types of operations, such as peacekeeping, natural disaster recovery, and other types of humanitarian support. In these roles, very small, and often very technical or specific capabilities, such as medical or engineering units, will be deployed with varying degrees of logistic support. The forces might require the use of local resources for food, water, and supplies and restoral of communications. Forces might face situations ranging from hostile and lethal nonuniformed guerrilla forces to exposure to unusual diseases, and often massive natural destruction and environmental conditions that will task their ability to perform their mission. This type of deployment is often to areas not usually considered likely future deployment areas, so there might be little time for commanders to obtain accurate intelligence on disease prevalence and the industrial base, or to evaluate the host nation’s infrastructure, such as water supplies, sanitation, and insect control. These deployments can often involve going to third world countries as well to rescue U.S. cities and towns facing natural disasters and/or physical and cyber sabotage.

Although technologies such as lasers, microwaves, sonics, and micro-biological and gene therapies have been developed and generally intended to improve the human condition, they are a double-edged sword as they can be used to do just the opposite and inflict damage and loss of service. The military must learn how to counter attempts to turn this technology against us. As the exploitation of these technologies often requires resources, such as special equipment or unusually high amounts of electrical power, intelligence agencies can help in their discovery and identification. Although against international policy, the use of nuclear weapons and chemical and biological agents, delivered as weapons or by acts of individual guerrilla or terrorist elements, cannot be ruled out. When a chemical or biological agent has been identified and its source is known, the attacked forces can improve their survivability by operating continually in chemical–biological protective gear, but this gear can degrade the effectiveness of the deploying force, especially in the urban or climatically severe environment. If deployed, the use of nuclear weapons will cause massive casualties that would instantly overwhelm existing medical services and be an extremely effective psychological weapon for the remaining fighting or recovery force. Additionally, there will be a political response of some type, which could result in the additional use of nuclear weapons and additional support to deployed forces.

Modern telecommunications technologies have added a new element to the deployed experience, not only for coordination and effective warfighting but for the availability of instant access to the news and situation updates. Military forces try to hide tactical movements. This includes any indicators of their locations such as communications, smoke, and chemicals for pest control and sanitation. Therefore, the use of this communications should be covert and not reveal locations. Although readily available telephone service and video teleconferencing with loved ones keeps the deployed force bonded to the home environment, and are advantageous to troop morale and well-being, they can also have the opposite effect and be an additional source of anxiety and depression, as well as providing intelligence on troop movements. Smaller dispersed units, increased utilization of technology, information overload, and less reliance on massed forces will all change the psychological environment and stress the psychological state of the deployed force despite intense prior operational training. Urban combat, terrorism, sniper activity, 360-degree threats, industrial pollution, and the handling of civilian (noncombatant) populations will further stress the ground force.

In summary, the future battlespace will be frequently waged in urban environments, where civilian homes, hospitals, and industries will most likely experience considerable targeting, resulting in structural and industrial damage and disruption of their supporting networks and systems. The fighting will often involve a nontraditional enemy force structure as well as standing armies. It will often include force dispersion, smaller tailored force structures, and new high-tech personal equipment with data links to the individual soldier. Intelligence gathering is likely to expand in scope and sophistication. Soldiers are trained and equipped with special resources and equipment to repair, reconstitute, and restore service and to adapt and innovate to maintain effectiveness despite heavy loss and disruption, doing what is necessary to achieve their objective at all costs. It is important to create tight-knit units, where teamwork, and comradery among members of the same unit is instilled through training and maintaining continuity of assignments together. The equipment is designed to operate in degraded mode while only partially functioning. For example, damaged ships can seal off flooded areas and continue to operate. Aircraft and drones can be launched to provide emergency communications among surviving forces. Besides damage inflicted, disease, nonbattle injury and psychological stresses will remain important threats to future deployed forces in all scenarios, which they will need to overcome. There is also the possibility of the use of currently banned weapon technologies such as nuclear and chemical and biological warfare that the military needs to be trained against and aware of their long-term effects.

The forces are trained prior to deployment, on how to overcome the psychological effects of stresses in combat, how to access and employ the resources necessary to repair, reconstitute, and reconnect dispersed disconnected forces with lost and degraded communications and processing, as well as a battle plan regarding the prioritization of available resources, including command, communications and processing, and order of restoral. Most importantly, the military forces are trained to maintain a can do state of mind, a willingness to take risks and innovate, to use the available resources at hand, to continue fighting, prioritize, restore, and reconstitute while doing whatever is possible to achieve the mission objective, and instilled in a sense of comradery and cooperation. These lessons need to be exported to the commercial sector as they will increasingly be vulnerable targets, and the military provides an excellent role model in how to be resilient.

Government: Federal, State, and Municipal

Government, like private industry, has increasingly invested in digital networks and technology to enable it to provide better and more affordable service to its citizens. This increased dependence on digital and network technologies has, however, made governmental systems, like private industry, more vulnerable to cyberattacks. U.S. government agencies, municipalities, as well as many countries around the world have increasingly become targets and victims of ransomware and other cyberattacks with their systems brought down, data exfiltrated, and forced to pay ransoms. Hackers hit U.S. city and county governments with 79 ransomware attacks in 2020. From 2018 to 2020, cyberattacks against U.S. government agencies have cost an estimated $52.88 billion. The goal of most of these attacks on cities, states, and counties was not to steal data, but to interrupt services and cause disruption. The number of incidents is increasing. Costa Rica was cyberattacked in April 2022, causing its President Rodrigo Chaves to declare his country at war with the Russian-linked Conti ransomware gang. The Conti assault included the country’s Finance Ministry, followed by 27 other institutions being hit, impacting the ability to pay Costa Rica’s civil servants, and the country’s foreign trade. Conti initially demanded $10 million, later raised to $20 million, and threatened to overthrow the government by means of a cyberattack. Governments throughout the world have become increasingly vulnerable to cyberattack and natural disasters, making the need to become more resilient more urgent.

Government plays a unique and important role in funding research in the areas of security, global warming, and resilience. It also provides emergency services; have put up community networks; collaborates with industry in sharing information and collaborating to help fight cyber and physical crime and in improving our infrastructure’s resilience to environmental disasters; and regulates our technology, which influences its future directions and can serve as both an accelerator and a brake.

===== FILE 10/18: text%2fChapter03.xhtml =====

CHAPTER 3

The Growing Threat

We have seen how technology advances hold the promise to increase the quality of life, add convenience, improve productivity, and reduce cost. These advances have also resulted in our increased dependence on networks, and the associated technology and supporting infrastructure. Unfortunately, these advances are also producing threats that make our networks and technologies more vulnerable to disruption, which can sometimes last for days, weeks, and even months. Because networks and technology have become so entrenched in our lives and businesses, the likelihood that we could return to an earlier, simpler time, where we could continue to function without them is highly unlikely. We are functioning without a safety net as we have become hopelessly dependent upon the continued availability of our communications, computer, and power technology infrastructure to survive; not just to socialize and be entertained, but to pay the rent, to eat, to work, and so on. As our dependency has grown, so have these critical technologies increasingly become prime targets. Rising global tensions and polarizations have resulted in the increased likelihood of sabotage and attack (physical, economic, and cyber), as well as disinformation campaigns to fuel these tensions and polarizations. Cyberattacks continue to increase in frequency, lethality, and in the likelihood of their succeeding. The growing success of these cyberattacks is occurring despite best efforts and successes in countering and defending against them, including investing in backup systems, patching known vulnerabilities, and continuously improving the security of our systems’ hardware and software. Cyberattacks come in various forms, including disruption and denial of service; holding data and other forms of digital information for ransom, blackmail, and theft of intellectual property; committing cybercrime for profit; and outright cyber warfare and terrorist attacks that target our critical infrastructure such as power, communications, and transportation.

Global warming has increased the likelihood of natural disasters such as flash floods, hurricanes, tornados, uncontrollable fires, and other natural disasters that can result in loss of property, lives, as well as the availability of critical communications, processing, and power. The negative environmental impact of global warming is now generally understood, but the ability for us to slow down, stop, and even reverse these trends is difficult, and involves global cooperation and sacrifices that many find difficult to accept. Even where successful, the reversal of these trends will take time. Natural disasters that are low probability, but high-risk events could devastate our systems and communications for days to months. A solar storm (a coronal mass ejection) could careen toward Earth with only a day or two to prepare, using current detection technology. If it makes a direct hit, a burst of magnetized plasma fired off from the sun will flood the Earth’s ionosphere, cell phone reception will go dark, the atmosphere will heat up, satellites will drag and veer off course, and risk collision with each other and space debris. Some may fall out of orbit entirely. Similar man-made disruptions can also occur. Radar systems will jam; nuclear defense protocols could activate due to real or fake threats; transformers, which convert low-voltage current from a power plant to a higher voltage for efficient transport and then back down for use in outlets, could over-heat and fail, causing cascading power outages that could last for months; and transit, manufacturing, and water treatment facilities could halt. Global warming is making hurricanes, forest fires, and other environmental disasters more severe and more common. Pandemics and other future health crises add to the confusion and panic. They tie up our hospitals and critical care, deny us of essential workers, and increase our dependencies on our critical communications and processing infrastructure as more people stay at home, quarantine, and rely on remote work, education, and entertainment. As the likelihood of these threats increase, so does the chance that we will experience more than one of them at the same time. For example, natural disasters can and already have invited those wishing us harm, or trying to make a profit, to launch cyberattacks in concert with them. We have already seen evidence of this behavior. Physical war, such as we are seeing happening now between Russia and the Ukraine, is generally accompanied by an increase in targeted cyberattacks. Cyberattacks are also likely to occur at times when markets are more volatile, or when financial intermediary balance sheets are strained, often causing hasty policy solutions to be made in times of extreme market conditions. The financial turmoil at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020 was examined using a scenario-based analysis by Eisenbach, Kovner, and Lee, in their 2022 paper “When It Rains, It Pours: Cyber Risk and Financial Conditions,” and found a correlation of cyber events with adverse economic and financial conditions. These threats are increasing in number, lethality, and the likelihood of success despite our best efforts to detect, prevent, and defend against them. It remains only a matter of time when our systems will be down for extended periods, causing loss of critical services, panic, and disruption of our lives. We need to learn how to continue to operate, at some minimum level of service, during these disastrous events and attacks, and to be able to rapidly restore our systems back to full operation as quickly as possible.

Dealing with how to reduce existing global tensions and polarizations is a social and political problem that will not be solved anytime soon. Even though technology and social networks have played a key role in providing the tools to enable people to increase tensions and create polarizations, technology alone cannot solve the problem. There are reasons to believe that the situation will get worse as nations and competing theologies continue to vie for supremacy. American political scientist Francis Fukuyama’s thesis in his 1992 book, The End of History and the Last Man argued that with the ascendancy of Western liberal democracy, which occurred after the Cold War (1945–1991) and the resulting dissolution of the Soviet Union (1991), humanity has reached “not just ... the passing of a particular period of post-war history, but the end of history as such, with the universalization of Western liberal democracy as the final form of human government.” We now know that the forces of totalitarianism and other forms of government have just been marshaling resources and bidding their time to again challenge democracy. These forces take advantage of democracies relatively free flow of uncensored information. They have studied and learned how to harness technology innovations, such as the Internet, to increase their reach and effectiveness, to reduce the cost and increase the effectiveness of spreading propaganda, and to cause dissent and division. And they are using these same tools to control the information accessible to their population. Combatting these trends and nefarious uses is complex and difficult as efforts to thwart these actions involve the imposition of constraints, monitoring, and censorship that could result in loss of the same freedoms that we are trying to safeguard.

The attractiveness of the Internet and public network applications as a target has increased as our use and dependency on it has grown. Early accidental incidents that brought down the Internet and exposed information through hacking and exploiting vulnerabilities in the software and communications protocol implementations in the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s were precursors of the vulnerability of the Internet to hackers. In the 1990s, propelled by the Clinton administration and the initiative of various technology firms, the Internet switched from being just a government research experiment to actual commercial use. As the use and dependency on the Internet and associated technology by business and commerce grew, the Internet increasingly became an attractive target for criminals and nation states. Today, the cybersecurity threat has grown to the point that it can no longer be ignored. Cyberattackers tools, techniques, and practices (TTPs) continue to evolve and improve, and they are becoming harder to prevent, and to defend against. Their increased sophistication and complexity, and their continual improvement, increases the difficulty in combatting cybercriminals, terrorists, and rogue nations, and their increasingly successful attempts to disrupt our lives. The cyberattacker has an inherent advantage against the defender because of the asymmetric nature of cyber warfare (the attacker only needs to find one vulnerability, while the defender must defend against all vulnerabilities). Another advantage for the cyberattacker is the difficulty in attribution (proving who was responsible). The attacker can break into and launch attacks from innocent websites and servers, and therefore not have any telltale physical location that enables the defender to identify the true source of the attack. Because the attack is done remotely, not requiring a physical presence, it can be launched in safe home locations, often out of the country where the attacked person or organization resides, making it hard to extradite and prosecute cybercriminals if discovered.

Ransomware is an example of one of the more recent and prominent forms of malware. Ransomware is difficult to defend against because each ransomware strain has its own way of infiltrating a network, moving around within a network, gaining access to resources, and exfiltrating data. Ransomware usually involves an initial infiltration stage where it tries to gain a foothold into the network or into one or a few machines. Once successful, it generally moves to the next stage and tries to escalate privileges and harvest credentials that it uses to move laterally within a network, increasing the scope of the penetration. At this stage, the attacker may do a bit of network reconnaissance to find the most valuable assets. The attacker often attempts to set up communication with a command-and-control server to receive further commands and download more tools to help reach deeper into the network and further exploit. A successful hack could take over a domain controller or install backdoor access on routers and other communications equipment, which will help monitor traffic or redirect it. This could include an exploit for privilege escalation, and once achieved, it could download the next stage of the payload, which contains ransomware, crypto miner, rootkit, and other forms of malware. Once an organization is infected with ransomware malware, its files are usually encrypted and held for ransom. A new ransomware threat is emerging. In this case, before the ransomware encrypts an organization’s files, it exfiltrates files from infected computers, which can result in double extortion. Once an organization’s network and processors are infected with ransomware, it is common for the criminal to demand that the organization pay a ransom to get the files decrypted back. While an organization may consent to get its files decrypted, the problem is that the original files were exfiltrated. These files may contain confidential information, personal data, credit card information, or blueprints for upcoming projects. The organization could then be extorted by the ransomware operator to keep the content from being released into the public domain. This could also be accompanied by attempts to degrade and/or disable the systems operations and to commit other forms of cyberattacks. Ransomware, today, is a big business, reportedly making over $11 billion annually. Ransomware is sometimes accompanied by other cyberattacks to distract and/or achieve multiple objectives. Ransomware is growing as are other forms of cyberattacks. In 2021, there were at least one attack observed every 11 seconds. Ransomware is international with many of the criminals/gangs in Russia, Eastern Europe, Korea, Iran, and China. Because these countries do not usually cooperate with the United States, it makes it hard to capture and to prosecute criminals residing in these countries. There is also a growing blur between government and criminal hackers. Oftentimes, the criminal hacker also has a government or military job or tools originating from a nation’s cyber weapon arsenal. And cyber hacking skills are growing internationally. Iran, after discovering its nuclear plants were attacked by the Stuxnet malware, became more conscious of cybersecurity, and invested in increasing their own cyberattack proficiency.

It is instructive to see how the use and form of ransomware as evolved over the last three decades since it started to understand how the cyber-threat can mutate and grow in effectiveness and lethality. Ransomware started out encrypting individual’s files, making them unusable. The ransomware gang then offered to decrypt and restore this information if a ransom was paid. Over the last three years, ransomware has grown in sophistication, lethality, and use. It no longer just hijacks data, which it holds hostage for ransom, but attacks and shuts down computers and threatens the release of stolen sensitive data as a means of blackmail and extortion. It has become an industry, generally with a sophisticated supply chain, usually run by gangs, with different specialists. Some build and supply the technology and tools; other commit the crimes; others launder the money, and so on. There are even group(s) now offering a ransomware as a service (RaaS). Ransomware takes advantage of emerging technologies, identified by some as part of Web 3.0, such as getting paid in cryptocurrency, like Bitcoin, which is harder to trace back. Although there are many gangs involved in perpetrating ransomware attacks, the field is concentrated with just a handful of known groups responsible for more than half all attacks. This includes gangs known as Conti, REvil, LockBit, Pysa, Doppelpaymer, Maze (aka ChaCha), Wizard Spider, and Darkside. When these gangs are hunted and taken down, they reappear, sometimes under a different name. The threat is constantly evolving in lethality with new tools, tactics, and techniques developed in response to new evolving defenses. It’s a cyber arms race. As ransomware became more sophisticated and able to withstand the greater defensive ability of companies and governments, it evolved from primarily targeting individual consumers to more attractive and profitable business and government targets, with the reward and ransom demanded greatly increasing. From 2020 to 2022, over 4,200 companies, organizations, and government entities have reported being attacked, with all industries fair game. While smaller and mid-sized companies are at most risk (average size company has revenue $27 million), large organizations are also not without risk of successful attack. At least 10 percent of reported organizations attacked are worth above $1 billion. As an example, on May 7, 2021, Colonial Pipeline, an American oil pipeline system that originates in Houston, Texas, and carries gasoline and jet fuel mainly to the Southeastern United States, suffered a ransomware cyberattack that impacted computerized equipment managing the pipeline. It crippled gas supplies throughout the United States, resulting in losses in the millions of dollars. This attack was attributed to the REvil gang. This gang and other gangs take advantage of the fact that many companies have not achieved a high level of security, do not have a security-aware culture, and often run systems with known deficiencies and vulnerabilities making them an easy target. For example, a few years prior to its attack, Colonial had been cited as deficient in security. Early targets were in the financial services industry, and this industry remains a prime target because “that’s where the money is,” a phrase attributed to the bank robber Willie Sutton when asked why he robbed banks. As a result the financial industry has grown proficient at defending itself with large financial institutions now spending billions of dollars annually to maintain security. Gangs have added other lucrative industries, many of them with a reputation as not being quite as security aware. The health care industry has become a popular target. For example, in mid-2021, Ireland’s health system suffered a massive attack, with 80 percent of its information encrypted to deny them access. It took them over four months to recover from this attack, and it inflicted losses of over $600 million. Another large ransomware victim from another industry was HBO. In August 2017, HBO had over 1.5 TB of their data seized, including soon-to-be-released episodes of their popular Game of Thrones and Curb Your Enthusiasm shows. HBO reportedly paid over $250,000 to prevent the shows premature release to the public. Even governments have been successfully ransomed and attacked. According to The Washington Post, more than 400 ransomware attacks have hit city and county governments in the United States since 2016. Examples include Atlanta, New Orleans, Baltimore, and Tulsa. Even, countries are not immune to successful cyberattacks. In 2022, Costa Rica experienced a highly successful and crippling ransomware attack. Spurred on by their success, we have seen a 60 percent increase in the frequency of cyberattacks since 2019, along with an increase in complexity and sophistication of these attacks over the past few years. Small and medium-sized businesses (SMBs) and their managed-service providers are particularly vulnerable to these advanced cyberthreats; 46 percent of SMBs having been victims of ransomware attacks, with 73 percent of those affected paying the ransom. Ransomware attacks have been credited with accounting for 79 percent of all cyberattacks experienced in 2020 to 2021. Although it is generally concurred that ransom or cyber extortion demands should not be paid, whether to pay a ransom is a complex and difficult decision and many organizations do pay the ransom. Paying a ransom may result in the encrypted data being returned, but there still could be malware lurking in the victim’s system, enabling the criminal to repeat the attack again sometime in the future. However, the company may feel the loss of its data and the damage resulting from the release of sensitive data to the public would be so great that its future existence is at stake, and that it has no other option but to pay the ransom to stay in business. If the attacked company has managed to backup its data safely in a still operational server, it can recover without paying the option, but that does not solve the extortion part of the threat or getting a system that has been compromised back up and working. Sometimes, the victim might be lucky and find that their data have been encrypted by the gang with a key that law enforcement has obtained, and the data can be returned and decrypted without the help of the ransomware gang. In some relatively rare instances, the criminal has not even bothered to have retained the key and are unable to return the data unencrypted.

Ransomware has grown to include other threats in addition to encrypting a victim’s data. It often is performed in tandem with other cybercriminal activity such as extortion, account hijacking, fraudulent use of credit and debit cards, and denial of service attacks. Sometimes, the cyberattacker’s motivation is not financial, but politically motivated. The lines between the different forms of cyberattack and the motivations behind them is blurring. Defcon (https://defcon.org) is an annual conference that brings together white hats (good hackers) and black hats (criminal hackers), government and private individuals. It is a venue where different cyberthreat actors can meet, cross-fertilize their knowledge, and form alliances. Some individuals work in multiple capacities (government intelligence or military organization, an independent cybercriminal, part of a cyber gang, for a cybersecurity company) in the cybersecurity community. At the conference, vendors display different software tools, present papers, participate in the Capture the Flag contests where they do things like hack voting machines and break into products. The conference and its increasing popularity and attendance are a testimonial to the tremendous growth in the cybersecurity community.

Most cyberattacks have known stages, sometimes perpetuated by different individuals or groups, namely: reconnaissance stage—stacking out a victim. Finding their vulnerabilities and information of value; installing the malware; once installed, contacting headquarters for instructions and for places to transfer the stolen data; encryption of the data by a key only known and controlled by the gang; and extortion and payment. If the gang is after a denial of service or an extortion, encryption may not be necessary. The gang is incented in decrypting and returning the data, or their future lack of credibility will discourage future victims from paying the ransom. Besides being decrypted, data and key systems components can be deleted or damaged so that they do not function properly. Not all attackers are organized hierarchically; they can operate more decentralized, without the need for a command-and-control link back to a headquarters. Such decentralized attacks are generally harder to stop and defeat, or even know the gang you are dealing with. Payment in cryptocurrency is generally requested because it is semi-anonymous and harder to track. However, cryptocurrencies have their own issues. Cryptocurrency transactions are stored in a public shared general ledger/log, where the transactions put on the ledger can be verified as valid. Cryptocurrencies can be exchanged directly between users and bought and sold over exchanges. It is semi-anonymous, in the sense that no names or identities, or personal identifying data, are associated with a transaction, only exchanges and digital wallet IDs, where the cryptocurrencies are stored or exchanged from/to. The exchanges and digital wallets are either on the cloud or on a local personal computing device. However, with the right knowledge and know how, and sufficient effort, cryptocurrency transactions can sometimes be traced back to individuals or gangs, and even recovered. Because cryptocurrencies can and are used for illicit, illegal activity, there is government pressure for the imposition of regulatory requirements. Like real cash, cryptocurrencies are vulnerable to theft just as physical cash is. Wallets and cryptocurrency exchanges have been successfully broken into. For example, Mt Gox lost 850,000 bitcoins belonging to 750,000 customers. This represented over $400 million at time. This theft probably started in late 2011 but took years to discover. Since discovery of the theft, 200,000 bitcoins have been found. Other forms of payment that criminals take include cash cards. With cash cards, there is no identity information to identify the user of the card. However, there are generally limits to the maximum amount of value that can be put on the card. So, for large transfers of funds, cryptocurrencies remain the payment mechanism of choice. Most cryptocurrencies are not backed by, or tied to, any real physical asset or government (fiat) currency and fluctuate greatly in price and have no intrinsic value. Recently, these cryptocurrencies have not only experienced dramatic gains but also dramatic losses, making them risky to hold. Because they are relatively difficult to trace, they are often used for illegal activity, to launder money, to transfer illegally acquired funds, and are currently without any regulatory oversight or reporting. Cryptocurrencies can be stolen from exchanges and user wallets, with little chance of recovery because of the difficulty to trace. For these reasons, countries are concerned about the use of cryptocurrency without some regulatory oversight, including the ability to follow the flow of money. The threat of regulation, the loss of semi-anonymity, and the detection of illegal activity could serve as a great disincentive to use for what is currently a large percentage of users.

Cybercriminals work in secrecy, using the Dark Web and anonymous communications and Web access tools, such as Tor, to exchange, coordinate and sell malware tools, hijacked data, criminal services such as RaaS, illegal drugs, firearms, illicit pornography, and so on. The Deep Web is the part of the Internet that isn’t indexed by, and therefore not visible to, search engines. There are many more websites in the Deep Web than on the indexed Web. Not all sites that aren’t indexed are conducting illegal and illicit activity. This is generally conducted over the portion of the Deep Web known as the Dark Web. Special software or authorizations are required to access content in the Dark Web, and it usually includes using an anonymizing browser such as Tor. The Dark and Deep web accounts for approximately 90 percent of all websites. While many news outlets use deep web and dark web interchangeably, much of the deep portion is perfectly legal and safe.

As previously discussed, several factors make cyberattacks particularly hard to defend against. Much of the cyberattacks against the U.S. companies and individuals originate from overseas gangs, usually in countries not sympathetic toward the United States, making it difficult to find, extradite, and prosecute because of the general lack of cooperation from authorities in their host countries. Being better able to prosecute and take down the gangs, not only would help recover ransomed data and money stolen and paid as ransomware, but it would also serve as a big deterrent. Cyberattacks and cyber warfare are asymmetric, in the sense that the attacker needs to find only one vulnerability, whereas the defender must find and defend against all known vulnerabilities. Cybercriminals, especially those state-backed, have a store of zero-day vulnerabilities (vulnerabilities the cyberattacker has discovered but not used, and which are not advertised or known by the victim or software provider). Even when we suspect or even know who the attacking gangs are, it is difficult to prove this sufficiently to act against the gang members with necessary justification and proof to successfully prosecute. Attackers use anonymous tools, and often design their malware code and attacks to look like someone else. They often launch their attack from host servers they have previously broken into, which are located far away from base, and disguise their code and characteristic code signatures so that it appears to be written and launched from some other group and nationality. The criminal operations can take place in relatively benign locations, apartment houses, private homes in suburban neighborhoods, so they are hard to discover. It is not like trying to find a nuclear plant or missile site. Finally, cyberattacks are relatively cheap to develop and deploy, and to dismantle, and move operations.

Cyberattack has become a new dimension of warfare and destabilization. As mentioned earlier, Qiao Liang, a retired Chinese Major General, and Wang Xiangsui, a professor at Beihang University in Beijing, China, and a retired senior Colonel in the People’s Liberation Army, in their book Un-restricted Warfare, explore strategies that militarily and politically disadvantaged nations might take in order to successfully attack a geopolitical super-power like the United States, and conclude that information/cyber warfare, represents a new class of weapon that can exploit a crucial weakness and blind spot in the American military that can be effectively exploited by its enemies. It is interesting how often people and organizations tip their hand and strategy by writing books like this. Hitler in 1925 (20th century) wrote Mein Kampf, which outlined his political ideology and his plan for world conquest and domination by Germany. Richard Clarke, recognizing the growing importance of cyber as a warfare tool, wrote Cyber War in 2010.

Rising global tensions and internal discord and discontent fuel these threats. The Cold War between Russia and the United States is back, recently evidenced by Russia’s attack on the Ukraine. Putin’s recent actions demonstrate that he obviously views the dissolution of the Soviet Union as merely a temporary setback and is attempting to reconstruct the old USSR. Russian’s recent attack and attempt to annex the Ukraine is evidence of this aspiration. As a part of its attack, Russia has employed physical warfare in concert with cyberattacks, illustrating the growth of cyber as a tool for war and terror. There are many other international conflicts, both economically and politically motivated. There is China’s claim to Taiwan, and the economic competition between the United States with China. There is unrest in the Mideast and threats from terrorists. And there is the increasing hostility, distrust, and the threat of nuclear war coming from both North Korea and Iran. Even within liberal democracies, differences and dissents between the citizens regarding cultural and government priorities and positions have grown to the point where they are taking a particularly intolerant and polarizing turn, even to the point of physical violence. Old competitions and differences persist, and new ones are rising, and both are growing in intensity. Added to this is the threat of climate change and global warming that will not only create and increase in the frequency and severity of environmental disturbances but contribute to the divisions between the haves and have nots and causing a growing migration problem. The result is an increasingly unsettled world, ripe for attacks and sabotage, both physical and cyber, often combined, working in concert with one another and taking advantage of an increasing occurrence of environmental disasters. Increasing divisions and internal strife is also a cause for cyber and physical attack. This unrest and the potential for cyber and physical attack and sabotage combined with the growing likelihood of environmental disaster presents a threat to our systems that cannot be ignored.

The 21st century is witnessing growing instabilities and threats that make it increasingly likely that we will experience some combination of environmental disaster, cyber, and physical attacks that will succeed in degrading, disrupting, and taking down networks and systems that we have become more dependent on for days, weeks, even months. Our systems are increasing vulnerable to experiencing long periods, when they will become disabled and/or inoperable. This disturbing future makes it imperative that we need to learn how to be resilient in the face of this threat, able to continue to operate, even in a degraded mode, to fulfill our critical missions and to repair, restore, and rebuild to full operations as quickly as possible.

===== FILE 11/18: text%2fChapter04.xhtml =====

CHAPTER 4

What Is Resilience, and How Is It Measured and Tested?

There are many different definitions of resilience, but they are all variations of the same idea. NIST defines resiliency as “The ability to adapt to changing conditions and prepare for, withstand, and rapidly recover from disruption.” The National Infrastructure Advisory Council states that “The effectiveness of a resilient infrastructure or enterprise depends upon its ability to anticipate, absorb, adapt to, and/or rapidly recover from a potentially disruptive event.” Office of Management and Budget (OMB) says critical infrastructure security and resilience is “… the ability to prepare for and adapt to changing conditions and withstand and recover rapidly from disruptions. Resilience includes the ability to withstand and recover from deliberate attacks, accidents, or naturally occurring threats or incidents.” DoD defines cybersecurity operational resilience as “The ability of systems to resist, absorb, and recover from or adapt to an adverse occurrence during operation that may cause harm, destruction, or loss of ability to perform mission-related functions.” Sterbenz in his book, defines network resiliency as “The ability of the network to provide and maintain an acceptable level of service in the face of various faults and challenges to normal operation.” Madni and Jackson in their book on resiliency engineering says resiliency is “The ability to build systems that are able to anticipate and circumvent accidents, survive disruptions through appropriate learning and adaptation, and recover from disruptions by restoring the pre-disruption state as closely as possible.” And, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Risk committee says resiliency is “The ability to adapt to changing conditions and prepare for, withstand, and rapidly recover from disruption.”

These definitions of resiliency all talk about the ability, when encountering situations or conditions causing disruption, adversity, and faults to be able to anticipate, resist, absorb, and adapt, even while still under attack, where the disruption can come from some combination of environmental disasters, physical and cyberattack, and other unexpected or rare events. This means being ready to continue operations as close to normal as possible, and to recover and restore to full operation as quickly as possible. It implies knowing the priority of everything you want to accomplish. When you no longer can do everything, you need to know what minimum set of objectives needs to be accomplished and what can be temporarily dropped. It involves being able to adopt new initiatives and technical and procedural controls at scale and fast enough rate to accomplish at least this minimal set of prioritized objectives. It not only requires that data and applications be recovered, but that systems, applications, and data integrity are assured. It requires the people, processes, and technology are prepared and able to recover compromised data and/or application services, regardless of the cause. It requires the ability to identify and leverage known sources of validated uncorrupted data, applications, and systems to keep running. And it requires investment in the necessary preparation, training, practice, spare resources, and the development of right attitude. It includes being able to not only respond to disruption of your own people and systems, but also to disruption to your third-party partners and technology providers because their disruption can have a direct impact on your business and home and provide a path to your sensitive data. This means that not just keeping up and running a single data store or application, but the entire collection of systems needed to meet the critical mission objectives and to restore service, even while under attack. Whenever possible, this includes being able to anticipate and prepare, and when there are no longer sufficient surviving resources to do everything, knowing what minimum set of objectives needs to be accomplished.

It may be easier to understand what is meant by resiliency by understanding how it differs from related better known concepts such as security, disaster recovery, business continuity, fault tolerance, and systems availability. Resiliency is not the same as security. Security focuses on achieving the objectives of confidentiality, integrity, availability, authenticity, and nonrepudiation. It is concerned with maintaining availability to acceptable levels, but this generally assumes the attacks are of limited duration inflicting temporary upheavals, such as distributed denial of service attacks. By contrast, the goals of resiliency, derived from the discipline of resilience engineering, are to anticipate, withstand, recover, and evolve from what could be long lasting and evolving attacks and disruptions. In this regard, resiliency overlaps with security but goes beyond. Whereas security assumes that the adversary can be kept out of a system or can be quickly detected and removed from that system, resiliency assumes that a sophisticated adversary can overcome such security measures such as boundary protections, identity, and access management (IdAM), and intrusion detection and response (IDR). It acknowledges that natural and man-initiated attacks can inflict much more long-lasting and permanent damage. The threat model for resiliency takes into consideration supply chain contamination, long adversary dwell times, and loss of control over parts of the set of resources on which an organization depends. It adopts the perspective that modern systems, operational environments, and supply chains are large and complex entities that will always have flaws and weaknesses, which will allow natural disasters and adversaries’ attacks to inflict sufficiently devastating, longer-lasting damage, and disruption, that achieving resiliency objectives will require making tradeoffs.

Resiliency also differs from concepts such as disaster recovery, business continuity, and continuation of operations (COOP). Its shares with those disciplines the goals of continuity (withstanding adversity) and recovery. It differs in its underlying threat model, and thus in the techniques that can address adversity. The other disciplines generally assume one-time threat events, nonguided attacks, and threat events that are generally physical in nature. Resiliency addresses all those types of threat events, but it also deals with cyber-based threat events, for which physical and geographic separation of duplicate resources (a common mitigation technique for noncyber-sourced threat events) is not an effective mitigation. In addition, resiliency does not assume a one-time event or a period of quiescence after an event, but that due to the stealthy and persistent nature of the advanced persistent threat (APT) and the long-lasting effects of some natural disasters, reconstitution may have to occur while attacks continue, and systems remain down or severely degraded. This requires recognition that we are dealing with an intelligent adversary that can evolve and adapt their actions in response to the defender’s actions, much as in fighting wars. This means that to be resilient, systems and people need to be able to change their behavior on an ongoing basis, rather than implement relatively static plans and playbooks.

Resiliency also differs from fault tolerance. They are related, but not the same. Fault tolerance is concerned with the extent to which a functional unit can continue to operate at a defined performance level, even though one or more of its components are malfunctioning. Although both fault tolerance and resiliency are concerned with continuing operations, fault tolerance focuses on faults or failures, which are commonly results of human errors, or of stresses or operating conditions as defined or assumed in the system specification. Resiliency includes fault tolerance considerations but focuses on adversarial threats. Resiliency is concerned with dealing with ongoing, stealthy, evolving threat-actors or agents, and responding to a successful evolving threat event. It is concerned with adversaries who can emulate or leverage other forms of stress, such as faults, failures, human errors, natural disasters, and failures of supporting infrastructures, but much more.

As a result of these differences and threat assumptions, resiliency measures differ from cybersecurity, continuity of operations, and fault tolerance measures. Resiliency measures need to measure the impact architectural decisions, technologies, and operational practices and tactics have on achieving mission objectives despite a long-lasting loss and/or degradation of critical resources, as well as the ability to restore critical components and resources as rapidly as possible. Resiliency includes the goal of recovery, but it recognizes that it may not always be feasible to completely restore service to an acceptable level of service anytime soon, as adversary activities can make the state of a system indeterminate and/or be sufficiently destructive that an acceptable level of service cannot be fully restored for an indeterminant time. Resilience needs to focus on maximizing the mission/business assurance, and meeting certain prioritized critical mission functions, despite the presence of continuous and successful adversary activities. Accordingly, resiliency metrics and assessment methods depend on the context (e.g., mission context, controls effectiveness context, and architectural context). To ensure realism, evaluation (particularly in a mission or controls context) typically relies on retrospective analysis of events in an operational environment and/or an emulation or test (e.g., via a Red Team) in a limited environment. Resiliency should also employ analytic measurements. While less realistic, analytics can consider and measure a wider range of possible attacks and under several different contexts. Generally, some combination of operational and analytic test and measurements are best. Because adversaries adapt and evolve their tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs), resiliency assessments are more uncertain than assessments of other capabilities (e.g., reliability, maintainability). As resiliency relates to how well mission-critical functions can be performed while a cyberattack is ongoing, its assessment should include mission assessment measures of effectiveness (MOEs), measures of performance (MOPs), and key performance parameters (KPPs), where this includes how quickly, how completely, and with how much confidence mission functions can be restored and/or reconstituted.

Previous chapters discussed how our dependence on communications and technology in all faucets of our lives has increased to the point that without their availability our lives will be disrupted to the point of catastrophe, where we will be unable to function, and where our lives and economy will be endangered leading to panic and despair. The likelihood of such disruption has so dramatically increased in recent years that it has become necessary to add increased attention, focus, and emphasis on designing, training, and measuring how to be resilient. Global warming has increased the likelihood of disruptive natural disasters, such as floods, hurricanes, tornadoes, and uncontrolled fires. Global tensions and internal discord and divisions are also increasing, along with a growing increase in sophistication, lethality, and frequency of both cyber and physical attacks. Global tensions are being caused by increased polarization of political, religious, and economic views, competition amongst nations, and heightened tensions between have and have nots resulting from shrinking resources caused by global warming. Over the last few years, we have seen the emergence of several events that give us a hint of things to come, and the need to be concerned about our resiliency. Events known as Gray Rhinos (highly probable, high impact, yet previously neglected events) are hitting our home, work, and social environments with devastating consequences. Examples include the May 7, 2021, ransomware attack on Colonial Pipeline, an American oil pipeline system; the 2020 California wildfires; the COVID-19 pandemic that started in 2019; the August 14–16, 2003, Northeast blackout; and hurricanes such as Sandy in 2012, and Katrina in 2005. These sorts of catastrophic events were warned about but ignored until they happened, causing huge disruptions, losses, and panic. With global warming, disruptions due to natural disasters such as floods, hurricanes, tornados, and fires are increasing in likelihood and frequency of occurrence. The drought-fueled bushfires that ravaged much of southern Australia in 2019 and 2020 not only darkened skies and destroyed wildlife, but damaged critical energy infrastructure, leaving tens of thousands of homes without power during the disaster. Intense cyclones, monsoon rains, and floods hit highly exposed and densely populated areas in South Asia and East Asia and led to the displacement of millions of people in China, Bangladesh, India, Japan, Pakistan, Nepal, and Viet Nam in 2020. In February 2021, unusually cold temperatures in Texas froze natural gas wells, wind turbines, and coal piles, causing the state’s power grid to collapse and leaving millions to face harsh conditions without power. In September 2021, Deloitte’s State of the Consumer Tracker surveyed 23,000 people across 23 countries. Nearly half of the respondents had directly experienced at least one climate event in the past six months. As extreme weather exacerbated by climate change continues to disrupt the delivery of water, power, and other services, government agencies around the world are prioritizing climate resilience—the ability to respond, recover, and adapt to the adverse effects of climate change.

Cyberthreats are increasing in frequency, lethality, and complexity to the point that every entity can be assured that they are going to be attacked and, if not already, there is a good chance that at least one of these attacks will be successful. An increase in global tensions and competition among countries with competing ideologies, terrorists, and increased political divisions and hostilities has increased the likelihood that a global natural disaster could be the trigger for a nation or group of terrorists to launch a parallel cyberattack. The Global Year in Breach 2021 report from ID Agent showed over 90 percent of U.S. businesses experienced a cybersecurity incident that year due to a third party or supply chain fault. Things are predicted to only get worse. And, as more companies are opting to continue home working or moving to hybrid work environments, the need to be resilient extends to the home.

Imagine if two or more such events occur at the same time? What if, during a pandemic, we experience both a hurricane and a deadly cyberattack aimed at taking out needed systems and communications? Certainly, things like cyberattacks can be planned, rehearsed, and launched during the middle of one or more of the natural events. We have already experienced this. If this trend continues and increases in severity and impact, what sort of panic would occur? Would we see a resulting economic collapse and loss of confidence in our government and supporting industries? Up until now, we have concentrated on building systems that are better at detecting, preventing, and protecting us against these events. We need to continue these efforts, but sadly, as discussed, we have learned that these events cannot be totally prevented or stopped and will often take their toll. There is a rising chorus that argues that we must learn to become more resilient in the face of these disastrous events. But how?

Governments are increasingly investing in resilient infrastructure to enhance the capacity of the community to withstand extreme weather events and ensuring that disadvantaged communities aren’t left to face climate-related risks on their own. Across the world, cities are turning to engineering solutions such as sea walls or surge barriers. In February 2022, Governor DeSantis announced that Florida will be allocating $404 million to his Resilient Florida Grant Program, which is meant to fund 113 projects in 25 counties to adapt critical assets to the effects of flooding and sea-level rise. In April 2021, Governor Newsom of California signed a Landmark $536 million Wildfire Package Accelerating Projects to Protect High-Risk Communities to support wildfire suppression, improve forest health, and build resilience in communities to help protect residents and property from catastrophic wildfires in diverse landscapes across the state. On January 18, Indonesia’s Parliament approved a bill to relocate the country’s capital from Jakarta to a new city to be built on the island of Borneo, named as Nusantara at a cost of over $32 billion, as studies have forecast that the entire city of Jakarta could sink by 2050. Venice (Italy), one of the world’s most flood-prone cities, has built a system of flood barriers—Modulo Sperimentale Elettromeccanico (MOSE)—to protect against rising sea levels and high tides, but also to provide emergency communications and power. Similar government investments are being made specifically to keep communications and data processing available on an emergency basis in the case of climate-related disruptions. Besides taking advantage of these government investments, businesses and individuals likewise need to invest in making their infrastructure more resilient.

It is difficult to determine how much money is needed to invest in resiliency against attack. It is not even clear that we have the appropriate metrics and measurement to determine how effective a resiliency countermeasure is. The length of time an adversary continues to operate in a deception environment is a measure of the effectiveness of deception measures. The length of time between compromise of resources in one enclave or segment and compromise of similar resources in another enclave is a measure of the effectiveness of segmentation. But the effectiveness of a resiliency technology investment and associated processes is harder to measure. We need these measures to aid in our decision making regarding the cost-effectiveness of making investments in resiliency.

With respect to natural disasters, in 2021, the U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency introduced the National Risk Index, a Web-based tool that maps the nation’s vulnerability to 18 different risk factors at the county and census tract levels. The tool is designed to help agencies and communities direct their resources and actions where they’re needed most. But we need to do more than just measure historical expected losses by community and social vulnerability to these 18 hazard types. We need to develop measures that can evaluate the effectiveness of designs and processes that we can build into our systems to become more resilient, and we need to measure its effectiveness not just against these 18 hazards but against physical and cyberattacks. To determine the effectiveness of keeping at least critical mission functions operational, we need to delineate our mission critical functions. We also need to be able to determine the effectiveness of a proposed resiliency technique, tactic, and process against a combination of physical and cyberattack as well as environmental hazards. Resilience against a physical attack could be equated to destruction of a system due to an environmental disaster, but resilience against a cyberattack is more difficult to measure. What makes it especially hard to measure the effectiveness of techniques and tactics being proposed to maintain operations against a cyberattack is that they need to work against an adversary who can change their tactics and targets in response to the resiliency tactics and techniques being proposed. We have the same issue in the operational techniques and tactics needed to successfully deploy assets needed to reconstitute and restore. Measuring how rapidly we can reconstitute communications while the communications and the restoration attempts are under attack is difficult to measure without some effective and realistic way of testing and measuring their effectiveness while these attempts are under attack. Assessment and evaluation of these investments and strategies involves not just analytic, but also operational testing involving exercises, simulations, and retrospective evaluations. The measurements produced are likely to involve qualitative, or semi-quantitative, assessment measures, making them harder to use as justification for a specific dollar investment. However, waiting for satisfactory ways to determine if a proposed measure is cost-effective could prove disastrous. Some investment and actions for improving our resiliency needs to be taken now while we develop suitable measures and metrics.

A primary reason we are not more resilient is that, except for warfighting, resiliency has not been a focus. Our civilian, nonmilitary systems, including governmental operations, have been more focused on cybersecurity, fault tolerance, and continuity of operations, which, as discussed, have been based on and designed against different assumptions and priorities. Because of this lack of focus, we haven’t designed and trained our people and systems in how to operate, prioritize, and assure mission critical objectives, despite persistent, long-standing outages, loss of resources, and continuing attacks. We often have not even defined the mission-critical objectives that need to continue to operate while under successful attack, which include not just continuing to perform critical prioritized functions but restoring full operations according to prioritized considerations as quickly as possible. Without these definitions, we can’t even begin to develop measures and evaluation technologies regarding the resiliency of our architectural decisions, technologies, operational practices, training, and tactics appropriate across all environments and systems. Coming up with useful measures and evaluation technologies of investments in resiliency are not easy. We lack the tools to measure the cost-effectiveness of proposed resiliency tools, tactics, and practices. These measures not only need to consider political, operational, economic, and technical factors, but the response of attackers against these tools, tactics, and practices. We need to be able to assess the effectiveness and validity of these measures so that they will be accepted. These measures will need to prove themselves over time. The track record and confidence in these measures will only grow with extended testing in both simulated operational and in real situations. And, as has been previously stated, these measures are likely to be qualitative as well as quantitative, making their assessment of cost-effectiveness of the proposed resiliency tactics and investments harder to measure and therefore to justify. Only as these measures and metrics mature and we gain greater trust and confidence in them, will their adoption grow in use. The time to start developing and validating these measures is now. However, we can’t wait; we need to start incorporating resiliency objectives and design requirements into new acquisitions and incorporating them in updates of existing mature systems while we continue to validate their effectiveness and provide refinements and updates in response to these evaluations.

On the positive side, many of the technologies, techniques, practices, and processes needed to harden resiliency technologies, such as protection of the command and control and coordination of resource sharing, imposition of prioritizing available resources, and reconstitution of communication and processing resources involve using already proven and tested technologies and practices, such as the use of encryption, covert communications, anti-jamming, and denial of service countermeasures, and backup storage and recovery of data. These technologies have already been developed, used, tested, and validated in protection against current cybersecurity attacks, and are being employed by our military to help ensure its resiliency. Additionally, many of the steps that need to be taken to achieve greater resiliency, do not require a cost-effectiveness evaluation and justification. This includes the need to establish concerns, priorities, and risk tolerance of the various stakeholders in determining the allocation of surviving available resources and increasing the emphasis and awareness of the need to be resilient. The road ahead is clear. We need to work on developing and validating resiliency measures of effectiveness, while simultaneously start working on developing and testing resiliency technologies, techniques, tactics, processes, and priorities for allocating scarce remaining resources, and for coordinating and effecting both the reconstitution of lost resources and services. We will be discussing some of the recommended techniques, tactics, processes, and priorities in the next chapter.

===== FILE 12/18: text%2fChapter05.xhtml =====

CHAPTER 5

A Blueprint for Becoming More Resilient

The need to be resilient (able to continue to operate and satisfy mission critical functions, with systems and communications severely degraded or taken out of service and under attack for extended periods of time) has dramatically increased in importance. Global warming and the resultant climate change have increased the likelihood of environmental disasters occurring that could knock out our communications and systems from hours to days, weeks, even months. Cyberattacks have grown both in frequency and sophistication, with an increased likelihood of succeeding in inflicting damage. And global tension is rising increasing the likelihood that cyberattacks could be launched to occur simultaneously with a natural disaster and/or physical attack, purposefully taking advantage of an already perilous situation, and increasing its chances of succeeding. Many consumers and businesses are likely to find themselves with their surviving communications and computing assets isolated into islands, while others are totally cut off, for extended periods of time. To remain resilient under attack or environmental disaster, or both, involves investment in backup resources, planning, and training. This includes arranging for redundant communications and Internet points of entry; for backup for facilities, services, and data; and for special hardware and software that can be rapidly deployed to reconstitute service and restore communications connectivity. Power outages can be overcome if the surviving assets can generate their own power (e.g., use backup power, solar panels, EV batteries). Users are increasingly likely to make these investments in backup power as the threat of loss of power increases due to global warming and to increases in the frequency, scale, and lethality of cyberattacks against critical infrastructure. Backup for lost data, processing, and communications resources can be provided by some combination of in-house investments, outsource arrangements, and by collaborative sharing. In-house approaches involve maintaining backup sites located sufficiently far away that it is not likely to be impacted by disruptions at the primary site due to environmental disturbances and physical/cyberattacks. This approach is expensive as duplicate communications and data processing need to be maintained and synchronized, along with backup power generators. It is generally not affordable for small to medium businesses or individual users, although they have the option of sharing backup facilities with other businesses to make it more affordable. But sharing comes with its own set of vulnerabilities. Synchronization needs to be performed in a way that minimizes the chance of infecting the backup system and data with malware installed in the compromised system they are intended to backup. One also needs to do their best to keep the backup system isolated and protected from cyberattack, while in standby mode. Backup facilities also won’t help staff who are working remotely at locations that have lost power and communications connectivity and remain cut-off from both primary and backup facilities. Working remotely also increases an enterprise systems security risk as it gives an attacker more points of entry into the enterprise systems that need to be protected that are outside the traditional security perimeter.

Signing up with a third-party service to host backup facilities is usually more cost-effective, but care must be taken to maintain privacy and confidentiality regarding sensitive in-house customer information and proprietary data. Third-party backup can be achieved through cloud-based computing solutions or through disaster recovery as a service (DRaaS) offerings. DRaaS differs from normal cloud-based backup services because they provide standby computing capacity on demand as well as protect data to facilitate more rapid application recovery. With DRaaS, the recovery resources are generally only paid for when they are used, with perhaps some minimal maintenance membership, making it more efficient and affordable than a traditional disaster recovery warm site or hot site where the recovery resources must be always running.

If the backup facility is not completely synched and up to date, there needs to be a plan for how to bootstrap the system to handle missed data not synched. If the backup processing and communications are not full capacity, there needs to be a plan regarding how to prioritize the available communications and processing resources against competing applications and services. The resulting resiliency in both third-party cloud backup and DRaaS is only as good as the resiliency of the third-party site and the communications connecting to it, which can also be targeted or become the victim of an environmental disaster, fall out of synch, and/or become corrupted. And, as with the dedicated backup facilities, it can’t help customers or employees working from home who find themselves cut off and isolated. This is especially troublesome if the organization is hierarchical, and the employee is isolated from the command-and-control location.

Individuals and small businesses that cannot afford any of these backup solutions can invest in spare backup computers they maintain on site, and can back up their data on a locally attached storage devices, or on a shared cloud service (e.g., Apple, Microsoft, and Google), provided they still have communications to connect them to the cloud service. If they have more than one communications service (e.g., cellular data from their mobile network provider plus Internet access to the home from their cable provider), they increase the odds that at least one communications network remains available, and that they still have connectivity. They can also achieve resiliency through collaborative sharing. For example, if one has lost processing, communications, and/or power, but one’s neighbors and/or business partners still are operational, resilience can be achieved through sharing arrangements with their neighbor or business partner, either previously and formally set up, or set up as an ad hoc emergency arrangement, on either an individual and/or group basis. Neighbors that are still operational can share their surviving communications with others who are located sufficiently close to connect/tap into their wireless communications. To work best, the connected neighbors need to know and trust who is piggybacking on their resources. With trust established, people and organizations with surviving communications connectivity and power can collaborate by extending and sharing their Internet and other communications connections, computers, and power. For example, if the disconnected customer can see their neighbor’s Wi-Fi or cellular signal, then they can connect if allowed. These disconnected neighbors, once connected, can now share with other neighbors they trust who are out of range with the neighbor who still has connectivity, but within their range. As this practice grows, consumers are likely to increase the range of their Wi-Fi to better accommodate this sharing. If power and communications outages continue to occur with increasing frequency, these investments and ad-hoc sharing arrangements are likely to continue to grow, with neighbors sharing with their neighbors, who share with their neighbors, and so on. Nearby businesses who may still be functioning, such as the local bank, can similarly agree to let their customer’s share their resources. This sharing can be formalized with sharing agreements established in advance. As sharing extends and increases, the shared bandwidth will likely run out of capacity, necessitating the prioritization of the shared bandwidth. If sharing is to succeed, the individuals sharing need to be identified as legitimate individuals who can be trusted to safely share. Persons sharing need to agree on how to prioritize and allocate scarce resources by need, criticality, and other considerations. Such collaborations rely on trust, and generally involve the need to verify the collaboration party’s identity and/or develop collaboration schemes that can be executed in a zero-trust environment. Although a neighbor could attempt to hijack and use a neighbors processing and communications without their knowledge and consent, sharing works better if the surviving resources are shared with the neighbor’s full knowledge and permission as it makes it easier to detect and keep unauthorized users out and it simplifies the prioritization of the remaining resources. Sharing with permission makes good neighbors, minimizes the likelihood of the sharing being successfully attacked, and enables collaborative prioritization of the limited resources remaining.

As this sharing becomes more commonplace and extends beyond the immediate neighborhood, they will increasingly gain the notice and become targets of hackers, who will attempt to detect, intercept, join, and disrupt any reconstitution attempts, making these coordinated sharing arrangements, and rapid reconstitution and restoral of service attempts vulnerable to cyberattacks and disruption attempts such as denial of the service, interception, compromising the shared resources, stealing data, and blackmail. This means that some effort needs to be extended to ensure that the shared assets and the coordination can survive these attacks. The communications required for coordination will need to be protected against attack, interception, and tampering. This will likely involve some form of encryption of sensitive data, but it could also include other forms of secret/stealth communications such as steganography and the use of special low probability of intercept out-of-band communications. Shared data and access to prioritized resources should not be accessible or readable from anyone but the intended part(ies). Sensitive data could even be embedded inside executable programs with the results computed on the fly when needed and made accessible only to the authenticated coordinating part(ies) who are sharing. This shared data could include physical addresses to ship reconstitution hardware to, software updates and changes, access, and prioritization codes. Fundamental to this is the need to establish trust and verification of the identity between sharing parties and resources. For neighbors who can recognize, see, and speak to one another, the verification can be rather informal, possibly in-person. Merchants and banks can verify their customers through already-established procedures. Verification of the correct individual could also be handled through use of physical tokens exchanged in advance through some trusted process. It is important we identify and update changes (software and hardware) in the communications equipment and protocols that can support this coordination and sharing that is safe, secure, private, and efficient. Sharing may include not just sharing of resources but also collaborative intelligence sharing. And this collaborative sharing needs to be effective in withstanding and holding off attacks aimed at preventing or compromising the sharing.

Special-purpose hardware and software could be set aside for just these emergency backups and sharing situations. Low-code techniques could allow nonprofessional programmers to generate custom software tailored to support this emergency sharing and reconstitution arrangements. There is also the need to plan and practice safe sharing and coordinated reconstitution, as successful backup and sharing involve people and processes, not just hardware and software. Uncertainties in economic norms, political stability, social unrest, climate effects, cyberattacks, IT failures, pandemics, and other disruptive events can cause stress and wreak havoc on an operation that doesn’t plan, test, and practice how to maintain resiliency and safely share resources. This includes developing an agreed-upon compendium of tested and vetted best practices for prioritizing business functions that would be most critical to maintain when failures occur and systems resources degrade, safely turning over operations to protected backup sites, and for coordinated sharing, restoral, and reconstitution of lost and degraded resources. It also includes collecting and safely sharing intelligence and taking active countermeasures to provide advance warning, to minimize the impact and duration of the attack, and to help the defender find and identify the criminals/attackers, isolate, and/or neutralize them. Paramount is the importance of planning, training, and effective tactics and procedures. If the organization becomes cut off or broken into isolated noncommunication entities, there needs to be a plan and training for how the business or individual can operate in a more independent decentralized/distributed mode. The plan needs to include independent arrangements and approaches for managing and sharing the remaining degraded resources, for maintaining continued operation while in degraded isolated mode for at least accomplishing a set of prioritized critical missions; for working with corrupted and compromised data; and for reconstituting and restoring service as rapidly as possible. It is not enough to rely solely on the communications and processing of third-party vendors to perform these functions for you. Essential to becoming a successful resilient organization will be the resourcefulness and innovation of those affected and charged with meeting the mission in figuring out how to best continue to operate and reconstitute full service using any resources and means available.

The author believes we can learn to be more resilient by taking a page from how we fight wars. When a warship takes a devastating hit, the navy keeps their ships afloat and fighting despite these hits. They seal off flooded compartments, get help from surviving ships and aircrafts, go into minimum-essential fighting mode with the remaining resources dedicated to supporting only prioritized functions and missions, rapidly reconstitute, and using their training, continue to fight with innovative work arounds. To this end, the military invests in both the assets and training for how the soldiers/sailors can continue to fight in a more independent mode. They are provided with resources and training to enable them to set up local emergency communications and processing to keep operating at least to some level of minimum essential operations and to enable reconstitution of lost communications and processors. This includes the training, tactics, and procedures for continuing to effectively fight with minimal if any communications back to headquarters, with clearly understood mission objectives, and with the ability to take local independent initiatives when confronted with unplanned for events. If a ship gets torpedoed or bombed, leaking compartments can be sealed so that the ship can continue without sinking. Sailors in the water with life vests on, or onboard, the sinking ship can be rescued by neighboring ship and aircraft. If communications are lost, emergency communications are established by repairing damaged equipment and/or using spare parts and emergency communications equipment to establish new emergency communications (e.g., use of High Frequency [HF], communications relay aircraft and drones, signaling flags and lamps) between at a minimum the local ships, aircraft, and submarines in the immediate fighting arena. If this is impossible, the soldier/sailor is trained to continue independently without any external communications until some communications is restored.

As previously discussed, future conflicts are likely to be directed not only at military and government facilities but also at civilians, hospitals, and private companies. So, nonmilitary personnel and locations will also have to learn how to operate while under attack to accomplish at least a minimal level of service and mission objectives. As one cannot plan for every unexpected contingency, ultimately the training, innovation, and resourcefulness of people to make do with what they have, and to help one another are a necessary and important component of achieving resiliency. To build truly resilient societies and systems, we must protect and train everyone, including those with few resources, on how to deal with failing communications, processing, power, or water systems.

Government can help along several fronts. Resilience first begins with information. With respect to environmental threats, this includes understanding and weighing specific climate threats and their likelihood, potential impact, and community vulnerability to those threats. The government plays a key role in this. For example, the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) recently launched an interactive map providing county-level information on various locations’ susceptibility to catastrophic climate disasters such as wildfires, floods, droughts, and heat waves. This can also include knowledge about cyberattacks and known players, tactics, technologies, techniques, and practices, including current intelligence regarding current plans and intent. It can also include sharing important cybersecurity warnings, alerts, and advice. Such collaborations between key critical industries, such as communications and financial services companies, and the government already exist. The knowledge shared between federal, state, municipal governments and the private sector helps them to develop action plans and coordinate the detection, and capture and prosecution of terrorists and criminals and enemy government actors. Governments can continue to build, expand, and nurture collaborative public–private ecosystems to take advantage of shared knowledge and resources while ensuring that the broader community supports their actions. The government and private citizens and enterprises become partners in taking shared actions.

We already mentioned how faced with the adverse effects of climate change, governments around the world are prioritizing climate resilience by investing in supporting infrastructure and data analytics to predict and prepare for future disruptions to enable a societal resilience. Government investment in large infrastructure projects to build resilience against climate change’s disruptive effects is most obvious in coastal cities who face the greatest risk from rising sea levels and extreme weather but may also increasingly include local or federal government-provided emergency communications connectivity services and power that citizens may use regardless of their location. Cities such as San Francisco and New York are already beginning to provide free communications as a service. Another example is the U.S. Federal Justice40 initiative, which aims to address historic underinvestment by delivering at least 40 percent of the overall benefits from relevant federal climate investments to disadvantaged communities. This can include the federal government providing communications and processing infrastructure to disadvantaged communities. Government can also help support the funding for research of innovative approaches to climate change and cyber resilience. The National Science Foundation (NSF) already supports university research in these areas. The government can also make seed investments in promising start-ups and provide tax incentives. Linking climate and cyber resiliency action to economic opportunities can make the private sector a willing participant in investments in resiliency. These investments not only help make us more resilient but create jobs in new industries and work related to implementing improvements in our systems resiliency. As companies themselves make moves to shore up their own resilience, government policymakers are starting to provide a mix of incentives to encourage them to bolster domestic supply chains, such as subsidies, tax breaks, and loan-guarantee programs. Government funding for innovation, research and development, and knowledge-sharing can include enhancing and building domestic industries’ technical capacities for manufacturing.

Because of the international nature of today’s supply chains, governments need to pursue resilience in their international relations, even as various protectionist and nationalist trade policies reappear. Policymakers no longer see commercial supply chains for electronics, food, or pharmaceuticals purely in economic terms. They’ve become important national security considerations. Consider the case of lithium-ion batteries, essential to electric vehicles and renewable energy storage. As countries transition to low-carbon economies, these batteries will be critical to long-term economic growth and national security. Fragile supply chains can threaten access to these critical components in the event of natural disasters or heightened tensions. Even China, which has 77 percent of the global lithium cell manufacturing capacity, is highly reliant on imports of raw lithium. Many countries, most notably India and the European Union, have begun offering subsidies encouraging manufacturers to set up domestic manufacturing units. The United States is also starting to encourage more local in-country investments. The Department of Energy’s (DoE) loan authority is being used to support the domestic battery supply chain, and its US$17.7 billion Advanced Technology Vehicles Manufacturing Loan Program offers loans to manufacturers to establish factories in the United States. Pursuing supply chain resilience via these reshoring loan programs is important, but as there still will be dependence on other countries, this effort needs to be supplemented with friend shoring, working with other nations and trusted supply sources. By strengthening domestic supply chains with trusted international sources, companies and nations can improve resilience. So governments can bolster resilience by evaluating the strength of critical industries, improving in-country supply chain capability, and cultivating links with trusted foreign nations and suppliers. For example, in 2021, India, Japan, and Australia partnered to enhance the resilience of Indo-Pacific supply chains. Under their supply chain resilience initiative, these nations agree to share best practices on resilience and hold investment promotion and buyer–seller matching events to encourage businesses to diversify their supply lines. Federal agencies can also encourage private sector participation by using their authority to set favorable regulations and by helping to create new standards.

The government should also fund a research agenda to investigate technologies, practices, and protocols that can improve our resiliency. Much of this funding is already in place, but there should be more emphasis and focus on their use in becoming more resilient. This should include research in robust and secure, secret, and survivable protocols and emergency communications with trusted relays and validated business partners, neighbors, and customers (includes adaption and enhancement of existing secret communications implementations such as TOR, and newer technologies, such as possible use of quantum communications and steganography). It should also include development and testing of protocols to mutually authenticate customers, partners, and devices from scratch to support emergency collaborative sharing when many of the traditional identification and authentication credentials are no longer trusted or available (use of advanced tokens, biometrics, third-party credentials), and protocols and software to support bootstrapping shared applications to a working starting point. It should also include research into building more effective decoys, fake sites, communications, and people, to make it difficult for an enemy to discern them from actual hardware, software, and people collaboratively working to share and restore lost and degraded communications and processing. And it should include research into operational practices, technologies, and processes, for achieving, improving, and measuring resiliency. The necessary research into how to measure and become more resilient can be organized along the following four tracks in support of this architecture:

1. Collaboration for intelligence collection and sharing. Applicable technologies include, but are not limited to, quantum computing, cryptography, artificial intelligence, and steganography for secure robust collection, communications, and collaboration.

2. Collaboration for sharing processing and communications resources, backup facilities, and resources for rapid reconstitution and restoral. Applicable technologies include, but are not limited to, distributed/federated identity, edge, mobile and personal computing, broadband networking, mobile and robotics/drones, low Earth orbit (OLE) satellites, minimum essential operations, augmented reality/digital frontier tools, innovative power sources, and 3D additive manufacturing.

3. Collaboration for protection, use, and securing of sensitive information (e.g., identity and identity attributes). This will include research into new and novel ways of using and saving sensitive information. It would also include novel ways to change, modify, and augment sensitive information in near-real time when compromised so the compromised information loses its usefulness. Applicable technologies include, but are not limited to, artificial intelligence, cryptography, blockchain, and tokenization, digital twins, biometrics, low code, innovative identity, fuzzy logic, and edge computing.

4. Educating others about how to become more resilient and achieve these objectives and the value in sharing and collaborating. This will take the form of books, publications, and videos on the results of this research, course curriculum, and training to teach new resiliency concepts, operational practices, and technologies coming out of this research.

Examples of promising technologies that have been identified as candidates for achieving resiliency include smart object-oriented databases to protect, limit access to preapproved, authenticated computations and requestors, and to send alerts. Approaches, such as digital rights management technology can be adapted so that sensitive data is embedded inside programs that are only accessible to trusted people and programs to perform authenticated and authorized functions. Database system implementations and designs can be researched where good data co-exist with purposely false data, and where only trusted vetted partners can determine which are the good data, potentially requiring more than one collaborating partner to verify and access. Drone technology and LEO satellites can be adapted to provide affordable and easy to deploy and share minimum essential emergency communications. Portable easily deployed sources of emergency power can be researched and adapted for rapid deployment, constitution, and sharing. Candidates include solar arrays, generators, and rechargeable batteries. Ways to rapidly establish emergency stealth communications to reconstitute service and to support collaboration sharing that cannot be easily detected or intercepted can be researched. Processing systems with built-in communications can be developed that can operate standalone and establish secure confidential communications paths with other trusted processing systems. Artificial intelligence technology can be adapted to assess and map surviving assets, and to strengthen, simplify, and otherwise improve the identification, authentication, and sharing of people, devices, and systems. This includes identifying compromised credentials and authentication processes and help to discover and rapidly establish new credentials and additional multifactor authentication approaches to prevent fraudulent use of compromised credentials. The design of secret hidden backup processing systems, possibly shared with collaborative partners, can be explored, and developed. Research into adapting existing communications protocols with the ability to discover and securely modify packets to support secret, secure emergency command, and control functions and in response to counter attacks. Also the use of quantum communications to quickly and establish new secure communications channels from scratch and to enable computational expensive artificial intelligence processing.

===== FILE 13/18: text%2fChapter06.xhtml =====

CHAPTER 6

Concluding Remarks

The digital revolution is just getting started, but the digits have already won. No facet of our lives remains untouched. We work, play, keep up with friends, entertain ourselves, learn, and shop, all online. We have even become dependent upon online services and information to receive the news and look up facts, definitions, recommendations and ratings, and explanations for how things work and how to repair them. The convenience, economics, and richness of being online has become too compelling to do without. If you were born before the 1990s, you wonder how you existed before the Internet and the smartphone, and if you were born later, you can’t even imagine life without being online. We even make life decisions based upon counting on being able to work online, often choosing to live further from the office than is convenient without having the ability to work online, knowing that if pandemics strike and/or transportation (trains, buses, and automobiles) become unavailable, or something else prevents us from getting to work, we can also work online. Even greater dependence on being online is predicted with the anticipated metaverse and Internet of Things of Web 3.0. Unfortunately, as our dependence on being online has become complete, so has the threat of losing it all dramatically increased. Global warming and the accompanying climate change has increased the likelihood of environmental disasters occurring that could knock out our communications and systems from hours to days, weeks, even months. Accompanying this is the increasing cyberthreat, which has grown both in frequency, sophistication, and damage inflicted. From stealing credit card numbers and conning people into transferring money, the cyberthreat can now hold your personal and sensitive business data for ransom and blackmail, take down businesses and even countries for days to months, bring supply chains to a halt, even inflict physical damage. The threat includes intelligent unmanned aircraft and vehicles. And global tensions and internal divisions between us have worsened and grown to the point that the incidents inflicting both physical and cyber damage have dramatically increased. And with increasingly scarce resources brought on by global warming and a growing have and have not divide, divisions are likely to further increase. People are increasingly vulnerable to being swayed by convincing fake manipulation of information designed to promote causes, sway elections, and cause internal divisions that increase the likelihood of attacks, even to the point of purposely orchestrating the timing of physical and cyberattacks to occur in concert with an environmental catastrophe for maximum impact. This increased dependence on systems and services that have become more vulnerable to successful attacks and environmental disasters that can succeed in taking them down for long periods of time increases the necessity of focusing on how we can dramatically improve the resiliency of our systems. We need to assure that our systems can continue to operate and accomplish critical mission objectives, despite a successful degrading debilitating attack/event, especially when launched during some environmental disaster. We need to significantly reduce the time it takes to repair and restore our systems to full service. Although we have built backup and recovery systems, they are not sufficient to address this new evolved threat. They were designed to work against occasional hardware failure and software crashes, and to prevent, detect, and mitigate against cyberattacks that generally fail to succeed, and only impact us for a limited duration without inflicting lasting damage when they do succeed. Our increased dependence, and this new evolved greater threat, requires a new mindset, the development of tools, technologies, training, and collaboration strategies capable of meeting these pressing resiliency objectives.

Up until now, we focused on building systems and processes that are good at detecting, preventing, and protecting us against attacks and failures in the belief that our defenses will generally succeed, and if they fail, our systems will not be down for long, nor will our systems become fatally degraded. Sadly, we have learned that these events cannot be totally prevented or stopped and are increasingly taking their toll at great cost. What more can we do? There is a rising chorus that argues that we must learn to become more resilient. We need to make the necessary investments in resources and training that provide backup, allow us to continue to operate, and accomplish a prioritized subset of objectives while our systems remain down, degraded, and cut off, and to rapidly reconstitute lost service. We have discussed how we can learn to do better through collaborative sharing; by taking a page in how we fight wars to become more resourceful and innovative; by funding more directed research, investment, and training in how to measure and become more resilient; and by instilling the right culture for surviving and becoming resilient. When a warship takes a devastating hit, the navy has learned how to keep their ships afloat and fighting despite these hits. They seal off flooded compartments, get help from nearby surviving ships and aircrafts, launch drones, go into minimum essential fighting mode with the remaining resources, and are trained how to continue to fight with innovative work arounds while rapidly repairing and reconstituting. We need to learn how to apply this thinking, training, and culture so that we can keep our critical systems running even after devastating gray rhino events. We still need to continue to take the necessary steps to attempt to prevent, detect, and defend against cyberattacks and environmental disasters. This includes keeping up with the latest techniques, tactics, and procedures that cyberattackers use, the latest versions of malware used, the cyberattacker’s organization structure, known vulnerabilities, and the latest patches and software updates. It includes being cautious about the websites you visit, the links you click on, and verifying the identity of whoever you communicate with. It includes shoring up our infrastructure to stand up better against floods, winds, fire, and other threatening environmental impacts. But in addition, we need to learn how to continue to operate in the face of cyberattacks where critical data are hijacked and held hostage, and supply chains and critical communications we rely upon are cut off. To succeed, we need to invest in research and development of the necessary tools, resources, collaborations, and training to enable our critical systems (transportation, communications, energy, financial, and government) to continue to operate and provide at least minimum essential services while restoring to full operations as quickly as possible. This includes building the needed measurement and evaluation tools that can be used to continuously test, validate, and improve our resiliency in response to an intelligent, changing, and adaptive threat. It includes not just tools, but the creation of a culture of resiliency through educating and training people in the science and art of resiliency. We must continue to work on improving our ability to address the complete defense spectrum of defer, protect, detect, adapt, and recover, but increasingly we will need to add special attention on learning how to better adapt and recover, with an added emphasis on recovering through collaboration—“United we stand, divided we fall.” Understanding that threat actors frequently create backdoors so they can return, we not only need a mechanism to recover and restore damaged, out-of-commission assets and resources, but when we clean up infected devices, it is critical that we do so in a way to prevent the threat actors’ easy return. If a systematic file backup (protect step) works, it can become our file recovery lifeline; if not, we need alternatives. Our efforts at becoming more resilient will be more effective through collaboration. This includes collaboration both among the entities in the private sector, and collaboration between government and the private sector. Collaboration includes processes to enable distributed organizations to assess and share existing functioning systems. This includes knowledge of what resources are available for sharing and how to affect this sharing. Sharing includes the need for prioritizing the services and functions and how they get allocated across users (e.g., what is minimum essential service for what industries and organizations?) and to ensure only validated and trusted partners are included in the sharing. It includes establishing processes and technologies to establish secure and secret communications between only trusted sharing partners that can support and coordinate sharing both surviving and rapidly constituted assets. Shared resources not only include communications and processing resource sharing but also existing and easily set up sources of energy that can be shared (e.g., solar panels with storage batteries). These shared resources should optimally be mobile so that they can be moved to needed locations, and there should be some way of rapidly deploying and redirecting critical communications relays, such as communications drones and low orbiting satellites, to where they are most needed. Besides communications, it also be possible to deploy and safely share mobile computational and smart data objects, limiting access to only trusted partners and allowing computations only after strong authentication.

There is also a cultural component to being resilient. Although most organizations are comfortable operating in a hierarchical, command and control security compliance type of culture, it does not make for a very flexible, agile, and/or adaptive environment that can react to rapidly changing circumstances. We need to learn to collaborate but be capable of acting more independently. Attackers will always look for the path of least resistance, for weak spots that will be targeted. Resiliency cannot be achieved unless an organization is culturally ready to strive for it, with needed resources, plans, and training. To be resilient, companies must design in features that make continued operation and reconstitution possible even when damaged and degraded; use the right technology; and adapt a more resilient distributed and sharing/collaborating culture. The world we now live in is a highly mobile, distributed technology world where computing is ubiquitous, and increasingly cyber-physical, with smartphones and smart everything else (from buildings to cars) surrounding us in our daily lives, and an increasingly complex supply chain to support it all. We need everyone to embrace the need for resiliency. Security and resiliency should be viewed as everyone’s responsibility, not just the service provider, for example, the communications company and the power company. Resiliency cannot be achieved unless everyone is aware of their roles and responsibilities, and what they can do to become resilient. Achieving the flexibility and adaptability needed to become resilient in times of crisis will require a more entrepreneurial mindset. Most importantly, paying attention to relationships will determine the fates of many companies as these relationships are far harder to imitate than purely automated software-based solutions. This includes willingness and knowing how to collaborate and share. Communicating secure practices for handling data and overcoming cyberthreats that will work to defeat that sharing. Finally, we need to ensure everyone understands how they can respond to a disruptive event. Resiliency is not a product that you buy, it requires more than implementation of technology controls and business continuity plans. It may sound overwhelming, but these are challenges that an individual or business of any size can overcome if they have the right strategy going forward. There are five components to creating a resilience mindset and framework for your organization. First, one needs to identify their mission-critical needs. One way to accomplish this is to look at your critical asset and process mapping, making sure you know which bits of your infrastructure are the most important, and carry out a risk and readiness assessment on them. Second, to protect. This can be accomplished using the traditional first line of defense security mechanisms we all know and depend on. Third is to detect, to invest in security analytics and keep watch across your systems. Fourth is about response, to be ready to tackle security and physical failures with the right tools. Lastly, it is important to have a sharing and recovery plan, employing coordinated mechanisms to get everything back on track. This last step is extremely important.

Once considered a low-probability event, disaster recovery from cyberattacks and/or natural disasters has a high impact and a greater likelihood of occurrence. The invasiveness of malware is forcing a change in the approach to data backup and sharing. As the time to detect malware can be as much as 200 days, traditional backup and recovery are insufficient. One needs to get a sense of what to prioritize based on a maturity assessment, and then take actions to provide this emergency capability through prioritization, sharing and reconstitution efforts. This includes not just focusing on the technical aspects of response and regulatory obligations and ignoring the customer- and employee-facing communications that would help to foster a smoother recovery. It means investing in redundancies, adopting a collaborative, cooperative, and creative culture, and fostering a diverse and empowered workforce. Organizations need to operate with dispersed, but interdependent operations, digitally and physically. They must delegate security decision making to people closest to processes or systems and embrace independent and innovative thinking. It includes adopting a composable technology architecture and mindset, where you can add, rearrange, and jettison interchangeable building blocks or components as needed. Compare that with an inflexible, monolithic organization and architecture that’s slow and difficult to evolve. By assembling and reassembling various people and technology components, composable businesses can respond quickly to market shifts and be adaptive, elastic, and flexible. Being resilient also includes establishing a resilient testbed that can be used to verify approaches to satisfy the resilience criteria, and that can provide important measures of their success. For example, using the testbed to determine how long it takes to react, adapt, and respond and recover to a threat. This includes the ability to measure one’s success in being able to isolate from damaged and corrupted components, being able to orchestrate coordination, sharing, and rapid recovery. It also includes an ability to define and move to a mode of operations capable of meeting essential mission-critical functions when capabilities are greatly reduced. It includes the ability to take stock of the state of remaining functioning components and connections. To reallocate and adapt remaining resources against agreed-on priorities to support a minimum essential operating mode. To issue special authentication and authorization credentials so that the sharing can be restricted to just trusted parties. And, as anything we do with respect to backup, sharing, and reconstitution needs to be protected from malware aimed at deleting or corrupting these attempts, we need to establish secure and secret/stealth communications across existing resources. To coordinate across multiple entities the reallocation of remaining resources and to establish special secure sharing. To have a plan and resources to be able to rapidly establish new secure secret connections between users, service providers, and devices, and to bootstrap applications and services to useful starting points. To maintain a secure space, emergency equipment, and start-up software and protocols (possibly mobile so it can be moved to optimum location). This includes computers with start-up program code and built-in trusted checkpoints (possibly employing blockchain technology); emergency power supplies; emergency secure secret start-up communications (e.g., drones, LEO channel, antennas); start-up crypto codes to establish secure communications channels from scratch; and special one-time start-up access codes to mutually authenticate and verify trusted customers and partners. To be resilient requires an organization and individuals to define and communicate a shared goal; to raise awareness of risk (threats, impacts, and risk tolerance) so that everyone is aligned on the path forward; and to establish a system of checks and balances that can foster a trust but verify culture. It requires having well-defined key performance indicators (KPIs) that are actionable and measurable to enable more informed decision making. To be able to establish and support effective collaborations among verified and trusted external partners as well as with all the members inside an enterprise or household. To be able to focus on all aspects of resiliency, not just protection capabilities, but including, most importantly, respond-and-recover functions. And it requires practice, practice, practice. You start by documenting incident response plans, and then practice the strategy with internal response or critical system isolation exercises conducted at least annually. Doing so will exponentially increase your response time.

The government can help to support these objectives. They can provide resources that can be shared and used in emergencies. They can fund a research agenda that includes developing metrics and exercises that can measure resiliency as well as technologies, tools, techniques, and practices for achieving, improving, and adapting resiliency. It includes developing protocols and emergency communications needed to find and establish secure trusted and secret communications with trusted relays and end points and with validated business partners, neighbors, and customers (includes existing secret communications implementations such as TOR, and newer technologies, such as possible use of quantum communications and steganography); protocols to mutually authenticate customers, partners, and devices from scratch, despite the fact that many of the traditional identification and authentication credentials are no longer trusted or available (could include advanced tokens, biometrics, third-party credentials); protocols and software to bootstrap applications to a working starting point; decoys and fake sites, communications, and people, to make the enemy’s ability to discern and target actual correct hardware, software, and people difficult; technologies, processes, and protocols to enable safe sharing and coordination among trusted parties. The best way to be resilient would be if we could learn how to practically rebuild from scratch. If we could, then it would be beneficial to hone these skills by making it a habit to periodically relearn to rebuild everything from scratch. By continually relearning the process of rebuilding, we might even find better ways to do things. This ability to rebuild from scratch if needed would be the ultimate capability; it would be resilience baked in.

===== FILE 14/18: text%2fBibliography.xhtml =====

Bibliography

ATIS Telecom Glossary. n.d. https://glossary.atis.org/ (accessed January 23, 2023).

Barrera, D., L. Chuat, A. Perrig, R.M. Reischuk, and P. Szalachowski. June 2017. “The Scion Internet Architecture.” Communications of the ACM 60, no. 6, pp. 56–65.

Barrett, B. November 5, 2021. “A Drone Tried to Disrupt the Power Grid. It Won’t Be the Last, An Attack Attempt in 2020 Proves the UAS Threat Is Real—and Not Enough Is Being Done to Stop It.” Wired.

Beck, M. July 2019. “On the Hourglass Model.” Communications of the ACM 62, no. 7, pp. 48–57. https://doi.org/10.1145/3274770 (accessed January 23, 2023).

Bode, K. January 23, 2018. “More Than 750 American Communities Have Built Their Own Internet Networks, a New Map Shows That More Communities Than Ever Are Building Their Own Broadband Networks to End Big Telecom’s Monopoly.” Motherboard Tech.

Bodeau, D., R. Graubart, and E. Laderman. September 2019. Relationships Between Cyber Resiliency Constructs and Cyber Survivability Attributes Enabling Controls, Requirements, Solutions, and Metrics to Be Identified. MP190668, MITRE PRODUCT.

Bracken, B., ed. August 15, 2022. DEF CON 30: Hackers Come Home to Vibrant Community—After 30 Years and a Brief Pandemic Hiatus, DEF CON Returns With “Hacker Homecoming,” an Event That Put the Humans Behind Cybersecurity First. Dark Reading.

Brtis, J., S. Jackson, and K. Cureton. May 20, 2022. System Resilience. SEBoK v. 2.6.

Center for Strategic and International Studies. 2006–2022. Significant Cyber Incidents.

Clarke, R., and Knake, R., 2010. CyberWar: The Next Threat to National Security and What to Do About It. New York, NY: Ecco.

Computer Security Resource Center. March 14, 2014. NIST SP 800-160 Vol. 2 Rev. 1 from OMB Circular A-130 (2016), NIST SP 800-160 Vol. 2 Rev 1 [Superseded] from OMB Circular A-130 DoDI 8500.01. https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-160/vol-2-rev-1/final (accessed January 23, 2023).

Cybersecurity. March 14, 2014. DoDI 8500.01. www.esd.whs.mil/portals/54/documents/dd/issuances/dodi/850001_2014.pdf (accessed January 23, 2023).

DrPeering White Paper. n.d. Internet Transit Prices—Historical and Projections.

Edwards, J. June 16, 2022. Cyber Resiliency: What It Is and How to Build It, Cyberattacks Continue to Increase. Has Your Organization Done All It Can to Protect Itself? John-Edwards, Technology.

Eisenbach, T.M., A. Kovner, and M.J. Lee. June 2022. “When It Rains, It Pours: Cyber Risk and Financial Conditions.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, no. 1022.

Ekert, A.K. August 5, 1991. “Quantum Cryptography Based on Bell’s Theorem.” Physical Review Letters 67, p. 661.

FEMA. November 2021. “National Risk Index.” Technical Documentation. FEMA. www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/documents/fema_national-risk-index_technical-documentation.pdf (accessed January 23, 2023).

Firesmith, D. November 25, 2019. System Resilience: What Exactly Is It? SEI Blog.

Fukuyama, F. 1992. The End of History and the Last Man. Free Press.

Giles, L. 2007. The Art of War by Sun Tzu—Special Edition. Special Edition Books.

Gillis, A.S. January 2020. “Quantum Key Distribution (QKD).” TechTarget.

Goodin, D. August 2, 2022. “Post-Quantum Encryption Contender Is Taken Out by Single-Core PC and 1 Hour. Leave It to Mathematicians to Muck Up What Looked Like an Impressive New Algorithm.” ARS Technica. https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2022/08/sike-once-a-post-quantum-encryption-contender-is-koed-in-nist-smackdown/ (accessed January 23, 2023).

Hillgear, S. May 24, 2022. “What Is Wi-Fi 7? Everything You Need to Know.” Wired.

ID Agent. n.d. The Global Year in Breach 2021: What Happened in 2020, Why It Happened and What To Do Next.

Kestenbaum, R. November 16, 2018. “Jeff Bezos Says ‘Amazon Is Not Too Big To Fail.’ He’s Right.” Forbes.

Kim, H., E. McGivney, and E. Care. March 28, 2017. Science of Learning: Why Do We Care? Brookings.

Krishnan, A. January 29, 2022. “Explained | Why Indonesia Has Moved Its Capital.” The Hindu.

Liang, Q. 1999. Unrestricted Warfare. Qiao Liang, a retired Chinese Major General and Wang Xiangsui a professor at Beihang University in Beijing, China and a retired senior Colonel in the People’s Liberation Army.

Madni, A.M. and S. Jackson. June 2009. “Towards a Conceptual Framework for Resilience Engineering.” IEEE Systems Journal 3, no. 2, pp. 181–191.

Marcus, L. October 3, 2014. San Francisco Gets Free Wi-Fi: Check Out These Other 9 Connected Cities: More and More Cities Are Offering Free Wi-Fi to Visitors, Including Osaka, New York, Barcelona, and Edinburgh. Conde Nast Traveler. www.cntraveler.com/stories/2014-10-03/10-cities-with-free-wifi (accessed January 23, 2023).

Nadlinger, D.P., P. Drmota, B.C. Nichol, G. Araneda, D. Main, R. Srinivas, D.M. Lucas, C.J. Ballance, K. Ivanov, E.Y.-Z. Tan, P. Sekatski, R.L. Urbanke, R. Renner, N. Sangouard, and J.-D. Bancal. 2022. “Experimental Quantum Key Distribution Certified by Bell’s Theorem.” Nature 607, pp. 682–686.

National Infrastructure Advisory Council. September 8, 2009. Critical Infrastructure Resilience: Final Report and Recommendations. NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4.

NIST News. May 3, 2022. Wi-Fi May Be Coming Soon to a Lamppost Near You.

NIST News. July 5, 2022. NIST Announces First Four Quantum-Resistant Cryptographic Algorithms. www.nist.gov/news-events/news/2022/07/nist-announces-first-four-quantum-resistant-cryptographic-algorithms (accessed January 23, 2023).

Page, C. May 20, 2022. “Fears Grow for Smaller Nations After Ransomware Attack on Costa Rica Escalates Conti Demanded $20M in Ransom—and the Overthrow of the Government.” TechCrunch.

Pernet, C. June 13, 2022. “State-Sponsored Chinese Threat Actors Compromise Telecom and Network Service Providers.” TechRepublic.

Peru Telegraph. April 29, 2017. Increase of Cyber-Attacks in Peru, Criminals Take Advantage of Special Sales Dates for Their Malicious Campaigns.

Pratt, M.K. June 20, 2022. IT Leaders Rethink the People Part of Business Continuity, in an Era of Increasingly Dispersed Workforces, IOs Are Grappling With How to Help IT Staff in Peril—and Keep the Business Moving Forward When Events Disrupt Employees’ Ability to Work.

Pretz, K. April 14, 2022. “This Community-Run Internet Is Bridging the Digital Divide the Low-Power Open-Source Wireless Mesh Network Is Portable.” IEEE Spectrum.

Resilient & Intelligent NextG Systems (RINGS). n.d. “Program Solicitation.” NSF 21-581. www.nsf.gov/pubs/2021/nsf21581/nsf21581.pdf (accessed January 23, 2023).

Risk Steering Committee. September 2010. DHS Risk Lexicon 2010 ed. www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/dhs-risk-lexicon-2010.pdf (accessed January 23, 2023).

Shein, E. August 8, 2022. Deepfake Attacks and Cyber Extortion Are Creating Mounting Risks. TechRepublic.

Shor, P.W. 1994. “Algorithms for Quantum Computation: Discrete Logarithms and Factoring.” In Proceedings 35th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pp. 124–134. IEEE Computer Society Press. https://doi.org/10.1109/sfcs.1994.365700 (accessed January 23, 2023).

Sterbenz, J.P., D. Hutchison, E.K. Çetinkaya, A. Jabbar, J.P. Rohrer, M. Schöller, and P. Smith. March 17, 2010. “Resilience and Survivability in Communication Networks: Strategies, Principles, and Survey of Disciplines.” Computer Networks 54, pp. 1245–1265.

Strauss, V. December 11, 2020. No, Public Schools Are Not Modeled After Factories. Here’s Why Betsy DeVos Keeps Saying They Are. Washington Post.

Sungard AS. February 10, 2021. Ransomware Attacks Against U.S. Government Entities: 5 Key Observations and Takeaways for Municipalities.

Townsend, K. February 21, 2023. AI Helps Crack NIST Recommended Post-Quantum Encryption Algorithm. Security Week.

Trail of BITS. June 2022. Are Blockchains Decentralized? Unintended Centralities in Distributed Ledgers. Trail of BITS.

Wiesner, S. 1983. “Conjugate Coding.” ACM SIGACT News 15, pp. 78–88. https://doi.org/10.1145/1008908.1008920 (accessed January 23, 2023).

===== FILE 15/18: text%2fAbout_the_Author.xhtml =====

About the Author

Dr. Daniel Schutzer is a sought-after lecturer and author of numerous books and articles. His related work experience includes Founder and President of Financial Services Technology Consortium (FSTC), one of the first virtual organizations, working on collaborative research for the financial services industry, primarily in fraud, security, and payments; Head Advanced Technology for Citibank; Technical Director of U.S. Naval Intelligence; first Technical Director of Navy Command, Control, and Communications; Bell Laboratory working on ABM defense, in charge of discriminating between real warheads and decoys.

===== FILE 16/18: text%2fIndex.xhtml =====

Index

Adaptability, 55, 59, 72, 79, 95, 96, 98–100, 116, 117, 122–126, 123

Aerial Experimentation and Research Platform for Advanced Wireless (AERPAW), 25

Artificial intelligence (AI), 7, 29–30, 46, 47, 66, 118

Artificial intelligence (AI)-augmented analysis, 45

Attribution modeling, 63

Autonomous aerial vehicles (AAVs), 64–65

Autonomous vehicles, 62

Backup facilities, 108–109

Behavioral biometrics, 36

Big data, 66

Biometrics, 36

Blended learning, 51–52

Blockchain, 37–38

Bluetooth, 16, 17

Bluetooth low energy (BLE), 17

BSS coloring, 11

Building electrification, 67–68

Business, 69–72

Business continuity, 96, 97, 123

Climate change, 63–64, 92, 100, 107, 114, 119

Collaborative sharing, 111

Commerce, 60–63

Continuation of operations (COOP), 97

COVID-19 pandemic, 43, 44, 48, 54–55

Cryptocurrency, 37, 89–90

Cryptography, 30–34

CRYSTALS-Dilithium, 33, 34

Crystals-Kyber, 35

CRYSTALS-Kyber algorithm, 33–34

Cyberattacks, 67, 81–83, 89, 91, 92, 102–103, 107

Cyberattacker, 84, 88, 121

Cybercriminals, 90–91

Cybersecurity, 25, 66, 84, 86, 89, 95, 98, 100, 103, 104, 114

Cyberthreats, 100

Cyber warfare, 73, 81, 84, 91, 92

Dark Web, 90–91

Data corruption, 30

Digitalization, 1

Digital twin, 38

Disaster recovery, 97

Disaster recovery as a service (DRaaS), 108–109

Drones, 23–25, 36, 37, 62, 64–65

E-commerce, 60–63

Edge computing devices, 8–9

Education, 48–54

Ehang 184 Air Taxi, 65

Electric vehicles (EVs), 64

Enabling technologies, 29–39

artificial intelligence (AI), 29–30, 118

blockchain, 37–38

communication and, 39–42

cryptocurrency, 37

cryptography, 30–34

digital twin, 38

internet of things (IoT), 38–39

machine learning, 29–30

quantum computing, 35–36

supersingular isogeny key encapsulation (SIKE), 34

Entanglement-based protocols, 35

Entertainment, 54–60

Environmental disaster, 2, 80, 82, 92–93, 96, 102, 107, 109, 119–121

FALCON, 33, 34

Fast IDentity Online (FIDO) Alliance standards, 36

Fault tolerance, 98

5G network, 4–6, 8, 9, 17

Finance, 69–72

Flipped classroom, 50

Global tension, 83, 99, 107

Global warming, 66–67, 82, 92, 99, 100, 107

Government, 79–80, 101, 113–116, 119

Hash functions, 31–32

Health care, 43–48

Health sensors, 44, 45

Hybrid environment, 60–63

Hybrid learning. See Blended learning

Hyperloop, 65

Image recognition apps, 63

Intelligent sensing layer, 7

Internet, 6, 8–10, 16, 18, 19, 21, 28–29, 22, 39, 40–42, 45, 54, 61, 83, 84

Internet protocols, 26

Internet hourglass model, 3–4

Internet of Things (IoT), 38–39

Layered communications model, 2–4

LEO satellites, 21, 23

Local area networks (LANs), 10

Long-term evolution (LTE) networks, 23

Machine learning, 29–30

Magnetic Levitation (MagLev), 65

Marine Corps Doctrinal Publication 8, 74

Metaverse, 57–59, 62

Military, 72–79

mm Wave technology, 17

Mobile networks, 4–9

Mobile wireless

Wi-Fi vs., 16–17

communications model, higher layers of, 25–27

drones, 23–25

satellites, 19–23

Multiuser multiple input, multiple output (MU-MIMO), 11

National Risk Index, 102

Network architecture research, 28–29

Networked devices, 45

Network trends, 1–2

Nonfungible tokens (NFTs), 59

Online learning, 50, 51

Open Grid Alliance, 28

Open interoperable systems, 38

Open Systems Interconnection (OSI), 2–3

Orthogonal frequency-division multiple access (OFDMA), 11–12

Peresvet, 23

Polarizations, 83, 99

Power, 66–68

Protocol, 2

Public key cryptography, 31–34

Quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM), 13, 14

Qualcomm Flight RB5 5G Platform, 25

Quantum computing, 34–35

Quantum key distribution (QKD), 34–35

QUIC protocol, 26

Rapid reconstitution, 22, 24, 29, 110, 116

Ransomware, 84–89

Remote environment, 60–63

Resilience

business, 69–72

commerce, 60–63

definitions, 95, 96

education, 48–54

entertainment, 54–60

finance, 69–72

government, 79–80, 101, 113–116, 119

health care, 43–48

measurement, 97–105, 116–117

military, 72–79

network trends and, 1–2

overview, 119–126

power, 66–68

vs. security, 96–97

social networking, 54–60

transportation, 63–66

Resilient and Intelligent Next-Generation Systems program (RINGS), 2

Ridesharing, 64

SATCOM, 20

Satellites, 19–23

SCION, 28–29

SCORE, 19

Secret key cryptography, 31

Service, 2

Sharing process, 110–112, 116–117

6G network, 7–9, 17

Smart application layer, 7

Social networking, 54–60

Solar-powered HAWK30, 24

SPHINCS+, 33, 34

Starlink, 21–22

Supersingular isogeny key encapsulation (SIKE), 34

Survivability, 25, 38, 78

Synchronization, 108

Telecommunications technologies, 78

Telemedicine, 45, 46

Terahertz radiation, 8

3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), 24

Tools, techniques, and practices (TTPs), 84

Transmission control protocol/internet protocol (TCP/IP), 3

Transportation, 63–66

Vehicle-to-everything (V2X), 66

Vertical takeoff and landing (VTOL), 65

Web, 1

Web 1.0, 1, 25

Web 2.0, 1, 26

Web 3.0, 1, 26–27, 86, 119

Weaponry, 73, 76

Wi-Fi, 9–10

advances, impact of, 15–16

vs. mobile wireless, 16–17

communications model, higher layers of, 25–27

drones, 23–25

satellites, 19–23

Wi-Fi 6, 10–12, 15, 17–18

Wi-Fi 7, 13–15, 17

Zigbee, 17

===== FILE 17/18: text%2fBackmatter.xhtml =====

OTHER TITLES IN THE SERVICE SYSTEMS AND INNOVATIONS IN BUSINESS AND SOCIETY COLLECTION

Jim Spohrer, IBM and Haluk Demirkan, University of Washington, Tacoma, Editors

• Servitization by Antonio Pérez Márquez

• Evolving With Inclusive Business in Emerging Markets by Rajagopal

• Hidden Challenges by Elizabeth Florent Treacy, Fernanda Pomin, James Hennessy, Ricardo Senerman and Ross Emerson

• Service in the AI Era by Jim Spohrer, Paul P. Maglio, Stephen L. Vargo and Markus Warg

• The Emergent Approach to Strategy by Peter Compo

• Emerging FinTech by Paul Taylor

• The Vice Chairman’s Doctrine by Ian Domowitz

• Compassion-Driven Innovation by Nicole Reineke, Hanna Yehuda and Debra Slapak

• Adoption and Adaption in Digital Business by Keith Sherringham and Bhuvan Unhelkar

• Customer Value Starvation Can Kill by Gautam Mahajan and Walter Vieira

• ATOM, Second Edition by Kartik Gada

• Designing Service Processes to Unlock Value, Third Edition by Joy M. Field

• Disruptive Innovation and Digital Transformation by Marguerite L. Johnson

• Build Better Brains by Martina Muttke

Concise and Applied Business Books

The Collection listed above is one of 30 business subject collections that Business Expert Press has grown to make BEP a premiere publisher of print and digital books. Our concise and applied books are for…

• Professionals and Practitioners

• Faculty who adopt our books for courses

• Librarians who know that BEP’s Digital Libraries are a unique way to offer students ebooks to download, not restricted with any digital rights management

• Executive Training Course Leaders

• Business Seminar Organizers

Business Expert Press books are for anyone who needs to dig deeper on business ideas, goals, and solutions to everyday problems. Whether one print book, one ebook, or buying a digital library of 110 ebooks, we remain the affordable and smart way to be business smart. For more information, please visit www.businessexpertpress.com, or contact sales@businessexpertpress.com.
