OSINT TECHNIQUES:
RESOURCES FOR UNCOVERING ONLINE INFORMATION
ELEVENTH EDITION
Copyright © 2024 by Michael Bazzell & Jason Edison
Project Editor: Janice Bartlett
Technical Editors: Rhianna Huizenga, Peter Richardson
Cover: "Anonymous Reader"
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or mechanical
means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without permission in writing from the author. The
content of this print edition book cannot be distributed digitally, in any form, or offered as an electronic
download, without permission in writing from the author.
Eleventh Edition First Published: November 2024
The information in this book is distributed on an "As Is" basis, without warranty. The author has taken great
care in preparation of this book, but assumes no responsibility for errors or omissions. No liability is assumed
for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of the use of the information or
programs contained herein.
Rather than use a trademark symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, this book uses the names
only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the
trademark.
Due to the use of quotation marks to identify specific text to be used as search queries and data entry, the author
has chosen to display the British rule of punctuation outside of quotes. This ensures that the quoted content is
accurate for replication. The author has also chosen to omit smart or curly single and double quotes in order to
maintain proper emphasis within search queries and scripts. Only "straight" quotation marks and apostrophes
are presented. To maintain consistency, these formats are continued throughout the entire book.
The technology referenced in this book was edited and verified by a professional team for accuracy. Exact
tutorials in reference to websites, software, and hardware configurations change rapidly. All tutorials in this book
were confirmed accurate as of November 1, 2024. Readers may find slight discrepancies within the methods as
technology changes.
Library of Congress Control Number (LCCN): Application submitted
ISBN: 9798345969250

Revision: 2025.04.02

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1: WHY VIRTUAL MACHINES? ................................................. 9
CHAPTER 2: MACOS HOST OPTIMIZATION............................................ 11
CHAPTER 3: MACOS VM SOFTWARE ......................................................... 22
CHAPTER 4: LINUX HOST OPTIMIZATION ............................................ 27
CHAPTER 5: LINUX VM SOFTWARE .......................................................... 31
CHAPTER 6: WINDOWS HOST OPTIMIZATION...................................... 38
CHAPTER 7: WINDOWS VM SOFTWARE ................................................... 42
CHAPTER 8: OSINT VM OPERATING SYSTEMS ...................................... 49
CHAPTER 9: OSINT VM WEB BROWSERS ................................................. 64
CHAPTER 10: OSINT VM APPLICATIONS.................................................. 85
CHAPTER 11: OSINT VM SCRIPTS ............................................................... 136
CHAPTER 12: OSINT VM APIS ...................................................................... 148
CHAPTER 13: OSINT VM MAINTENANCE ................................................ 159
CHAPTER 14: OSINT VM AUTOMATED BUILD ....................................... 162
CHAPTER 15: ANDROID VIRTUALIZATION ............................................ 163
CHAPTER 16: CUSTOM SEARCH TOOLS ................................................... 175
CHAPTER 17: SEARCH ENGINES ................................................................ 186
CHAPTER 18: SOCIAL NETWORKS: FACEBOOK ...................................... 212
CHAPTER 19: SOCIAL NETWORKS: X (TWITTER) ................................... 228
CHAPTER 20: SOCIAL NETWORKS: INSTAGRAM .................................... 243
CHAPTER 21: SOCIAL NETWORKS: TIKTOK ............................................ 254
CHAPTER 22: ONLINE COMMUNITIES .................................................... 259
CHAPTER 23: EMAIL ADDRESSES .............................................................. 292
CHAPTER 24: USERNAMES .......................................................................... 303
CHAPTER 25: PEOPLE SEARCH ENGINES ............................................... 309
CHAPTER 26: TELEPHONE NUMBERS..................................................... 320
CHAPTER 27: ONLINE MAPS ....................................................................... 329
CHAPTER 28: DOCUMENTS ......................................................................... 345
CHAPTER 29: IMAGES ................................................................................... 355
CHAPTER 30: VIDEOS .................................................................................... 372
CHAPTER 31: BROADCAST STREAMS ........................................................ 384
CHAPTER 32: DOMAIN NAMES ................................................................... 396
CHAPTER 33: IP ADDRESSES ....................................................................... 416
CHAPTER 34: GOVERNMENT & BUSINESS RECORDS .......................... 424
CHAPTER 35: VIRTUAL CURRENCIES....................................................... 433
CHAPTER 36: BREACHES: INVESTIGATIVE BENEFITS ........................ 438
CHAPTER 37: BREACHES: HARDWARE CONFIGURATION ................. 440
CHAPTER 38: BREACHES: SOFTWARE CONFIGURATION ................... 445
CHAPTER 39: BREACHES: TERMINAL COMMANDS .............................. 459
CHAPTER 40: DATA LEAKS........................................................................... 471
CHAPTER 41: DATA BREACHES .................................................................. 495
CHAPTER 42: STEALER LOGS...................................................................... 518
CHAPTER 43: RANSOMWARE ...................................................................... 534
CHAPTER 44: QUERIES, SCRIPTS, DATABASES, & BACKUPS ............... 539
CHAPTER 45: METHODOLOGY & WORKFLOW ...................................... 561
CHAPTER 46: DOCUMENTATION & REPORTING ................................. 572
CHAPTER 47: POLICY, ETHICS, & DEVELOPMENT .............................. 582

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
MICHAEL BAZZELL
Michael Bazzell investigated computer crimes on behalf of the government for over 20 years. During the
majority of that time, he was assigned to the FBI's Cyber Crimes Task Force where he focused on various online
investigations and Open Source Intelligence (OSINT) collection. As an investigator and sworn federal officer
through the U.S. Marshals Service, he was involved in numerous major criminal investigations including online
child solicitation, child abduction, kidnapping, cold-case homicide, terrorist threats, and advanced computer
intrusions. He has trained thousands of individuals in the use of his investigative techniques and privacy control
strategies. After leaving government work, he served as the technical advisor for the first season of the television
hacker drama Mr. Robot. His books OSINT Techniques and Extreme Privacy are used by several government
and private organizations as training manuals for intelligence gathering and privacy hardening. He now assists
individual clients in achieving ultimate privacy, both proactively and as a response to an undesired situation.
More details about his services can be found at IntelTechniques.com.

JASON EDISON
Jason Edison is a 25-year veteran with a major U.S. metropolitan police department where he serves as the
technical lead for the agency's Criminal Intelligence and Cyber-Crime Sections. He instructs internal department
teams as well as outside organizations in the areas of Operational Security for Covert Operations, Countering
Electronic Surveillance, Cyber-Crime Investigations, and Open-Source Intelligence. Prior to his current
assignments, Jason worked as a Federal Task-Force Officer, running under-cover and electronic surveillance
operations for long-term organized crime investigations.

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

ELEVENTH EDITION PREFACE
The previous (tenth) edition of this book was originally written in late 2022. In late 2024, I was asked to update
this book, as it is required reading for numerous college courses, university degrees, and government training
academies. It had been two years since our last update, which is an eternity in technology. I never want stale or
inaccurate information being presented within training programs, so I created this revision. I estimate that 20%
of the content is brand new, 20% has been updated to reflect changes throughout 2024, and the
remaining 60% is recycled from the previous edition. This edition also includes the entirety of the digital
supplement guides The Ultimate Virtual Machine and Leaks, Breaches, & Logs, which replaced all tenth edition
content related to those topics. You could say that this edition is a "Complete Works" of all available OSINT
material which is relevant for 2025. Much of the remaining tenth edition content was still applicable and only
needed minor updates to reflect changes since 2022. If you have read the previous edition, you will find most
of those overall strategies within this book. However, I have added many new methods which complement the
original text in order to cater to those who always need accurate information. I also removed a lot of outdated
content which was no longer applicable. I believe there is much new value within this updated text.
My primary goals with this new edition are two-fold. First, we need to continue our path of self-reliance which
was introduced in the previous editions. This edition introduces a completely rebuilt Debian Linux OSINT
virtual machine which is simpler to create, full of new features, and easier to operate. It is also much more stable
and private than previous Ubuntu builds. I present all required commands to replicate my own system and offer
an automated script which allows you to generate your own working environment. Second, I have reworked all
of the OSINT techniques throughout all chapters. Many of the search methods targeted toward Facebook,
YouTube, X (Twitter), Instagram, and other online services which were presented in the previous editions have
begun to fail as these companies change their products. The updated tutorials here offer new solutions.
The biggest change within this edition is the addition of my co-author, Jason Edison. Jason runs the official
IntelTechniques online video training program and conducts live training sessions globally. I brought him in for
many reasons. This book is a monster, and keeping it updated takes a lot of time. I recruited him to help me
make sure we had a book worthy of a new edition. More importantly, I no longer personally conduct OSINT
investigations as part of my daily routine. Jason still works for the government in an OSINT capacity and is
buried within OSINT investigations every day. I wanted an active investigator to play a large role within this
publication, and I am no longer that type of investigator. While we both have a passion for OSINT, Jason lives
in that world more than I do now. In order to keep a fluid theme, we will use the first-person of "I" "me", and
"my" throughout the book. This is a collective first-person presentation, and we both stand by the entire guide.
Please consider the following technical note in regard to this book. I typically push my self-published titles
through five rounds of editing. The fees associated with editing a book of this size (over 300,000 words) are
substantial. This edition was put through only two rounds of editing, so I expect a few typos still exist. If you
find any, consider reporting them to books@inteltechniques.com. We also want to hear when things break. My
staff cannot respond directly to any emails, but we can correct future copies. The decision to restrict editing was
mostly due to hard deadlines for courses, but book piracy also played a strong role. We have seen a drastic shift
from most readers purchasing the book to the vast majority downloading illegal free PDF copies available a few
weeks after the initial release. If you purchased this edition, I sincerely thank you. You represent a shrinking
society. If you downloaded this book from a shady site, please consider purchasing a legitimate copy. We now
offer both print and digital PDF versions. Details are at https://inteltechniques.com/books.html.
Keeping a book up to date about ways to access information on the internet is a difficult task. Websites are
constantly changing or disappearing, and the techniques for collecting all possible public information from them
are affected. However, new resources appear constantly, and much of this book contains new techniques which
were previously not available. This book was accurate as of December 1, 2024. If, or more likely when, you
find techniques which no longer work, use the overall lessons from the entire book to push through the
changes and locate your content. Once you develop an understanding of the strategies, you will be ready to
adapt. I am truly excited to introduce a new level of OSINT. ~MB (& JE)

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

INTRODUCTION
OSINT TECHNIQUES
I taught my first Open Source Intelligence (OSINT) course in 1999 to a small group of local police chiefs in
Illinois. I had not heard of the term OSINT at the time and I did not realize there was an official name for the
methods I was teaching. I simply thought I was demonstrating a powerful way to use the internet as a part of
everyday investigations. Most in the room had little interest in my session, as they had not experienced the
internet much. Well, times sure have changed. OSINT is now quite the buzz word within several communities.
Hacking conferences proudly host OSINT training sessions; cyber security groups include it within their
strategies for hardening customers' systems; law enforcement agencies dedicate entire investigation units to
online research into criminals; journalists rely on the methods every day; and even the social engineering crowd
has adopted it as part of their playbook. I never anticipated OSINT would become a household name within
most technology circles.
As my company continues to provide OSINT training sessions, the audiences seem to grow every year. It is no
longer a course reserved for tech-savvy employees. We now see people with minimal online experience being
thrown into investigation and analyst positions. We see crowds desperate for the latest investigation techniques,
only to see those methods disappear without notice as social networks come and go, or change their search
options. Search techniques seem to be more fickle than ever, and I am always concerned about losing online
resources.
Open Source Intelligence, often referred to as OSINT, can mean many things to many people. Officially, it is
defined as any intelligence produced from publicly available information that is collected, exploited, and
disseminated in a timely manner to an appropriate audience for the purpose of addressing a specific intelligence
requirement. For the CIA, it may mean information obtained from foreign news broadcasts. For an attorney, it
may mean data obtained from official government documents which are available to the public. For most people,
it is simply publicly available content obtained from the internet.
Overall, this book includes several hundred sources of free information and software which could identify
personal information about anyone you might be investigating. All of the resources are 100% free and open to
the public, with a few minor exceptions. Each method is explained, and any creative search techniques involving
the resources are detailed. When applicable, actual case examples are provided to demonstrate the possibilities
within the methods. The topics in this book can be read in any order and referenced when a specific need arises.
It is a guidebook of techniques that I have found successful in my investigations.
Locating this free online information is not the final step of OSINT analysis. Appropriate collection and
reporting methods will be detailed and referenced. Whether the data you obtain is for an investigation, a
background check, or identifying problem employees, you must document all of your findings. You cannot rely
on the information being available online forever. A website may shut down or the data may be removed. You
must preserve anything of interest when you find it. The free software solutions presented here will help you
with that. OSINT search techniques do not apply only to websites. There are many free programs which
automate the search and collection of data. These programs, as well as application programming interfaces, will
be explained to assist the advanced investigator of open source intelligence. In summary, this book is to serve
as a reference guide to assist you with conducting more accurate and efficient searches of open source
intelligence. This is not a debate of the various opinions about online reconnaissance for personal information.
It is not a historical look at OSINT or a discussion of your administrative policy. Furthermore, it is not a howto guide for criminals to steal your identity. Nothing in this book discusses illegal methods.
When I first considered documenting my OSINT techniques, the plan was to post them on my website in a
private area for my co-workers. This documentation quickly turned into over 250 pages of content. It had grown

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

too big to place on my site in a manner that was easy to digest. I changed course and began putting together this
book as a manual to accompany my multiple-day training sessions. It has grown to a huge textbook which could
never include every beneficial resource on the internet.
Many readers work in some form of law enforcement or government agency. Police officers can use these
techniques to help locate missing children or investigate human trafficking. Intelligence analysts can apply these
methods to a large portion of their daily work as they tackle social media posts. Detectives can use the search
techniques to re-investigate cases that have gone unsolved. I embrace these techniques being used to locate facts
which can help solve crimes. This book also caters to the private sector, especially security divisions of large
corporations. It can help these teams locate more concise and appropriate information relative to their
companies. These methods have been proven successful for employees who monitor any type of threat to their
company, from physical violence to counterfeit products. I encourage the use of these techniques to institutions
which are responsible for finding and eliminating "bad apples". This may be the human resources department,
application processing employees, or "head hunters" looking for the best people. The information about a
subject found online can provide more intelligence than any interview or reference check.
Parents and teachers are encouraged to use this book as a guide to locating social media content posted by
children. In many households, the children know more about the internet than the adults. The children use this
to their advantage and often hide content online. They know that it will not be located by their parents and
teachers, and often post inappropriate content which can become harmful in the wrong hands. This book can
empower adults and assist with identifying important personal information which could pose a threat toward
children. A large portion of my intended audience is private investigators. They can use this book to find
information without possessing a deep understanding of computers or the internet. Explicit descriptions and
occasional screen captures will ensure that the techniques can be recreated on any computer. Several universities
have adopted this book as required reading, and I am honored to play a small role in some amazing courses
related to network security.
I realize that people who use these techniques for devious purposes will read this book as well. Colleagues have
expressed their concern about this possibility. My decision to document these techniques came down to two
thoughts. First, anyone that really wants to use this information in malicious ways will do so without this book.
There is nothing in here that could not be replicated with some serious searching and time. The second thought
is that getting this information out to those who will use it appropriately is worth the risk of a few people using
it for the wrong reasons. Please act responsibly with this information.
Finally, a parting thought before you begin your journey through OSINT analysis and collection. This book was
written as a reference guide. It does not necessarily need to be read straight-through sequentially, but it was
written as a chronological guide for most investigators. I encourage you to skip around when needed or if you
feel overwhelmed. The second chapter about Linux may make you want to abandon the teachings before ever
utilizing an online resource or website. When you encounter material that seems too technical or not applicable,
please move on to the next chapter and consider returning later. The book is suitable for all skill levels, and there
is something here for everyone. You can always return to the advanced topics when you are ready.
IMPORTANT! Digital Commands and Files
Throughout this book, I present numerous Terminal commands which must be entered exactly, and I refer to
several files which can be downloaded in order to simplify your usage of the various tools, techniques, and
scripts. These are all hosted on my website and available free to you. As each file or script is referenced, I provide
a download link to simplify the learning process, but you can also access all digital content at any time at
https://inteltechniques.com/osintbook11. The username is osint11 and the password for this book is
bk3t7. Please embrace this online page, and the files and the commands offered within it, as a vital part of this
book. They should minimize frustration and save time as you complete the tutorials. Copying and pasting from
the online site will be much easier than replicating from this book. This also allows us to update commands as
they change. Always check this site for the latest information, as the book can become outdated.

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

SECTION I

OSINT PREPARATION
This entire section explains the essential steps which I believe any online investigator should complete before
ever conducting a search online. We should never jump into an investigation without being digitally secure with
a clean computer and software which has not been compromised from previous activity. We should begin each
investigation with confidence, knowing we are working within an environment without any contamination from
previous investigations. It will take a lot of work to create our perfect playground, but replicating a pristine
environment for each investigation will be easy. Much like a DNA forensics lab must be configured and ready
before an investigation, your OSINT lab should face the same scrutiny.
The first four editions of this book began with search engine techniques. Right away, I offered my methods for
collecting online information from various popular and lesser-known search websites. This may have been due
to my own impatience and desire to "dive in" and start finding information. This edition will begin much
differently. Before you attempt any of the search methods within this book, I believe you should prepare your
computing environment. I was motivated to begin with this topic after teaching a multiple-day OSINT class.
On day two, several attendees brought laptop computers in order to attempt the techniques I was teaching
during the course. During a break, I observed police officers searching Facebook on patrol vehicle laptops;
private investigators using old versions of Windows while browsing suspects' blogs; and cyber security
professionals looking at hacker websites without possessing any antivirus software, script blockers, or a virtual
private network (VPN).
I have also been guilty of all of this. Early in my career of researching OSINT, I did not pay much attention to
computer security or proper browsing habits. While I was aware of malicious software, I knew I could reinstall
Windows if something really bad happened. This was reactive thinking. I believe that we must all proactively
address vulnerabilities in our own privacy and security while conducting online research. This section is not
meant to be a complete guide to computer security. Instead, I hope to quickly and efficiently propose the most
beneficial strategies which will protect you from the majority of problems. Applying the changes mentioned in
this section will provide a valuable layer of security to your online investigations and overall computing habits.
Virtual machines are an important part of our arsenal and we will be referring to "host" and "guest" operating
systems throughout the chapters. The "host" is your existing desktop or laptop computer and the "guest" is any
operating system which is running virtually. I will explain how to ensure your computer host is secure; configure
virtual machines for each investigation; embed Linux applications into Windows and Mac hosts; customize
OSINT software which will be available at all times; create your own set of search tools to automate queries;
prepare a virtual Android environment for mobile investigations; and easily clone all of your work for immediate
replication if anything should become corrupt, damaged, or compromised. Your efforts now will pay off tenfold in the future.
There is a lot to digest here. Please allow yourself to skip over any technical sections and return to them once
you understand the overall intent of the material. Many readers will skip to Section Two and start practicing
various online OSINT techniques. Some will navigate directly to Section Three to start exploring breach data.
Others might read through the entire book before ever touching a computer. Approach the content in the way
which suits you best. Most importantly, do not let the technical aspects deter you from finding areas which will
benefit your own investigations the most.
I offer one last vital piece of information before we start. I encourage you to generate your own opinions as you
read along. You may disagree with me at times, which is ideal. That means you are really thinking about how all
of this applies to you. If everyone unconditionally agrees with every word I say, then I am probably not
saying anything interesting. If this book only presented content which no one could dispute, then there
was no need for the text. Please read with an open mind and willingness to try new things. Let's begin.
8 Section I

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER ONE

WHY VIRTUAL MACHINES?
What data is on your computer? Is there a virus, malicious software, or spyware hanging around from casual
browsing in questionable places? Does your internet cache include tracking cookies from Amazon, Facebook,
Google, and others? Is there evidence of your last investigation stored within your bookmarks, documents, or
download queue? If the answer is "maybe" or "I don't know" to any of these, you have a contaminated computer.
If your investigation enters court testimony, you may have a lot of explaining to do once an expert witness who
specializes in computer forensics takes the stand. If your screen captures display evidence unrelated to your
investigation, you could compromise the entire case. You may think I am being overly cautious, but we can no
longer take any chances when it comes to the purity of our online evidence.
This is where virtual machines (VMs) can eliminate most of our concerns, especially Linux VMs. Linux operating
systems have been a part of my OSINT investigations and trainings for many years. They are lightweight, run
on practically any hardware, cost nothing, and provide a level of security that cannot be obtained through
traditional operating systems such as Microsoft Windows. I can navigate to any malicious website, download
every virus possible, and eliminate all traces of my activity by simply deleting the VM and cloning a new machine.
Upon reboot, there are no viruses and everything works exactly as intended when the system was created. VMs
provide unlimited disposable environments.
Virtual machines conduct virtualization of a particular computer system. They are computer operating systems
on top of computer operating systems. Most commonly, a software program is executed within an operating
system, and individual operating systems can launch within that program. Each virtual machine is independent
from the other and the host operating system. The environment of one virtual machine has no impact on any
others. Quite simply, it is a way to have numerous computers within your single computer. You can safely
investigate a single target within a secure environment with no contamination from other investigations. You
will be able to clone an original VM in minutes and will no longer need to worry about persistent viruses, tracking
cookies, or leftover evidence.
Many years ago, this may have been intimidating to non-technical users. Today, implementing a Linux VM into
your investigations is relatively easy. Once you start exploring the world of online search techniques, you will
likely encounter malicious software or viruses at some point. If you investigate cyber criminals, this will be
sooner rather than later. The malicious code will almost always target Windows machines. By choosing Linux
as your investigations system, you greatly lessen the concern about infections.
By conducting all of your work in a VM, you protect the host operating system from infection. By isolating each
of your investigations into their own VM, you prevent any contamination from one to another. Finally, by
generating a new VM for every case, you protect the integrity of all past, current, and future investigations. I
cannot stress the importance of isolated VMs enough. If you ever face a motion of discovery for a copy of your
investigative environment, your VM will save you many headaches.
During my final year of government work, I testified at the trial of a person who was transporting minors to
several states to be sexually abused by paying offenders. The defense asked the judge to grant them full access
to my investigative computer for scrutiny of my work. Since I conducted the entire online investigation within
a VM, I convinced the judge that the defense should only receive a copy of the VM and not a clone of my entire
computer, which had been used for other cases. Handing over a 4 GB file was much easier than allowing my
hard drive to be cloned and scrutinized. I hope you see the value of not only conducting investigations within a
VM, but saving the state of your work for future inspection. This guide will revisit both of these considerations
many times.

Why Virtual Machines? 9

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

I have known the value of VMs for a long time, but I was only scratching the surface of their potential. In 2016,
I was contacted by David Westcott. We knew each other through our OSINT work, and he asked if I was
interested in creating a custom OSINT virtual machine. I had always considered this, but had concerns about
my skills at hardening Linux systems and pushing out finished builds. David had worked on other public Linux
releases, and was much more comfortable distributing custom systems. I began designing my dream OSINT
build, sending him weekly requests, and he began taking the ideas and executing them within a test product. By
2017, the first public version of our new operating system was released and titled Buscador (Seeker in Spanish).
This concept is not new. Many readers are likely familiar with Linux digital security distributions such as Kali.
We wanted that same experience for the OSINT community. Buscador was designed from the ground up with
considerations for OSINT investigations. The web browsers were pre-configured with custom settings and
extensions, and numerous OSINT software applications were already preconfigured to accept search queries.
An important part of Buscador was the applications. On many Linux builds, launching software is not similar
to traditional operating systems. While the software is installed, you must still launch a Terminal window and
type the specific commands required. This can be very difficult and unforgiving. There are seldom point-andclick icons that launch similar to Windows. This has always created a barrier between the geeks and the norms.
Either you know how to issue Linux commands or you do not. If you don't, then you never get to take advantage
of the power of Linux and Python. We wanted to eliminate that barrier. We wanted to make powerful Linux
programs easily accessible to everyone. My initial thought was to create Bash scripts similar to batch files in
Windows, but David came up with a much easier and more appropriate way. Every tool inside Buscador had its
own icon in the Dock, executed by clicking with a mouse, which walked the user through the menus. After
collecting the required data, each program executed the proper commands behind the scenes and delivered the
content directly to the user. We believed this to be unique in our community. Every person, at any skill level,
could use Buscador as a Linux virtual machine for immediate OSINT work.
Today, my views of pre-built virtual machines have changed. While I am proud of our work with Buscador, I
believe you should no longer rely on systems from third parties. Buscador is no longer updated with new
versions, and there is no online repository to apply updates to the many applications within the virtual machine.
I no longer offer a direct download link to Buscador from my site because security patches have not been applied
since 2019. Anyone using Buscador now receives errors due to outdated applications and most users do not
have the training to apply their own updates in order to correct any issues. Creating a virtual machine which was
user friendly had many benefits, but also some unintended consequences.
My goal in this book is to help you easily create and maintain your own OSINT Linux virtual machine with all
of the easy-to-use features of Buscador. Together we will install and test numerous OSINT applications. We
will then build custom scripts to make our daily usage of these applications easy. We will revisit and apply the
lessons from my previous books, but then expand our options into many new features. We will easily archive
our investigative work when warranted, and have the confidence to present our findings when demanded.
Overall, we should never rely on a single source for our OSINT tools. It is easier than ever to build your own
OSINT VM while keeping it updated. By the end of this guide, you will possess a custom OSINT Linux machine
which rivals any pre-built options available through various providers. Better yet, you will have built it yourself
and can replicate your steps whenever desired, while also being able to explain your actions.
In a perfect world, we would possess a dedicated computer for each online investigation which we conduct. We
do not live in that world, so virtual machines are the next best thing. You still conduct all of your actions on a
dedicated local machine, and do not need to rely on cloud-based services to access your work.
The next six chapters are divided for macOS, Windows, and Linux users. I encourage you to read through all of
them, but I respect anyone who skips to the chapters about their specific host. If you only possess one computer
for OSINT work, then you should only apply the two chapters which match the operating system within that
host. I present them in order of recommendation (macOS, Linux, then Windows), but everything within the
rest of this guide functions the same on any of these options.

10 Chapter 1

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER TWO

macOS HOST OPTIMIZATION
At risk of sounding hypocritical, I prefer modern macOS machines for most OSINT use over Windows and
Linux. Before readers of my book Extreme Privacy and listeners of my former podcast scold me, please consider
my reasons. I always have at least two computers which are part of my daily office usage. My personal machine
is a Linux laptop. It is only for personal activity and is never used as part of any investigations. My OSINT
machine is a MacBook Pro with an M-series Apple Silicon chip. It is blazing fast and executes virtual machines
better than my Linux host. It is also quite secure by default. I never touch the host operating system, and conduct
all investigations within various virtual machines. I rely on a free and open-source application called UTM for
VMs, which I find to be superior to the Linux and Windows options explained within the next chapters. Let's
tackle macOS.
In a perfect world, you have an unlimited budget and are ready to purchase new hardware which has no
association from your true identity to Apple. However, we do not live in that perfect world. Whether you are
ready to purchase new equipment or need to recycle current hardware for future use, this chapter will explain
all options and considerations. Let's start with new gear.
When Apple computers switched to their own ARM-based processors, instead of using trusted Intel chips, I
was bummed. Numerous applications no longer functioned correctly and virtual machines were troublesome.
Those days are over. The latest machines which include Apple's M-series processors are blazingly fast with low
power consumption and minimal heat. Apps work better than ever. I have yet to hear my internal fans on my
MacBook Pro, which was a daily occurrence on older machines. I now recommend the latest hardware available
and believe the products with Apple's chips are superior to those with Intel processors. If you are buying new
gear, make sure you are taking advantage of these benefits.
Selecting a machine is a very personal choice. Laptop options include the MacBook, MacBook Air, and MacBook
Pro while desktops include the Mac mini, Mac Pro, and Mac Studio. I have never owned a Mac desktop, but I
have purchased my share of Apple laptops. Today's least expensive small laptops will probably meet the needs
for casual users, but the MacBook Pro models are all I will consider. I believe the latest 14" MacBook Pro
laptops hit a sweet spot with productivity and value.
As I write this, the latest MacBook Pro's possess the M3, M3 Pro, and M3 Max processors. The previous
generations possess the M1/M2, M1/M2 Pro, and M1/M2 Max chips. I am writing this from a 2021 14"
MacBook Pro with the M1 Pro processor. What should you choose? Well, there are many conflicting opinions
on this, and mine might not match yours. However, here is my advice. If you want the most affordable M-series
machine, I believe any M1 or M2 processor on a MacBook Pro will suffice for OSINT work. If you want the
latest machine for longevity of the hardware with operating system support, then the M3 series might be best
for you. Either way, I recommend the Pro processors for most people. These provide more cores than the
standard chips and more overall power. However, the Max processors would be overkill for most readers.
I believe most readers would get by with the minimal number of processor cores available with the latest 14"
MacBook Pro, which is currently 11 (CPU) and 14 (GPU). Increasing the number of cores can assist with
resource-intensive tasks, but most users would never take advantage of the power. You know if you need the
extra boost. Since we will rely heavily on VMs, I recommend 32 GB of RAM. The standard 512 GB of storage
may work for some (1 TB is better), and external drives are more affordable than embedded storage upgrades.
My machine possesses a 4 TB internal storage drive because I work with large data sets (breach data) and need
the fastest possible drive when working with the files. While these are great specs, I overpaid for the luxury.
I firmly believe that the newer M3 2023 models are worth the minimal current price increase from the previous
2021 generation. However, I have seen brand-new previous-generation laptops deeply discounted at various
macOS Host Optimization 11

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Apple resellers. If I were buying a new machine today, it would definitely be the newer M-series model. If you
already possess an M1 machine which meets your needs, I see no reason to upgrade to the M2 or M3. The realworld comparisons will be negligible. If you upgrade from an Intel processor to an M1/M2/M3, I believe you
will be shocked at the difference. My point is that I recommend a machine with newer ARM-based M1, M2, or
M3 processors for most readers. While you can use older hardware with Intel chips, and almost all of this guide
will still apply, you are missing out on a phenomenal increase in power and battery life.
I will now assume that you possess your desired macOS device if you plan to go that route. Regardless of its
condition or previous usage, I believe every reader should now reformat the drive and apply a fresh install of
the operating system. This ensures that we are all on the same page for an identical experience. Make sure you
have completely backed up all important data before continuing, as the following processes will erase
everything on the drive.
If you purchased a brand new M1, M2, or later device which does not possess an existing Apple ID account,
and has never been turned on, you can skip to the next section. If you are working from an existing device,
regardless of the processor type, we should consider several tasks. First, update the operating system to the latest
available version. As I write this, my machine possesses Apple's Sonoma version of macOS, specifically 14.0. By
the time you read this, that exact number will change. I always recommend the latest stable version available,
and avoid any beta (test) builds. The following assumes you possess macOS Sonoma as your operating
system and are able to update to the latest version of macOS Sonoma. This will require devices made after
2018, but unsupported devices can still take advantage of the rest of this book using previous versions of macOS.
You will need to slightly modify the steps for your specific operating system.
Open the "System Settings" application; click the "General" option and then the "Software Update" setting.
Allow your machine to download and install all available updates, and then reboot. Once your machine is fully
updated, conduct the following within macOS to reinstall a fresh version of the operating system.
•
•
•
•
•

Open the "System Settings" application.
Click the "General" option and then "Transfer or Reset".
Click the "Erase All Content and Settings" button.
Enter your password within the "Erase Assistant".
Confirm all warnings and allow the process to complete.

Previous versions, such as Ventura, Monterey, or Big Sur, should also provide the option to reset the system
through either the "Erase Assistant" or "Recovery" mode. You will need to research options for your nonSonoma version. Upon reboot, you should possess a clean installation of macOS ready for initial configuration.
I will now assume that you either have a brand-new computer or a recently-reset device. Either way, it should
appear as a new installation when turned on for the first time. Regardless of your processor type or history with
the machine, the following applies as if you were a new user.
Upon launching macOS for the first time, your experience may be unique from mine. Updates to the operating
system from Apple and specific hardware configurations could present minor variations from the steps outlined
here. I took the following actions within a new macOS Sonoma installation, which had not been updated to the
latest release. It was the original stock Sonoma version 14.0. Yours may appear slightly different.
•
•
•
•
•
•

Select desired language and click the right arrow.
Select country and click "Continue".
Click "Customized Settings".
Confirm preferred language.
Confirm location.
Confirm dictation (required).

12 Chapter 2

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Click "Not Now" for Accessibility options.
If prompted, choose "My computer does not connect to the internet".
Click "Continue" and "Continue" again if requested to connect to the internet.
Click "Continue" for Data & Privacy notification.
Click "Not Now" for the Migration Assistant.
Click "Set Up Later" to bypass the Apple ID requirement.
Confirm by clicking "Skip".
Click "Agree" to the Terms and Conditions.
Confirm by clicking "Agree".
Create a local computer account. This should be a generic name, such as "Laptop" or "Computer", and
should include a very strong password which you can remember. I never provide any password hint to
this screen. Click "Continue" when finished.
Do not enable "Location Service" and click "Continue".
Confirm choice by clicking "Don't Use".
Select your desired time zone and click "Continue".
Deselect all analytics options and click "Continue".
Click "Set Up Later" to bypass "Screen Time" settings.
Disable Siri and click "Continue".
Choose your desired screen mode and click "Continue".
Launch "System Settings" from the Dock.
Select "Wi-Fi" from the left menu and disable it.
Disable both "Ask to join networks" and "Ask to join hotspots".
Select Bluetooth from the left menu and disable it.

Next, I want to configure the operating system's firewall. This is much different than the software firewall
explained in my macOS privacy guide. This is only responsible for the way the operating system treats incoming
connections. The following steps enable the firewall and configure it to block incoming connections unless we
specifically allow them when prompted. It also stops the OS from confirming incoming requests for
information.
•
•
•
•
•
•

Select "Network" from the left menu and select "Firewall".
Enable the Firewall and click "Options".
Disable "Automatically allow built-in software to receive...".
Disable "Automatically allow downloaded signed software to receive...".
Enable "Stealth mode".
Click "OK".

If you want to truly ensure that Siri is not listening in on your activity, you can conduct the following, which
may be redundant.
•
•
•

Select "Siri & Spotlight" from the left menu.
Click "Siri Suggestions & Privacy".
Click each option and disable all toggles, then click "Done".

Let's conduct a few more configurations within System Settings.
•
•
•

Select "Privacy & Security" from the left menu.
Select "Analytics & Improvements" and verify all are disabled.
Select "Privacy & Security" from the left menu.

macOS Host Optimization 13

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•
•
•
•

Select "Apple Advertising" and disable "Personalized Ads".
Select "General" from the left menu.
Select "Software Update".
Click the "i" in the circle and deselect everything.

Next is likely the most important setting within this chapter. By default, the data stored on your macOS system
is not encrypted. Physical access to your computer using sophisticated forensic equipment could extract your
data. If you lose your laptop, or it is stolen, there is a chance that the culprit could acquire your sensitive files.
The best way to prevent this is to apply full-disk encryption through Apple's FileVault with the following steps.
•
•
•
•
•

Select "Privacy & Security" from the left menu.
Click "Turn On..." next to "FileVault".
Enter your system password and click "Unlock".
Choose "Create a recovery key and do not use my iCloud account".
Document this recovery key somewhere safe and click "Continue".

Your device will now encrypt the drive, including all data stored within it. This is a vital piece of protection
which I believe should be enabled by default.
Your macOS device should now be more private and secure than it was, but I have a few additional settings I
like to apply. These are all personal preferences, and you may want to tweak these differently.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Select "Desktop & Dock" from the left menu.
Disable "Show suggested and recent apps in Dock".
Disable "Show recent apps in Stage Manager".
Select "Wallpaper" from the left menu.
Choose a solid color instead of the default macOS image.
Select "Lock Screen" from the left menu.
Change "Start Screen Saver when inactive" to "Never".
Change "Turn display off on battery when inactive" to "For 1 hour".
Change "Turn display off on power adapter when inactive" to "For 1 hour".
Change "Require password after..." to "Immediately".

These settings prevent the macOS screen saver from kicking in, and instead disable the display after a set amount
of time. This also makes sure that your password is required the moment a screen is disabled or the device is
placed into standby mode, such as closing the lid of a laptop.
Next, I want to modify the default way in which Apple allows you to see the data stored within your device.
Apple is proud of the "simple" features of macOS. Things just work and you are not bombarded with complex
options. However, you are also severely restricted. As one example, macOS hides all "hidden files" from view
within Finder. While most users do not care about this data, I do. Much of my most important data is within a
hidden "Library" folder to which I have no access. Let's fix that.
•
•
•

Open Finder and select the "Macintosh HD" in the left menu.
Select "Users", and then your device's username.
Notice the view of this folder, which should appear similar to the following.

14 Chapter 2

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

On your key
following im
our system

the
kup

While we
•
•
•
•
•

Cl
C
C
C
C

macOS Host Optimization 15

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

You should now have a stable and protected operating system ready for third-party applications. As a reminder,
you have not associated your new machine with an Apple ID, and hopefully you never will do so. Without this
connection, Apple has limited capabilities associating the activity occurring on your machine with a specific user
or account. By refusing to attach an Apple ID, you are much more private and secure. I have not assigned an
Apple ID to my current (or previous) machine, and I never will again in the future.
Encrypted External Drives
In a later chapter, I explain how to export virtual machines onto an external USB SSD, and the importance of
encrypting the data within this drive. I believe this applies to any external drive which we connect to our macOS
devices which will not be used to transfer data from our VM. You should NOT apply the following to a
drive you will later want to access within your OSINT Linux VM. This is only for drives which will be connected
to your macOS host for the purposes of backing up data. USB drives are often lost or stolen. Therefore, we
should always encrypt the data stored on them. This is not always easy. Sometimes, macOS hides the settings
we need to protect an external device. As an example, I inserted a small USB drive which was formatted as
"FAT32", which is common for universal drive access. I wanted to erase the drive and encrypt it. However, the
Disk Utility application (Applications > Utilities) only displayed the following options. Right-clicking the drive
in Finder also did not present an option to encrypt the drive.

The first step to take within the Disk Utility application is to select "Show All Devices" under the "View" menu.
Next, select the device (not the formatted volume) within the left menu and click the "Erase" button. This may
still only present volume formats which cannot be encrypted. Be sure to change the "Scheme" to "GUID
Partition Map". You should now see an option of "APFS (Encrypted)" under "Format". This option will encrypt
the entire external drive with macOS encryption. I believe this is the best option for users who will only need to
access this drive from a macOS system.

16 Chapter 2

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Rosetta
I highly recommend you ensure that Rosetta is installed on your system. This software, which is provided by
Apple, helps applications which do not support ARM-based devices run smoothly on new macOS systems. You
likely already have it installed, but you can confirm with the following command. You will need internet access
enabled for the rest of this chapter.
softwareupdate --install-rosetta --agree-to-license
Antivirus & Antimalware
Mac users do not have any built-in antivirus protection, and most do not need any. The software architecture
of Mac computers is much more secure, and viruses are rare (but they do still occur). I do not recommend free
commercial products such as Avast, Kaspersky, and others. They tend to be more of an annoyance than helpful,
and their business practices can be questionable. However, I do believe that it is irresponsible to have
absolutely no protection whatsoever on an investigative machine. I was once asked during testimony of a
federal trial to disclose any security software present within my investigation computers. I was glad my response
was not "none". This would have likely introduced a defense blaming an infected workspace. I was proud to
disclose my open-source solutions.
When I conduct investigations from a Mac computer, I always possess three software applications which can be
executed at any time without any of them running full-time in the background of my operating system. However,
we must first install Homebrew. Homebrew (often referred to as Brew) is a very beneficial program when there
is a need to install macOS software which would usually already be present on a Linux computer. It also happens
to have pre-configured versions of the applications I am about to discuss. The easiest way to install Brew is to
visit the website brew.sh and copy and paste the following command into the Terminal application
("Applications" > "Utilities" > "Terminal").
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
After Brew installation is complete, you will likely be presented with one or two commands which need to be
manually executed within Terminal. My installation presented the following notice.

This is unique to my installation, as my chosen username was "ventura" at the time. Copy any commands
presented here and paste them within the same Terminal window, executing each by striking return. Let's test
everything with a few commands.
•
•
•
•

brew doctor - This command confirms that Brew is configured properly and that all paths are set.
You should receive a notice that "Your system is ready to brew".
brew update - This command checks for any pending updates to Brew itself. You should receive a
response of "Already up to date".
brew upgrade - This command updates any installed programs. You should receive no response
since we have not installed anything.
brew analytics off - This command disables Brew's embedded analytics which monitor the
number of times an application is installed using Brew. These metrics are only used to understand how
users interact with the product, but I prefer to limit my exposure.

macOS Host Optimization 17

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

You are now ready to use Brew as a software installation repository. Treat this as a replacement for the App
Store, but it does not require an Apple ID. Let's use it to install our first three applications.
Task Explorer (objective-see.com/products/taskexplorer.html): This free Mac-only application is simple yet
effective. It identifies all running processes and queries them through a service called Virus Total. If it finds a
suspicious file, it alerts you with a red flag in the lower-right corner. Clicking the flag allows you to see more
details about the potential threat. I execute this program weekly from any Mac machine I am using. If you have
picked up a virus on your host, this program should quickly identify it. However, it does not remove any
infections. For that, you will need to research any suspicious files. Install this application with the following.
brew install --cask taskexplorer
KnockKnock (objective-see.com/products/knockknock.html): Similar to the previous option, which is
maintained by the same company, this program conducts a scan of your Mac device. However, it is looking for
persistent programs which are set to launch upon boot. Since most viruses inject themselves to launch the
moment your computer starts, this program may identify threats which were missed by the previous program if
they were not running at the time. After opening this application, click the scan button and allow the process to
complete. You will receive a notification about any suspicious files. I execute this weekly along with Task
Explorer. Please note that it also only notifies you of issues, and does not remove them. Install this application
with the following Terminal command.
brew install --cask knockknock
ClamAV (clamav.net): ClamAV (not to be confused with the unnecessary paid option of ClamXAV) is a
community-driven and open-source antivirus database, which is freely available to anyone. It usually does not
score very high on "Top 10 Antivirus" websites, which are commonly paid advertisements. However, it is
completely free; does not run on your system non-stop; only executes when you desire; and can be completely
removed easily. Unfortunately, there is no easy software installation process, and no point-and-click application.
You will need to manually update the database through a Terminal command, then scan your system. ClamAV
does not remove any viruses by default, it only discloses the presence and location of suspicious files. In my use,
ClamAV has never found a virus which impacted a macOS computer. Instead, it has identified numerous
malicious files which target Windows machines, but were present on my system (mostly as email attachments).
This notification allowed me to manually remove those files, which could prevent future infection of my
Windows virtual machines. Remember, you may not NEED antivirus software on your OSINT macOS host,
but possessing it will allow you to defend any scrutiny if your investigation should appear in court. The following
instructions will configure macOS to be better protected. Enter the following commands, hitting "Return" after
each line, into the same Terminal application previously used.
brew install clamav
sudo mkdir /usr/local/sbin
sudo chown -R `whoami`:admin /usr/local/sbin
brew link clamav
cd /opt/homebrew/etc/clamav/
cp freshclam.conf.sample freshclam.conf
sed -ie 's/^Example/#Example/g' freshclam.conf
These steps will install ClamAV; switch to the installation directory; make a copy of the configuration file; and
then modify the configuration file to allow ClamAV to function. You are now ready to update your antivirus
database and conduct a scan. Type the following commands into Terminal, striking return on your keyboard
after each line.
freshclam -v
clamscan -r -i /

18 Chapter 2

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

The first option will download all virus definition updates, and should be executed before each scan. The second
option conducts a scan of the entire computer, and will only prompt you with details of found viruses. While it
may appear to be dormant, it is working, and will notify you upon completion. All of these commands must be
exact. Always copy and paste them instead of manually typing from the book.
ClamAV may occasionally present a false-positive report of a virus. Do not panic. Research the file on the
internet and identify the issues. If you receive reports of malicious files within email, simply delete those
messages. Note that the above scans only SEARCH for viruses, they do not REMOVE threats. If you would
like to conduct a scan and automatically remove suspicious files, you must conduct a different command. Please
note this could be dangerous, and could permanently remove necessary files. I always run a scan, research the
threats found, and execute the following scan ONLY if I am confident the files should be removed.
clamscan -i -r --remove=yes /
I confess I do not execute ClamAV often. A full scan can take hours and is unlikely to locate threats not found
by the previous two applications. However, Task Explorer and KnockKnock do not protect against malicious
applications which target Windows environments. ClamAV may find files which are malicious even if they are
not a direct threat to your Mac computer. If you conduct government investigations, especially those which may
result in prosecution, I believe you have an obligation to possess and execute some type of traditional antivirus
software. ClamAV is a safe and reliable option. If I were still investigating federal crimes, I would conduct a
complete scan of my Mac computer with all three of these programs weekly. If nothing else, it allows me to
confirm in my report that my machine was clean.
Telemetry
Apple computers collect and send as much, if not more, telemetry as Windows machines. Apple insists this is
for your benefit and to help create a fun and efficient computer experience. If you would like to stop Apple
from collecting any details about your usage, you will need to install a software firewall application. I use a paid
program called Little Snitch, but a free option called LuLu may work just as well for your needs.
First, you should question whether you need this type of protection on an OSINT machine. As I stated
previously, I never conduct any investigations within the macOS operating system. I only rely on virtual
machines, and my activities within those machines are not seen by Apple. Since these firewall applications cannot
intercept data within the VMs we will create later, a firewall might be overkill for this situation. I explain more
options in my macOS privacy guide for personal macOS devices. If you do not conduct investigations within
the operating system, and rely only on virtual machines as explained throughout this guide, then I do not believe
a software firewall is as important.
VPN Configuration
Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) provide a good mix of both security and privacy by routing your internet
traffic through a secure tunnel. The tunnel goes to the VPN's server and encrypts all the data between your
device and that server. This ensures that anyone monitoring your traffic before it reaches the distant server will
not find usable, unencrypted data. Privacy is also afforded through the use of a distant server. Because your
traffic appears to be originating from the VPN's server, websites will have a more difficult time tracking you,
aggregating data on you, and pinpointing your location. While conducting OSINT research, a VPN prevents
websites from knowing your true location or company network details. If you visit your target's personal website,
you do not want that person knowing any identifiable information about the connection.
Virtual Private Networks are not a perfect anonymity solution. It is important to note that VPNs offer you
privacy, not anonymity. The best VPNs for privacy purposes are paid subscriptions with reputable providers.
There are several excellent paid VPN providers out there and I strongly recommend them over free providers.
Free providers often monetize through very questionable means, such as data aggregation. Paid VPN providers

macOS Host Optimization 19

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

monetize directly by selling you a service, and reputable providers do not collect or monetize your data. Paid
providers also offer a number of options which will increase your overall privacy and security.
I currently use and recommend Proton VPN. I offer further information and the best affiliate purchase links on
my site at inteltechniques.com/vpn.html. Purchases include unlimited use, connection to multiple devices
simultaneously, and fast speeds. I pay for my VPN with Bitcoin in an alias name, but that may be overkill for
many readers. For most readers, I recommend sticking with the standard macOS application provided by the
VPN company. These branded apps should suffice for most needs. Proton VPN can be downloaded with the
following Terminal command.
brew install --cask protonvpn
Once installed, simply provide your account credentials and launch your VPN connection. Fortunately, Proton
VPN has made their applications completely open-source. This makes it much more difficult to hide malicious
programming within them.
My VPN policy is quite simple, but my opinions about VPN companies can be complex. Any time that I am
connected to the internet from my macOS device, I am connected through my VPN. Any VMs running within
this host are also protected with the same VPN IP address. I rely on Proton VPN through their app on my
macOS device only while I am traveling. Home devices are protected through a firewall with Proton VPN, as
explained in Extreme Privacy: VPNs & Firewalls. At home, I never need to launch a VPN within my computer
itself due to the VPN firewall.
Password Manager
While you conduct your online investigations, you will likely create and maintain numerous accounts and profiles
across various services. Documenting the profile details, including passwords, for these services can be a
daunting task. A password manager provides a secure database to store all of the various settings in regard to
these profiles. My choice is KeePassXC. I believe we should all have a robust password manager on our OSINT
host machine, and not necessarily within a VM. Since we may often delete, rebuild, or export our VMs, storing
our passwords within them may be risky. If we store all passwords on the host machine which runs the VMs,
we always have access to any account.
KeePassXC is an open-source password manager that does not synchronize content to the internet. There are
many convenient online password managers which are secure and keep all of your devices ready for automated
logins. Those are great for personal security, and millions of people are safely using them. However, it is not
enough for our needs. Since you will be storing data connected to online investigations, you should protect it in
an offline solution. KeePassXC is cross-platform and free. It will work identically on Mac, Windows, or Linux.
The following installs it on macOS.
brew install --cask keepassxc
Next, conduct the following as an exercise.
•
•
•
•
•
•

Launch KeePassXC and select "Database" > "New Database".
Provide a name to your new password database, such as Passwords, and click "Continue".
Move the encryptions settings slider completely to the right and click "Continue".
Assign a secure password which you can remember but is not in use anywhere else.
Click "Done" and select a safe location to store the database.
Close the program and verify you can open the database with your password.

You now have a secure password manager and database ready for use on your host machine. Whenever you
start using Linux virtual machines, as explained soon, all of your passwords will be available within the host, and

20 Chapter 2

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

the VM will store no credentials. Next, assume you are ready to change the password to your covert Facebook
profile. Navigate to the menu which allows change of password. Next, conduct the following within KeePassXC.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Right-click within the left column and select "New Group".
Name the group Facebook and click "OK".
Select the Facebook group on the left menu.
In the right panel, right-click and select "New Entry".
Provide the name of your covert account, username, and URL of the site.
Click the black dice icon to the right of the "Password" field.
Click the eyeball icon.
Slide the password length slider to at least 40 characters.
Copy the generated password and paste into the "Password" and "Repeat" fields.
Change your Facebook password to this selection within your account.
Click "OK" and save the database.

You successfully created a new, secure, randomly generated password for your covert profile. You will not
remember it, but your password manager will. Allow your password manager to generate a new random
password containing letters, numbers, and special characters. If the website you are using allows it, choose a
password length of at least 50 characters. When you need to log in, you will copy and paste from the password
manager. For each site which you change a password, your password manager will generate a new, unique string.
This way, WHEN the site you are using gets breached, the passwords collected will not work anywhere else.
More importantly, recycled passwords will not expose your true accounts after the breached data becomes
public. There should be only a handful of passwords you memorize, which brings us to the next point.
The password to open your password manager should be unique. It should be something you have never used
before. It should also contain letters, numbers, and special characters. It is vital that you never forget this
password, as it gives you access to all of the credentials that you do not know. I encourage users to write it down
in a safe place until memorized. It is vital to make a backup of your password database. When you created a new
database, you chose a name and location for the file. As you update and save this database, make a copy of the
file on an encrypted USB drive. Be sure to always have a copy somewhere safe, and not on the internet. If your
computer would completely crash, and you lose all of your data, you would also lose all of the new passwords
you have created. This would be a huge headache. Prepare for data loss now.
I no longer recommend the KeePassXC browser extension for OSINT investigations. There is nothing insecure
about it, but it requires you to copy the master database within any virtual machines unnecessarily, and technically
provides some connection from one investigation to another within the VM. This is not a huge deal, but we
should always be willing to scrutinize our strategies and become more secure investigators.
By keeping your passwords in an offline database, you eliminate this entire attack surface. By keeping your
password manager ready in your host machine, you will have immediate access to it regardless of which virtual
machine you are using during an investigation.
Summary
I will assume you now possess a sanitized macOS device ready for your investigations through a VM. Ideally,
you will never conduct any personal or investigative tasks within this environment. It will only serve as the host
for the many VMs which you will soon create.

macOS Host Optimization 21

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER THREE
macOS VM SOFTWARE

This is where I deviate heavily from some previous editions. In the past, I relied solely on VirtualBox VM
software for all Windows, macOS, and Linux machines. While VirtualBox still works well for Windows and
Linux, it is not recommended for Apple devices. There are two reasons, and the first is Apple silicon chips. All
modern (and future) macOS machines now use Apple's own processors based on the ARM architecture.
VirtualBox does not fully support this, and maybe never will. Second, Apple's operating system security can be
a hurdle when installing VirtualBox. With almost every application update, I need to confirm that I want the
software installed; modify system security settings; and allow my system to reboot. I present a much simpler and
more stable option for Apple devices called UTM (mac.getutm.app).
UTM is a free open-source virtualization and emulation program which allows macOS users to launch practically
any virtual system within machines which have either Intel or ARM (Apple) processors. This means it will work
with any Apple computer, regardless of the hardware. UTM employs Apple's Hypervisor virtualization
framework to run ARM operating systems on Apple Silicon at near native speeds. On Intel-based machines,
traditional x86/x64 operating systems can be virtualized. In addition, lower performance emulation is available
to run x86/x64 on Apple Silicon as well as ARM64 on Intel. This allows us practically any option desired, and
is unique to this program. Even the paid alternatives do not offer all of these features. The software relies on
QEMU, which has always been otherwise difficult to configure. I now rely solely on UTM for all VMs on my
macOS machine, and I find it to be superior to a Windows or Linux host. If you have Homebrew installed, the
following Terminal command downloads and installs UTM.
brew install --cask utm
Upon opening UTM, you have the option to "Create a New Virtual Machine". If this is ever not visible, you can
replicate the action by clicking "File" > "New" within the program's menu. Choosing this selection presents
options which may be new to readers. You can select to either "Virtualize" or "Emulate" your new VM. We
should understand the difference.
Virtualize: This process is accomplished with the help of hardware, typically the hypervisor. It virtually shares
the hardware resources of a single physical computer into multiple virtual devices by allocating dedicated
resources from the host system to the newly created virtual system. This is typically much faster than emulation
and the option we will choose for our new VM. If you have an M1, M2, or newer Apple processor, you cannot
virtualize x86/x64 operating systems, you can only virtualize ARM-based systems. Similarly, you cannot
virtualize ARM-based systems from a x86/x64 machine. When using virtualization, the operating system must
be created for the processor present within the device.
Emulate: This process is much more forgiving, but can be slow. It uses software to emulate specific hardware.
This means that the VM needs a software interpreter translating its code into the host system's language. This
eats up a lot of resources and can make things drag. Since the VM does not run on the host's physical hardware,
emulation is slower when compared to virtualization. By contrast, in virtualization, the guest system gets direct
access to the host's allocated resources, resulting in better speed. It is great to have this option, but we will not
use it within this chapter.
UTM macOS VM on macOS Host (ARM Processor)
Let's build our first VM within UTM together. If you own an Apple computer with an M1, M2, M3, or later
Apple processor, you can easily run multiple macOS virtual machines within UTM. This provides a "test" copy
of macOS for any experimentation without modifying your host operating system. I find these macOS VMs to
run almost as fast as the native host, which is quite impressive. The following applies only to Apple processors.

22 Chapter 3

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

First, you must download an "IPSW" file from a legitimate Apple source. I prefer to visit the following website
and download the latest "Final" IPSW file, such as UniversalMac_14.2.1_23C71_Restore.ipsw.
https://mrmacintosh.com/apple-silicon-m1-full-macos-restore-ipsw-firmware-files-database/
The full URL source of the file was as follows.
https://updates.cdn-apple.com/2023FallFCS/fullrestores/052-22662/ECE59A41-DACC-4CA5-AB23FDED1A4567DE/UniversalMac_14.2.1_23C71_Restore.ipsw
Once you have the IPSW file on your machine, you are ready to continue with installation.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Launch UTM and click "Create a New Virtual Machine".
Choose "Virtualize" and then "macOS 12+".
Click "Browse" and select your downloaded IPSW file.
Modify the RAM to 50 % of your current resources.
Modify the CPU to half of the "Performance" cores. My 10-core M1 Pro has 8 performance cores, so
I chose "4" for this option.
Click "Continue"; specify the desired size of the drive; click "Continue", then "Save".
Click the "Settings" icon and click the "Display" menu.
Choose the display of your device, enabling "HiDPI".
Click "Save" and exit the settings if necessary.

If you want a shared drive for accessing files across each version of macOS, complete the following.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

From the macOS host, open "System Settings" > "General" > "Sharing".
Enable "File Sharing" and click the information button.
Click the "+" and browse to the desired shared folder.
Click "Add" then "Done".
In the UTM program, open the settings for the macOS VM.
Ensure "Network" is set to "Shared Network" and click "Save".
In the UTM VM settings, click the shared directory menu and select "Browse".
Select the same folder previously shared and click "Open".
Launch the macOS VM and open Finder.
Go to "Finder" > "Settings" > "Sidebar" and enable "Connected Servers".
Click "Network" within Finder and double-click the host.
Click "Connect As…" and enter your host OS credentials.
Enable "Remember this password…" and click "Connect".

If you want to temporarily disable internet connectivity from your host device while you configure your
operating system and firewall, conduct the following before the initial boot.
•

Right-click the "Network" menu item and select "Remove".

Conduct the following to re-enable internet connectivity from the host machine.
•
•
•

Select the desired VM within UTM.
Click the "Settings" icon in the upper-right.
Click "New" in the left menu and select "Network", then click "Save".

macOS VM Software 23

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

It is important to note that UTM uses Apple's native virtualization framework on Apple Silicon hardware.
Therefore, connections within any UTM virtual machine cannot be intercepted by a software firewall, such as
Little Snitch. This is why you never see options to block traffic from within UTM VMs. I do not have an issue
with this because I am mostly running Linux VMs within UTM which do not possess abusive telemetry.
However, you may encounter a scenario where you want to run a VM without any network connectivity to the
internet. When this occurs, conduct the previous steps.
Before launching, I recommend modification to the screen resolution. I right-clicked on my machine within
UTM and selected the Display menu item. I then changed the resolution to 3840 x 2160 and activated "HiDPI".
This substantially increased the VM resolution for my external monitor. You should play with these options
until you find the setting appropriate for your machine.
Launch your new macOS VM. You may need to confirm the installation by pressing "OK". Allow the process
to complete, which may take some time. Once complete, you have a fully-functioning macOS VM which should
be as smooth and responsive as the native host. You have the ability to copy files to and from the VM when
needed. It could be used to test software before committing on your macOS host or to conduct sensitive activity
which may be inappropriate for your daily host. I conduct many online investigations within both macOS and
Linux virtual machines.
Note that the drive for your macOS VM will be 100% full. Whatever size you set will create a file that size for
the VM. There is currently no shrinking option for macOS VMs, but we will shrink our Windows and Linux
VMs later. Let's take a look at the file we generated by creating this VM. Within UTM, right-click on your new
macOS VM and select "Show in Finder". You should be presented the Finder application which has been
navigated to the default VM storage folder within macOS, which should be the following.
/Users/[your macOS username]/Library/Containers/UTM/Data/Documents/
In my example, the single file holding all of the data within my macOS VM is called "macOS.utm" and is 68.77
GB in size. This file size will never change regardless of the actual amount of data held within the VM. This
only applies to macOS VMs, and I will show the difference with a Windows VM in a moment. Knowing how
to open this storage location will be important when I explain VM backups and archives.
UTM Windows VM on macOS Host
UTM can also host Windows VMs, but they must be based on ARM builds if you want them to load in M1 or
newer processors. This section is completely optional. I respect if some people prefer to avoid Windows
altogether. If you would like the practice, you will need an official Windows 11 ARM-based ISO installation file.
Microsoft does not make this easy, but downloading a Windows installation file is completely legal. I prefer to
use a program called CrystalFetch, which obtains Windows installation media directly from Microsoft and
converts it into the proper format. It can be installed within macOS with the following command.
brew install --cask crystalfetch
After installation, conduct the following.
•
•
•
•
•
•

Launch the program.
Select "Windows 11", "Apple Silicon", and your desired language.
Choose the desired edition (Default is fine).
Click "Download" and accept the terms.
Allow the download and conversions process to complete.
When prompted, select the desired file storage location and click "Move".

You now have a Windows 11 ISO, which can be used to create a VM within UTM with the following steps.
24 Chapter 3

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Within UTM, select "File" then "New".
Choose "Virtualize" and then "Windows".
Click "Browse" and select your downloaded ISO file.
Click "Continue".
Modify the RAM to 50 % of your current resources.
Modify the CPU to half of the "Performance" cores. My 10-core M1 Pro has 8 performance cores, so
I chose "4" for this option.
Click "Continue" and specify the desired size of the drive.
Click "Continue" then "Save".
Click the "Display" menu item and change the Display Card to "virtio-ramfb".
Ensure all possible check boxes are selected.
Click "Save" and exit the settings if necessary.

If you want a shared drive for accessing files across each OS, complete the following.
•
•

In the UTM window, click "Browse" next to "Shared Directory".
Select the desired shared host folder and click "Open".

Launch the Windows 11 VM and press any button to install Windows 11. You can now go through the
installation process and declare you "don't have a product key". When prompted within Windows, install the
UTM Guest Tools. Once Windows 11 is successfully installed, shut the VM down and "clear" the installation
file from within the VM settings CD-ROM. If you have a Windows 11 license, you can apply it within the VM
once fully rebooted. If not, you can either purchase a license online or run this VM in trial mode, which will
eventually expire based on the version downloaded. If desired, you could replicate all of these steps to create a
new VM after the expiration and continue use of Windows 11 for free. You now have the UTM for macOS
basics covered. Later, we will use UTM to create the ultimate Linux OSINT VM for macOS. Next, we should
understand some advanced options within UTM.
UTM USB Connection
UTM offers simple USB device access for Windows and Linux VMs. If you are running a macOS VM within
macOS, the previous strategy of a shared folder works best. While any USB drive is attached to the host
computer, select the "USB Devices" icon in the upper-right of the UTM Windows or Linux VM window. This
presents a list of attached USB devices. You can select the USB storage device which will remove it from the
host (macOS) and allow access within the VM (Windows or Linux). Note that this transfer will likely generate a
macOS warning about removing a drive without ejecting it first, but there should be no harm in this. If you plug
in a USB device while the VM is running, it should prompt you to choose where you want it used (host or VM).
By default, UTM uses a generic USB 3.0 driver for access to external USB drives. This should work for most
purposes. On occasion, I have had to switch this to the USB 2.0 driver when inserting older USB drives. If you
encounter a USB drive which cannot be recognized by the VM, shut down the VM and go to the UTM VM
settings. Change "USB 3.0" to "USB 2.0" (or vice versa) within the "Input" tab. You can also disable USB
support entirely in this menu, but it is generally not recommended.
UTM Read-Only VM Execution
One of my favorite features of UTM is the ability to launch a VM without saving any changes. This is beneficial
when you want to test something but do not want to cause any irreversible damage to the VM. I often launch a
pristine Linux VM in a read-only environment to install new software for the first time to identify any potential
issues. Once I know I want to commit to the application, I shut down the read-only VM and relaunch it in
normal mode. Before launching any Windows or Linux VM, right-click the desired VM and select "Run without
saving changes". Any activity conducted during this session will not be preserved within the VM.
macOS VM Software 25

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

UTM VM Exports and Clones
While a VM is shut down and the VM window is closed, you will see options within the main UTM application
for the selected VM in the upper-right. Let's focus on the "Clone selected VM" and "Share" menu options.
Clicking the clone option simply presents an option to make a full clone. This allows us to preserve our original
VM and make copies whenever we want to conduct an investigation. The share option allows us to export an
entire VM within a ".utm" file for easy archiving or sharing. The dialogue will prompt you to choose the export
location. As a reminder, you can always see the location of all VMs within UTM by navigating to the following
directory within the macOS host.
/Users/[your macOS username]/Library/Containers/UTM/Data/Documents/
If this location is not convenient, and I believe it is not, you can move your VM to any folder desired with the
"Move selected VM" option within the main windows. I keep all of mine within a dedicated folder on my macOS
host. Note that you can only move them once using the button option, and this is likely unnecessary for most
users.
UTM Snapshots
UTM offers a Terminal-based snapshot option, but it is not similar to VirtualBox's offering which will be
discussed soon. Personally, I never use UTM snapshots and always rely on clones or exports, as previously
explained.
UTM Issues
Unlike using VirtualBox within various Windows and Linux machines, UTM within a macOS system has very
few issues. The software was designed only for macOS which reduces some of the typical cross-platform bugs.
Since it is made for Apple hardware, it seems much more fluid than other software. Once you have experienced
UTM on a macOS, you may never want to touch other options again.
UTM VM Size & Shrinking
The hard drive space of your Windows and Linux VMs will keep growing unnecessarily. When you make changes
within the VM, all of the data is somewhat preserved, even deleted content. Fortunately, UTM makes the
shrinking process easy. While a Windows or Linux VM is shut down, select it within the main UTM window.
Go to the Settings for that VM and select the IDE drive of your operating system within the left menu. Click
the "Reclaim Space" button and confirm the option. You will see the size decrease if free space was available. I
do this after every major update to any Windows or Linux VM.
UTM VPN Issues
Several readers have reported that using the macOS Proton VPN application in "Kill Switch" mode blocks all
internet to a VM. I was able to replicate this, and now recommend disabling "Kill Switch" mode in the Proton
VPN host application while using a UTM VM.
Summary
I currently rely on a 2021 MacBook Pro (M1) for all of my online investigations. I only use virtual machines
within UTM and possess no other virtualization software on my machine. I simply find UTM to be much more
stable than the equivalents for other operating systems. I can quickly launch multiple Linux, Windows, and
macOS VMs for my OSINT needs. A Linux VM boots in less than 10 seconds; a Windows VM in less than 19
seconds; and macOS VMs somehow boot in only 6 seconds. I can easily test software and customizations
without much of a time commitment. We will create our ultimate Linux machine soon.

26 Chapter 3

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER FOUR

LINUX HOST OPTIMIZATION
I suspect very few readers possess a Linux host machine for their OSINT investigations, but I find it much more
reliable than Windows. Of macOS, Linux, and Windows, a Linux host running a Linux VM will present the
fewest software errors. Consider some recommendations for Linux machines.
Complete System Wipe
Most Linux systems have an embedded reset function, but I never use them. Whenever I want to reinstall a
Linux operating system, I do so from a bootable USB drive which contains Ventoy. Ventoy allows you to place
various Linux ISO files at the root of a USB drive and boot to it. After boot, you can select which OS you want
to execute or install. The Ventoy downloads page presents options for Windows, Linux, or a live ISO. These
likely forward to https://github.com/ventoy/Ventoy/releases. The following will create your own Ventoy
bootable USB drive.
•
•
•
•
•
•

Download the Linux version, titled similarly to "ventoy-1.0.79-linux.tar. gz".
Decompress the file, which should present a folder similar to "ventoy-1.0.79".
Open Terminal and navigate to the directory of the folder.
Execute "./VentoyGUI.x86_64" in Terminal.
This should present the Ventoy installation application.
Choose the desired USB device and click "Install", then confirm when prompted.

Note that this will overwrite all data on the device. Your Ventoy boot device is now ready for use, but it does
not contain any bootable operating systems. This is where Ventoy excels. Instead of manually configuring
multiple systems for boot, you only need to possess the bootable ISO files for any systems desired. The drive
has an ExFat formatted partition which can hold any type of data. This means we can use it as a storage drive
and multi-boot drive. I downloaded all of the ISO files for the various systems which I may need, such as
Debian, and then re-titled the files to match my desired display. I then inserted this new drive within my
computer and rebooted. I was sure to select the proper USB boot option within the BIOS (Basic Input / Output
System). I could then select any of the downloaded operating systems and each would boot as if I had inserted
a dedicated USB boot device. The files will appear exactly as the file names on the drive. The remainder of the
drive can be used to store any data desired. Only available bootable Linux and Windows systems will display
within the Ventoy boot screen. This makes it easy to install or re-install a Linux operating system.
I use a SanDisk Extreme Portable 1TB USB SSD (https://amzn.to/3BLIHwd). It loads live systems without
any delay or stuttering, and installs new systems in a flash. It also allows me to use the remaining 95% of the
drive for fast file transfer. Once you are accustomed to the speed of a fast USB SSD for booting and installation
of Linux systems, you can never go back to slow flash drives. Today, I keep my multi-boot with me at all times.
Often, I forget that booting is the main purpose since I also use it to transfer large files. The best-case scenario
is that you will never need it. If you do, you will be glad you made these efforts.
Antivirus & Antimalware
Much like the Apple section, I recommend possessing ClamAV on your Linux OSINT host for the same
reasons. If your OSINT work should ever be scrutinized in court, the opposing counsel may raise concern over
the lack of antivirus protection. This attorney will know nothing about Linux system security, but neither will
the judge or the jury. This is more about "checking the boxes" of a secure machine and less about the protection
from Linux-targeted viruses. It is easier to simply testify that you possess security software and confirm that
scans are run on a schedule than to explain why your Linux machine does not need antivirus software. You are

Linux Host Optimization 27

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

always more likely to identify viruses which target Windows machines than Linux, but this is the game we play.
These could be attachments within email messages which are not a threat to your Linux installation, but should
still be removed. The following commands within Terminal installs ClamAV.
sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y clamav clamav-daemon
You are now ready to update your antivirus database and conduct a scan. Type the following commands into
Terminal to stop the service, update the database, and restart the service.
sudo systemctl stop clamav-freshclam
sudo freshclam
sudo systemctl start clamav-freshclam
These commands download all virus definition updates and should be executed before each scan. We now have
two options for a scan of our entire drive. The first scans your data and notifies you of potential viruses.
However, it does not remove any files. I always execute this option first. The second command repeats the scan
while deleting any infected files.
clamscan -r -i /
clamscan -r -i --remove=yes /
ClamAV may occasionally present a false-positive report of a virus. Research the file on the internet and identify
the issues. If you receive reports of malicious files within email, simply delete those messages.
Telemetry
Most Linux machines collect very little telemetry and allow us to easily prevent data from being sent from our
machine. Your Linux host may have telemetry enabled. During installation, Ubuntu presents options to disable
common telemetry, but let's assume Ubuntu users did not modify the proper settings. The following commands
disable telemetry within Ubuntu, and there is no harm executing these if using another system.
sudo apt purge -y apport apport-symptoms ubuntu-report whoopsie
sudo apt autoremove -y
System Cleaner
I recommend BleachBit as my weekly Linux system cleaner. Type the following to install the application.
sudo apt install bleachbit
Clicking the nine dots in the Dock will present two BleachBit applications. The second icon executes the
software with administrative privileges and is the option I choose. Upon first launch, click "Close" to accept
default configuration. Select every option except the "Free disk space" feature. Click "Preview" to see a report
of recommended cleaning. Click "Clean" to execute the process. I run this program weekly.
Full-Disk Encryption
Much like the macOS section, I always recommend full-disk encryption within any Linux host (but not Linux
VMs). Some Linux operating systems, such as Pop!_OS, make this easy and the default setting during installation.
Other systems, such as Ubuntu, make this option easy during installation, but you must change the default
setting. If you plan to re-install Ubuntu as your host operating system, this is a great time to make sure the full
disk is encrypted. Again, this only applies to a host computer running Linux, not a Linux VM. Every Linux

28 Chapter 4

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

system is unique, but Ubuntu presents an "Advanced Features" option during the installation process which
allows you to "Use LVM with the new Ubuntu installation" and "Encrypt the new Ubuntu installation for
security". This then presents an option to generate the password for the disk encryption. Always follow the
recommendations for your chosen Linux host.
VPN Configuration
Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) provide a good mix of both security and privacy by routing your internet
traffic through a secure tunnel. The tunnel goes to the VPN's server and encrypts all the data between your
device and that server. This ensures that anyone monitoring your traffic before it reaches the distant server will
not find usable, unencrypted data. Privacy is also afforded through the use of a distant server. Because your
traffic appears to be originating from the VPN's server, websites will have a more difficult time tracking you,
aggregating data on you, and pinpointing your location. While conducting OSINT research, a VPN prevents
websites from knowing your true location or company network details. If you visit your target's personal website,
you do not want that person knowing any identifiable information about the connection.
Virtual Private Networks are not a perfect anonymity solution. It is important to note that VPNs offer you
privacy, not anonymity. I currently use and recommend Proton VPN. Go to inteltechniques.com/vpn.html
for further information and the best affiliate purchase links. Purchases include unlimited use, connection to
multiple devices simultaneously, and fast speeds. I pay for my VPN with Bitcoin in an alias name, but that may
be overkill for many readers. For most readers, I recommend sticking with the standard Linux application
provided by the VPN company. These branded apps should suffice for most needs. Proton VPN can be
downloaded by following their official instructions online at https://protonvpn.com/support/official-linuxvpn-debian. Once installed, simply provide your account credentials and launch your VPN connection.
Fortunately, Proton VPN has made their applications completely open-source. This makes it much more
difficult to hide malicious programming within them.
My VPN policy is quite simple, but my opinions about VPN companies can be complex. Any time that I am
connected to the internet from my Linux device, I am connected through my VPN. Any VMs running within
this host are also protected with the same VPN IP address. I rely on Proton VPN through their app on my
Linux device only while I am traveling. Home devices are protected through a firewall with Proton VPN, as
explained in Extreme Privacy: VPNs & Firewalls. At home, I never need to launch a VPN within my computer
itself due to the VPN firewall.
Password Manager
While you conduct your online investigations, you will likely create and maintain numerous accounts and profiles
across various services. Documenting the profile details, including passwords, for these services can be a
daunting task. A password manager provides a secure database to store all of the various settings in regard to
these profiles. My choice is KeePassXC. I believe we should all have a robust password manager on our OSINT
host machine, and not necessarily within a VM. Since we may often delete, rebuild, or export our VMs, storing
our passwords within them may be risky. If we store all passwords on the host machine which runs the VMs,
we always have access to any account.
KeePassXC is an open-source password manager that does not synchronize content to the internet. There are
many convenient online password managers which are secure and keep all of your devices ready for automated
logins. Those are great for personal security, and millions of people are safely using them. However, it is not
enough for our needs. Since you will be storing data connected to online investigations, you should protect it in
an offline solution. KeePassXC is cross-platform and free. It will work identically on Mac, Windows, or Linux.
If you are running any Debian-based distribution, the following commands will install it.
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:phoerious/keepassxc
sudo apt update && sudo apt install keepassxc

Linux Host Optimization 29

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Next, conduct the following as an exercise.
•
•
•
•
•
•

Launch KeePassXC and select "Database" > "New Database".
Provide a name to your new password database, such as Passwords, and click "Continue".
Move the encryption settings slider completely to the right and click "Continue".
Assign a secure password which you can remember but is not in use anywhere else.
Click "Done" and select a safe location to store the database.
Close the program and verify you can open the database with your password.

You now have a secure password manager and database ready for use on your host machine. Whenever you
start using Linux virtual machines, as explained soon, all of your passwords will be available within the host, and
the VM will store no credentials. Next, assume you are ready to change the password to your covert Facebook
profile. Navigate to the menu which allows change of password. Next, conduct the following within KeePassXC.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Right-click within the left column and select "New Group".
Name the group Facebook and click "OK".
Select the Facebook group on the left menu.
In the right panel, right-click and select "New Entry".
Provide the name of your covert account, username, and URL of the site.
Click the black dice icon to the right of the "Password" field.
Click the eyeball icon underneath the black dice icon.
Slide the password length slider to at least 40 characters.
Apply the generated password.
Change your Facebook password to this selection within your account.
Click "OK" and save the database.

You successfully created a new, secure, randomly generated password for your covert profile. You will not
remember it, but your password manager will. Allow your password manager to generate a new random
password containing letters, numbers, and special characters. If the website you are using allows it, choose a
password length of at least 50 characters. When you need to log in, you will copy and paste from the password
manager. For each site which you change a password, your password manager will generate a new, unique string.
This way, WHEN the site you are using gets breached, the passwords collected will not work anywhere else.
More importantly, recycled passwords will not expose your true accounts after the breached data becomes
public. There should be only a handful of passwords you memorize, which brings us to the next point.
The password to open your password manager should be unique. It should be something you have never used
before. It should also contain letters, numbers, and special characters. It is vital that you never forget this
password, as it gives you access to all of the credentials that you do not know. I encourage users to write it down
in a safe place until memorized. It is vital to make a backup of your password database. When you created a new
database, you chose a name and location for the file. As you update and save this database, make a copy of the
file on an encrypted USB drive. Be sure to always have a copy somewhere safe, and not on the internet. If your
computer would completely crash, and you lose all of your data, you would also lose all of the new passwords
you have created. This would be a huge headache. Prepare for data loss now.
I no longer recommend the KeePassXC browser extension for OSINT investigations. There is nothing insecure
about it, but it requires you to copy the master database within any virtual machines unnecessarily, and technically
provides some connection from one investigation to another within the VM. This is not a huge deal, but we
should always be willing to scrutinize our strategies and become more secure investigators.
By keeping your passwords in an offline database, you eliminate this entire attack surface. By keeping your
password manager ready in your host machine, you will have immediate access to it regardless of which virtual
machine you are using during an investigation.
30 Chapter 4

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER FIVE
LINUX VM SOFTWARE

For Linux hosts, I still recommend VirtualBox (virtualbox.org) for VM creation and execution. I will first
explain how to install the application and then ways to configure a virtual machine. VirtualBox installation
instructions can be found at virtualbox.org but are not usually straightforward. The default steps will install an
outdated version on most machines. At the time of this writing, the following Terminal commands installed
VirtualBox 7 on a Linux host.
wget -O- https://www.virtualbox.org/download/oracle_vbox_2016.asc |
sudo gpg --dearmor --yes --output /usr/share/keyrings/oraclevirtualbox-2016.gpg
echo "deb [arch=amd64 signed-by=/usr/share/keyrings/oracle-virtualbox2016.gpg] http://download.virtualbox.org/virtualbox/debian
$(lsb_release -cs) contrib" | sudo tee
/etc/apt/sources.list.d/virtualbox.list
sudo apt update
sudo apt install virtualbox-7.0
sudo apt upgrade
Install the VirtualBox Extension Pack with the following steps.
•
•
•

Download "Extension Pack" at https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads.
Launch VirtualBox and select "File" > "Tools" > "Extension Pack Manager".
Click "Install" and select the downloaded file.

VirtualBox should update through your standard Linux update processes whenever a new version is available.
You should be prompted to download a new Extension Pack after an updated version is launched. If you ever
receive an error about a mismatch in software, repeat the above steps to install the latest Extension Pack. While
VirtualBox is free for personal use, make sure you or your organization meets the requirements for usage of the
software, especially the free Extension Pack license. You will receive a notice within Terminal asking you to
verify that you have read the requirements. Striking "Tab" then "Enter" on the keyboard acknowledges the first
screen, and striking the left arrow then "Enter" completes the second.
The only requirement for VirtualBox to function is a computer that supports virtualization. Any modern
Windows or Linux host should work without any modification. Most mid-range and high-end computers made
within the past five years should have no problem, but may require you to enable virtualization support in the
BIOS during startup. Netbooks, older machines, and cheap low-end computers will likely give you problems. If
you are in doubt about meeting this requirement, search for your model of computer followed by "virtualization"
and you should find the answers. The rest of this section will assume that your Linux host computer meets this
requirement and now possesses VirtualBox.
VirtualBox Windows VM on Linux Host
This section is completely optional. I respect if some people prefer to avoid Windows altogether. If you
would like the practice, begin by installing Windows 11 within VirtualBox on a Linux host computer. We will
not use this for OSINT investigations, but it is a good primer on the process. This will help when we create our
ultimate Linux OSINT VM later. It can also be a good idea to maintain a Windows VM on a Linux host if you
need to run Windows software. Conduct the following to download the installation file.
Linux VM Software 31

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•
•
•
•

Navigate to https://www.microsoft.com/software-download/windows11.
Choose "Windows 11..." under the "Download Windows 11 Disk Image(ISO)" section.
Click "Download Now", select the desired language when presented, and click "Confirm".
Click the "64-bit Download" button.

Microsoft often blocks VPN connections from this process. I had to use a dedicated VPN IP address to
complete the download (as explained in Extreme Privacy: VPNs & Firewalls). You could also download it from
public Wi-Fi if your home connection is behind a VPN. Once you have the file downloaded, conduct the
following within VirtualBox. Some versions of VirtualBox may present these options in a different order
with slight changes to the wording.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Click "Machine" then "New" in the menu.
Enter a name, such as "Windows11".
Click the drop-down under "ISO Image"; click "Other"; and select the Windows ISO file.
Choose the "Edition" as "Windows 11 Pro" (if not already selected).
Choose the "Type" of "Microsoft Windows" (if not already selected).
Choose the "Version" of "Windows 11 64-bit" (if not already selected).
Select the "Skip Unattended Installation" and click "Next".
Choose a memory size of half of your system's memory.
Change the "Processor(s)" to half of the available CPUs.
Deselect "Enable EFI" and click "Next".
Choose the maximum desired size of your VM (150GB) and click "Next" then "Finish".
Click "Settings" for this new VM.
Click the "Advanced" tab and enable "Bidirectional", "Shared Clipboard" and "Drag n' Drop".
Click "Shared Folders" in the left menu and click the "Plus" icon to the right.
Under "Folder Path", click the drop-down and select "Other".
Choose the Downloads folder and click "Open".
Enable the "Auto-mount" option and click "OK".
Click "OK" to save all changes and close the settings.
Click the "Start" option and press any key if prompted.
If presented, click the white icon next to any VirtualBox pop-ups to eliminate them.
If the screen is too small, click "View" in the VirtualBox menu and select "Virtual Screen 1" > "Scale
to 200%". Most users will not need to do this.
In the Windows installation screen, click "Next".
When you see "Install Now", press Shift and F10 simultaneously (FN+Shift+F10 on Apple).
Enter "regedit" and strike Enter.
Navigate to Computer\HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM\Setup.
Right-click on the Setup folder, click "New" then "Key".
Name the new key "LabConfig" and press Enter (Right-click and Edit is necessary).
In the right frame, right-click, select "New" then "DWORD (32-bit) Value".
Name the new value "BypassSecureBootCheck" and press "Enter".
Double-click this new entry and change the value to "1", then click "OK".
In the right frame, right-click, select "New" then "DWORD (32-bit) Value".
Name the new value "BypassTPMCheck" and press "Enter".
Double-click this new entry and change the value to "1", then click "OK".
In the right frame, right-click, select "New" then "DWORD (32-bit) Value".
Name the new value "BypassCPUCheck" and press "Enter".
Double-click this new entry and change the value to "1", then click "OK".
In the right frame, right-click, select "New" then "DWORD (32-bit) Value".
Name the new value "BypassRAMCheck" and press "Enter".

32 Chapter 5

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Double-click this new entry and change the value to "1", then click "OK".
Close the Registry Editor and Command Prompt, then click "Install Now".
When prompted, choose "I don't have a product key".
Select the "Windows 11 Pro" version of Windows 11 and click "Next".
Accept any license terms and then choose the custom installation option.
Select the default drive and click "Next".
Allow the installation to finish and restart.
Choose the desired location and keyboard layout, skipping additional layouts.
Skip the naming option and choose the option for use with work or school.
Choose "Sign-in Options".
Choose the option to connect to a "Domain".
Provide a username and password, then confirm the password.
Choose three security questions and provide your desired answers.
Disable all options in the privacy settings, then click "Next" and "Accept".
Allow the final process to complete.
Click "Devices" in the VirtualBox menu and select "Insert Guest Additions CD Image".
If required, click "Download" and "Insert".
Open Windows Explorer and select the "CD Drive".
Double-click "VBoxWindowsAdditions", click "Yes", "Next", "Next", then "Install".
Click "Finish" and allow a reboot (end any hung applications if necessary).
Enter your password to log into Windows (ignore any errors).
Shut down the VM and enter the Settings menu.
Select the Storage option and click VBoxGuestAdditions "CD".
Click the blue CD icon to the right, remove the disc, and click "OK".
Within Terminal in Linux, execute "sudo gpasswd -a $USER vboxusers".

This may have seemed exhausting for a simple Windows installation. Many of these steps were required because
Windows 11 now conducts numerous checks to see if your computer should have the privilege of possessing its
software. The registry modifications eliminate these checks since Microsoft would otherwise block the VM
installation without these settings. We also had to choose specific options to avoid a mandatory Microsoft online
account. These are yet more reasons I avoid Microsoft Windows. When we build our ultimate OSINT Linux
VM, this process will be much simpler.
You now have a fully functioning and legal Windows 11 VM at your disposal. You can resize the window as
desired and install any Windows applications. This is a trial, and the trial will eventually expire. When it does,
you could replicate these steps to generate a new machine. Surprisingly, this is allowed and encouraged from
Microsoft. You may notice branding within the desktop advising it is a trial. If that bothers you, you must acquire
a license and install from traditional media. This method is the easiest option to possess a legal copy of Windows
within a VM at no cost.
VirtualBox USB Connection
VirtualBox offers USB device access for Windows and Linux VMs, but this requires some configuration.
Navigate to the settings for your desired VM and select the "USB" option in the left menu. Click the first blue
icon to the right to create a new filter, and click "OK". Start the VM and allow it to completely boot. While any
USB drive is attached to the Linux host computer, select the "Devices" VirtualBox menu item and highlight
"USB". This will allow you to select the USB drive within the host to access within the VM.
By default, VirtualBox uses a generic USB 3.0 driver for access to external USB drives. This should work for
most purposes. On occasion, I have had to switch this to the USB 2.0 driver when inserting older USB drives.
If you encounter a USB drive which cannot be recognized by the VM, shut down the VM and go to the

Linux VM Software 33

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

VirtualBox VM settings. Change "USB 3.0" to "USB 2.0" (or vice versa) within the "USB" tab. You can also
disable USB support entirely in this menu, but it is generally not recommended.
VirtualBox Exports
If you ever want to preserve a specific state of a VM within VirtualBox, you can export an entire session. This
may be important if you are preserving your work environment for court purposes. When I am conducting an
investigation that may go to trial, or discovery of evidence will be required, I make an exact copy of the operating
system used during the investigation. This can be completed a couple of different ways.
The simplest route is to copy the entire folder of a desired VM. You can right-click on any VM while it is shut
down and select "Show in File Manager". You could then copy this folder to an external drive or other location.
This does not require any export or creation of a new file. You could also export the entire VM into a single file.
This is the method I prefer. While the VM is shut down, select "File" > "Export Appliance" within VirtualBox.
Select your VM and click "Next", "Next", then "Finish". This will create a new file within your Documents
folder which can later be imported into any instance of VirtualBox.
At the end of my OSINT work on a case, I shut down the machine and export it to a file. This file can be
imported later and examined by anyone else who has a copy. The exported file is added to my digital evidence
on an external drive. I now know that I can defend any scrutiny by recreating the exact environment during the
original examination.
VirtualBox Clones
Once you have a VM configured and ready for use, you may want to clone it and work from the copy. This way,
the original VM stays uncontaminated. We will discuss this much more later when we build our ultimate OSINT
VM. For now, let's conduct an example with the Windows 11 VM we just built. Conduct the following.
•
•

Right-click on the Windows VM and select "Clone".
Provide a name such as "Windows11Clone", click "Next", and click "Clone".

You now have two identical VMs, each in their own data folders. If you were to work within the cloned copy
and do any damage, you still have the original VM in a perfect state. For clarity, consider my routine for every
OSINT investigation I conduct, which takes advantage of the "Clone" option within VirtualBox.
•
•
•

Launch the Original VM weekly to apply updates or global changes, then close the VM.
In the VirtualBox menu, right-click on the Original VM and select "Clone".
Create a new name such as Case #19-87445 and click "Continue" (or "Next") then "Finish".

This creates an identical copy of the VM ready for your investigation. You have no worries of contaminating
your original VM. You can keep this clone available for as long as needed while you continue to work within
several investigations. You can export the clone in order to preserve evidence, or delete it when finished. Neither
action touches the original copy. It is similar to possessing a new computer for every case and having all of them
at your disposal whenever you want to jump back into an investigation.
VirtualBox Snapshots
A great feature of virtual machines is the use of Snapshots. These "frozen" moments in time allow you to revert
to an original configuration or preserve an optimal setup. Most users install the virtual machine as previously
detailed, and then immediately create a snapshot of the unused environment. When your virtual machine
eventually becomes contaminated with remnants of other investigations, or you accidentally remove or break a
feature, you can simply revert to the previously created snapshot and eliminate the need to ever reinstall.
Consider how you might use snapshots, as detailed in the following example.

34 Chapter 5

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•
•
•
•

After creation of your new virtual machine, apply all updates.
Completely shut down the machine.
Click the three lines menu next to the VM and select Snapshots.
Click the "Take" button and name the Snapshot, such as today's date, and click "OK".

You could now start this machine and download every virus known. You could then shut it down and return to
the Snapshots menu. Clicking on the Snapshot and selecting "Restore" would wipe out all of the activity which
had occurred since the snapshot was taken, and would allow you to boot to your original clean environment.
Clicking "Delete" would remove the Snapshot and prevent you from ever going back to the pristine state (not
recommended). Today, I rarely use snapshots, as I believe they are prone to user error. I much prefer cloned
machines or exports. Clones require more overall disk space, but provide a greater level of usability between
investigations. Snapshots will also generate more wasted space, especially if you create many within one VM.
VirtualBox VM Size & Shrinking
The hard drive space of your Windows and Linux VMs will keep growing unnecessarily. When you make changes
within the VM, all of the data is somewhat preserved, even deleted content. Unfortunately, VirtualBox does not
make the shrinking process as easy as UTM for macOS. To replicate, we will take a few steps within the Windows
VM (Linux VMs will be explained later).
•
•
•
•
•

Remove any undesired files and empty the trash.
Search within Windows for "Defrag" and open the Drive Optimization program.
Choose your C Drive and click "Optimize".
Search for, and execute "Command Prompt".
Execute the following command:

•
•
•

Execute the following command: tar -xf SDelete.zip
Execute the following command: sdelete64.exe c: -z
Accept any terms and shut down the Windows VM when process is complete.

curl https://download.sysinternals.com/files/SDelete.zip -o SDelete.zip

This procedure technically filled your VM completely with blank space, which may not sound ideal. With the
VM turned off, open Terminal within the Linux host and navigate to the folder containing the VM file you want
to shrink. For my test machine, this was the following (replace "osint" with your host name).
cd '/home/osint/VirtualBox VMs/Windows11'
You must then execute a Terminal command which compacts the "vdi" file within the VM folder. For me, the
command was the following.
VBoxManage modifymedium disk Windows11.vdi --compact
You will see the size decrease if free space was available. I do this after every major update to any Windows or
Linux VM, but this will become more important once we have created our ultimate OSINT VM later.
VirtualBox Issues
I wish I could say that every reader will be able to easily build virtual machines on any computer. This is simply
not the case. While most computers are capable of virtual machine usage, many demand slight modifications in
order to allow virtualization. Let's take a look at one of the most common errors presented by VirtualBox.

Linux VM Software 35

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

VT-x is Disabled: Any version of this error is the most common reason your VMs will not start. This indicates
that the processor of your computer either does not support virtualization or the feature is not enabled. The fix
for this varies by brand of machine and processor. Immediately after the computer is turned on, before the
operating system starts, enter the BIOS of the machine. This is usually accomplished by pressing delete, F2, F10,
or another designated key right away until a BIOS menu appears. Once in the BIOS, you can navigate through
the menu via keyboard. With many Intel processors, you can open the "Advanced" tab and set the "Virtualization
(VT-x)" to "Enable". For AMD processors, open the "M.I.T." tab, "Advanced Frequency" settings, "Advanced
Core" settings, and then set the "SVM Mode" to "Enable". If none of these options appear, conduct an online
search of the model of your computer followed by "virtualization" for instructions.
VirtualBox Displays: Some users have reported the inability to resize VM windows within VirtualBox and see
the "Auto-resize Guest Display" menu option greyed out. The following commands within Terminal of the
Linux VM should repair this issue. There is no harm running these if you are unsure.
sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y build-essential dkms gcc make perl
sudo rcvboxadd setup
reboot
VMWare Workstation Pro Windows VM on Linux Host
The previous tutorials all rely on VirtualBox as our VM software. VirtualBox is not without flaws. Many users
become frustrated and seek other VM clients. While I prefer VirtualBox due to its open-source nature, I respect
that others may want something a bit more polished. I recommend most readers also possess VMWare
Workstation Pro. VMWare now offers the fully-functioning Workstation Pro software for personal use, but
requires corporations and other entities to obtain a commercial license. Make sure you understand your own
requirements. This section is also completely optional. I respect if some people prefer to avoid Windows
altogether. If you would like the practice, consider the following.
First, determine if you already have the required software. If you possess the deprecated VMWare Workstation
Player, launch it and see if it prompts you to upgrade to the full Workstation Pro version. If so, allow this to
complete. If there are errors, which is common, uninstall the deprecated Player version with the following
Terminal command then install from scratch.
vmware-installer -u vmware-player
VMWare Workstation Pro can be installed with the following steps, which bypass the need to create an online
account with them.
•
•
•
•
•
•

Navigate to https://www.techspot.com/downloads/189-vmware-workstation-for-windows.html.
Click "Workstation Linux" and download the file.
Within Terminal, navigate to your downloads with cd Downloads.
Type "chmod +X VM" and then strike the tab key, then Enter.
Type "sudo ./VM" and then strike the tab key, then Enter.
Launch VMWare Workstation Pro; accept the terms and license; accept updates on startup; decline the
"Customer Experience"; and choose the personal use option (if you qualify).

Some report errors about module installation when executing the program. The following should resolve.
git clone https://github.com/mkubecek/vmware-host-modules
cd vmware-host-modules
git checkout workstation-17.5.1
sudo make ; sudo make install

36 Chapter 5

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Let's replicate the previous tutorial from installing Windows 11 into VirtualBox, with modifications which are
appropriate to VMWare Workstation Pro.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Click "File", then "New Virtual Machine" in the menu.
Select the "Typical" option.
Select "Installer disc image file (ISO)" and select the installation file previously downloaded.
Click "Next" and enter a name, such as "Windows11", then click "Next".
Enter and confirm a "TPM" password to bypass Windows restrictions and click "Next".
Choose the maximum size of your drive and select "Store Virtual Disk as a single file".
Click "Next" and then the "Customize Hardware" button.
Choose a memory size of half of your system's memory.
Change the "Processor(s)" to half of the available CPUs.
Click "Close" then "Finish".
Click within the VM and press any key when prompted. You may need to click several times after a few
restarts until the process is more streamlined.
In the Windows installation screen, click "Next" then "Install Now".
When prompted, choose "I don't have a product key".
Select the "Windows 11 Pro" version of Windows 11 and click "Next".
Accept any license terms and choose the custom installation option.
Select the default drive and click "Next".
Allow the installation to finish and restart.
Choose the desired location and keyboard layout, skipping additional layouts.
Skip the naming option and choose the option for use with work or school.
Choose "Sign-in Options".
Choose the option to connect to a "Domain".
Provide a username and password, then confirm the password.
Choose three security questions and provide your desired answers.
Disable all options in the privacy settings, then click "Next" and "Accept".
Allow the final process to complete.
Click "Virtual Machine" in the VMWare menu and select "Install VMWare Tools".
Click "Install", select the notification of a new drive in Windows, and click "Run Setup.exe".
If you are not prompted to run the setup file, launch it from the CD Drive.
Accept the default options and install the software.
Click "Finish" and allow a reboot (end any hung applications if necessary).
Enter your password to log into Windows (ignore any errors).

That was quite simpler than the VirtualBox tutorial. VMWare allowed us to bypass some of the Windows
restrictions without registry modification and the overall configuration was more straight-forward. So, what is
the catch? File sharing within VMWare Workstation Pro is difficult and often fails. Overall, I believe you should
have both programs installed within your Windows or Linux host. Only you can decide which client is better
for your needs.
VirtualBox & VMWare Workstation Pro VPN Issues
Several readers have reported that using the Linux Proton VPN application in "Kill Switch" mode blocks all
internet to a VM. I was able to replicate this, and now recommend disabling "Kill Switch" mode in the Proton
VPN host application while using a VirtualBox or VMWare Workstation Pro VM.
Summary
Hopefully, you now have VirtualBox and VMWare Workstation Pro installed and configured within your Linux
host. We will rely on these later when we build our ultimate OSINT VM.
Linux VM Software 37

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER SIX

WINDOWS HOST OPTIMIZATION
Most readers will possess a Windows-based computer. This is my least favorite option for this type of work, but
we must all deal with any limitations presented by our employers or our own comfort within an operating system.
I was a dedicated Windows user from 3.11 to 7, but transitioned away when 10 hit the scene. If your host
computer has a Windows operating system, there are several things to consider. First, which version do you
have and does it receive vital system security patches? As I write this, I still believe Windows 10 is the best
version to possess, but its days are numbered. It will be supported with updates throughout October of 2025.
At that time, one will be forced to move to Windows 11 or whatever Windows 12 will look like in the future.
Currently, Windows 11 is the most recent version and the option likely included with a new computer. Therefore,
I will assume it is the version Windows users will possess. Let's start with an optional complete wipe of the
system.
Complete System Wipe
First and foremost, backup any important data. Connect an external drive via USB and copy any documents,
configuration files, and media which will be removed when you reformat the machine. Common locations
include the Desktop, Downloads, and Documents folders within the home folder of the current user. Double
check that you have everything you need, because the next step is to remove all data from the drive. Most
modern Windows computers possess a hidden "restore" partition. To factory reset Windows 11, search "reset"
and then select the option to go to "Reset this PC". If desired, choose the option to remove everything and
follow the prompts. The result will be a new operating system free of any previous contamination. If you do not
have this option, or possess an older Windows operating system, you will need the original installation media or
a restore CD from the manufacturer. Upon boot, refuse any requests to create a Microsoft account, and only
provide the necessary information to log in to Windows, such as a vague username and password. I prefer to
eliminate any internet connection to this machine before I conduct this activity. This usually prevents Microsoft
from demanding an online account. You may want to visit the previous tutorial for installing Windows 11 to a
VM within Linux for tips to avoid creating an account. You may want to revisit the tutorial in the previous
chapter for installing Windows 11 to a VM within Linux for more tips.
Antivirus & Antimalware
There are a dozen popular antivirus companies that will provide a free Windows antivirus solution. For most
Windows users, I simply recommend to use Microsoft's products. Users of Windows 10 and 11 should use the
default Windows Defender included with their installation. Privacy enthusiasts will disagree with this advice, and
I understand their stance. Microsoft products tend to collect your computer usage history and analyze the data.
Unfortunately, their core operating systems also do this, and it is difficult to disable long term. Therefore, I
believe that Windows users are already disclosing sensitive information to Microsoft. Using their antivirus
solutions will not likely enhance the data being collected. I believe that a Windows OSINT host machine should
only be used to execute Linux VMs. If that is the scenario for you, then the default Microsoft Defender is
sufficient. I no longer recommend additional security software. Let's make sure you have the latest security
patches with the following steps.
•
•
•
•
•

Click the task bar and search "defender", then open the "Windows Security" application.
Click the shield tab and select "Protection Updates", then click "Check for Updates".
Apply any pending updates.
Click the task bar and search "updates", then open the "Check for Updates" application.
Apply any pending updates.

38 Chapter 6

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Telemetry
Microsoft's Telemetry service continuously collects the following data, plus numerous additional details, sending
it to their corporate servers in Seattle.
•
•
•
•
•
•

Typed text on keyboard and microphone transmissions
Index of all media files on your computer
Webcam data and browsing history
Search history and location activity
Health activity collected by HealthVault, Microsoft Band, and other trackers
Privacy settings across Microsoft application ecosystem

This data would make it very easy to identify you, your location, and all online activity. Microsoft claims this
collection of data is only to enhance your experience. I find this invasive, and I will present options to disable
much of the data collection. I strongly advise users to attempt to minimize the amount of data Microsoft collects
about your computer usage. I already explained a few options during the installation process, but there is much
more content which needs blocked. There are many free utilities which assist with this, but I have found O&O
Shut Up 10++ to be the most effective and current. Download the latest version at https://www.oosoftware.com/en/shutup10 then install and launch the software. You will see many individual options which
can be enabled or disabled. A red icon indicates that feature is disabled while green indicates enabled. The
wording can be murky. In general, anything red indicates that data about that topic is being sent to Microsoft
while green indicates the service is blocked.
As an example, one option states "Disable suggestions in the timeline". The default option is disabled (red).
Switching to green tells us that this threat is disabled, and we are protected. You can ignore any warnings about
restore points. Some may want to play with each individual setting. Most choose a pre-determined level of
privacy. In the "Actions" option at the top, you will see three categories of "Recommended", "Recommended
and somewhat recommended", and "Apply all settings". The first option is very safe and applies normal blocking
such as disabling advertisement IDs. The second option is a bit stricter and blocks everything except automatic
Windows updates, Windows Defender, and OneDrive. The last option blocks everything possible.
My preference is to select the "Recommended and somewhat recommended" option, and then enable the
"Disable sending URLs from apps to Windows Store" (Current User) and "Disable Microsoft OneDrive" (Local
Machine) options. This leaves updates and Defender running, which are vital to the overall security of your
machine. After you have made your selections, close the program and allow Windows to reboot. Open the
application again to make sure your desired settings were maintained. Every time you update the Windows
operating system, take a look to see if you need to re-enable your choices here. If you ever have troubles because
of your level of protection, you can reverse these changes any time from within the application.
System Cleaner
In some previous books, I recommended a cleaning application called CCleaner. I no longer use this product
because of some unethical practices of its owner Piriform. Some versions of CCleaner contain Ad-ware which
has been accused of collecting user metrics. My preference today is to use BleachBit (bleachbit.org). BleachBit
is very similar to CCleaner, but can be a bit more aggressive. I select all available options with the exception of
"Wipe Free Space". Choosing this would overwrite all free space on the hard drive which is time consuming.
BleachBit removes leftover internet history content, temporary files, and many other types of unwanted data. I
execute this program weekly on any Windows or Linux host I use.
VPN Configuration
Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) provide a good mix of both security and privacy by routing your internet
traffic through a secure tunnel. The tunnel goes to the VPN's server and encrypts all the data between your

Windows Host Optimization 39

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

device and that server. This ensures that anyone monitoring your traffic before it reaches the distant server will
not find usable, unencrypted data. Privacy is also afforded through the use of a distant server. Because your
traffic appears to be originating from the VPN's server, websites will have a more difficult time tracking you,
aggregating data on you, and pinpointing your location. While conducting OSINT research, a VPN prevents
websites from knowing your true location or company network details. If you visit your target's personal website,
you do not want that person knowing any identifiable information about the connection.
Virtual Private Networks are not a perfect anonymity solution. It is important to note that VPNs offer you
privacy, not anonymity. I currently use and recommend Proton VPN. Go to inteltechniques.com/vpn.html
for further information and the best affiliate purchase links. Purchases include unlimited use, connection to
multiple devices simultaneously, and fast speeds. I pay for my VPN with Bitcoin in an alias name, but that may
be overkill for many readers.
For most readers, I recommend sticking with the standard Windows application provided by the VPN company.
These branded apps should suffice for most needs. Proton VPN can be downloaded by following the
instructions at https://protonvpn.com/download-windows. Once installed, simply provide your account
credentials and launch your VPN connection. Fortunately, Proton VPN has made their applications completely
open-source. This makes it much more difficult to hide malicious programming within them.
My VPN policy is quite simple, but my opinions about VPN companies can be complex. Any time that I am
connected to the internet from my device, I am connected through my VPN. Any VMs running within this host
are also protected with the same VPN IP address. I rely on Proton VPN through their app on my device only
while I am traveling. Home devices are protected through a firewall with Proton VPN, as explained in Extreme
Privacy: VPNs & Firewalls. At home, I never need to launch a VPN within my computer due to the firewall.
Password Manager
While you conduct your online investigations, you will likely create and maintain numerous accounts and profiles
across various services. Documenting the profile details, including passwords, for these services can be a
daunting task. A password manager provides a secure database to store all of the various settings in regard to
these profiles. My choice is KeePassXC or Bitwarden. I believe we should all have a robust password manager
on our OSINT host machine, and not necessarily within a VM. Since we may often delete, rebuild, or export
our VMs, storing our passwords within them may be risky. If we store all passwords on the host machine which
runs the VMs, we always have access to any account.
KeePassXC is an open-source password manager that does not synchronize content to the internet. There are
many convenient online password managers which are secure and keep all of your devices ready for automated
logins. Those are great for personal security, and millions of people are safely using them. However, it is not
enough for our needs. Since you will be storing data connected to online investigations, you should protect it in
an offline solution. KeePassXC is cross-platform and free. It works the same on Mac, Windows, or Linux. Visit
https://keepassxc.org/download/#windows to download KeePassXC for Windows.
Next, conduct the following as an exercise.
•
•
•
•
•
•

Launch KeePassXC and select "Database" > "New Database".
Provide a name to your new password database, such as Passwords.
Move the encryptions settings slider completely to the right and click "Continue".
Assign a secure password which you can remember but is not in use anywhere else.
Click "Done" and select a safe location to store the database.
Close the program and verify you can open the database with your password.

You now have a secure password manager and database ready for use on your host machine. Whenever you
start using Linux virtual machines, as explained soon, all of your passwords will be available within the host, and

40 Chapter 6

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

the VM will store no credentials. Next, assume you are ready to change the password to your covert Facebook
profile. Navigate to the menu which allows change of password. Next, conduct the following within KeePassXC.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Right-click within the left column and select "New Group".
Name the group Facebook and click "OK".
Select the Facebook group on the left menu.
In the right panel, right-click and select "New Entry".
Provide the name of your covert account, username, and URL of the site.
Click the black dice icon to the right of the "Password" field.
Click the eyeball icon next to the black dice icon.
Slide the password length slider to at least 40 characters.
Change your Facebook password to this selection within your account.
Click "OK" and save the database.

You successfully created a new, secure, randomly generated password for your covert profile. You will not
remember it, but your password manager will. Allow your password manager to generate a new random
password containing letters, numbers, and special characters. If the website you are using allows it, choose a
password length of at least 50 characters. When you need to log in, you will copy and paste from the password
manager. For each site which you change a password, your password manager will generate a new, unique string.
This way, WHEN the site you are using gets breached, the passwords collected will not work anywhere else.
More importantly, recycled passwords will not expose your true accounts after the breached data becomes
public. There should be only a handful of passwords you memorize, which brings us to the next point.
The password to open your password manager should be unique. It should be something you have never used
before. It should also contain letters, numbers, and special characters. It is vital that you never forget this
password, as it gives you access to all of the credentials that you do not know. I encourage users to write it down
in a safe place until memorized. It is vital to make a backup of your password database. When you created a new
database, you chose a name and location for the file. As you update and save this database, make a copy of the
file on an encrypted USB drive. Be sure to always have a copy somewhere safe, and not on the internet. If your
computer would completely crash, and you lose all of your data, you would also lose all of the new passwords
you have created. This would be a huge headache. Prepare for data loss now.
I no longer recommend the KeePassXC browser extension for OSINT investigations. There is nothing insecure
about it, but it requires you to copy the master database within any virtual machines unnecessarily, and technically
provides some connection from one investigation to another within the VM. This is not a huge deal, but we
should always be willing to scrutinize our strategies and become more secure investigators.
By keeping your passwords in an offline database, you eliminate this entire attack surface. By keeping your
password manager ready in your host machine, you will have immediate access to it regardless of which virtual
machine you are using during an investigation.
Hopefully, you now have a newly-refreshed Windows machine with many protections against the threats you
will face while conducting online investigations. Your system is ready for virtual machines to be built and
executed, and you will be ready to defend the security of your strategies if ever questioned in court or by a client.

Windows Host Optimization 41

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER SEVEN
WINDOWS VM SOFTWARE

For Windows hosts, I still recommend VirtualBox (virtualbox.org). I will first explain how to install the
application and then ways to configure a virtual machine. VirtualBox installation instructions can be found at
virtualbox.org. At the time of this writing, VirtualBox could be downloaded from
https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads by selecting the "Windows Hosts" and "Extension Pack"
download options (two files). Install VirtualBox by double-clicking the first downloaded file. Accept all default
options except the "VirtualBox Python Support". Disable that option in the "Custom Setup" screen. After
installation has completed, allow the program to launch. Then, double-click the second Extension Pack file to
install it into VirtualBox. While VirtualBox is free for personal use, make sure you or your organization meets
the requirements for usage of the software, especially the free Extension Pack license.
The only requirement for VirtualBox to function is a computer that supports virtualization. Any modern
Windows or Linux host should work without any modification. Most mid-range and high-end computers made
within the past ten years should have no problem, but may require you to enable virtualization support in the
BIOS during startup. Netbooks, older machines, and cheap low-end computers will likely give you problems. If
you are in doubt about meeting this requirement, search for your model of computer followed by "virtualization"
and you should find the answers. The rest of this section will assume that your Windows host computer meets
this requirement and now possesses VirtualBox.
I must issue an ironic warning. While my team and I were testing everything here, creating Windows VMs
on top of Windows hosts presented the most problems, errors, and frustrations. We also found countless other
people online complaining of the same issues. If you can avoid Windows hosts in favor of macOS and Linux
machines, please do. If you cannot, we will work through it together. This section is completely optional. I
respect if some people prefer to avoid Windows VMs altogether. If you would like the practice, continue. If not,
wait until the Linux VM chapter.
VirtualBox Windows VM on Windows Host
Let's begin by installing Windows 11 within VirtualBox on a Windows host computer. We will not use this for
OSINT investigations, but it is a good primer on the process. This will help when we create our ultimate Linux
OSINT VM later. It can also be a good idea to maintain a second copy of Windows on a Windows host in the
event you need to test Windows software without impact to your host. Conduct the following to download the
necessary installation file.
•
•
•
•

Navigate to https://www.microsoft.com/software-download/windows11.
Choose "Windows 11..." under the "Download Windows 11 Disk Image(ISO)" section.
Click "Download Now", select the desired language when presented, and click "Confirm".
Click the "64-bit Download" button.

Microsoft often blocks VPN connections from this process. You could also download it from public Wi-Fi if
your home connection is behind a VPN. Once you have the file downloaded, conduct the following within
VirtualBox.
•
•
•
•
•
•

Click "Machine" then "New" in the menu.
Enter a name, such as "Windows11".
Click the drop-down under "ISO Image"; choose "Other"; and select the Windows ISO file.
Choose the "Edition" as "Windows 11 Pro".
Choose the "Type" of "Microsoft Windows".
Choose the "Version" of "Windows 11 64-bit"

42 Chapter 7

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Select the "Skip Unattended Installation" and click "Next".
Choose a memory size of half of your system's memory.
Change the "Processor(s)" to half of the available CPUs.
Deselect "Enable EFI" and click "Next".
Choose the maximum desired size of your VM (150GB) and click "Next" then "Finish".
Click "Settings" for this new VM.
Click the "Advanced" tab and enable "Bidirectional", "Shared Clipboard" and "Drag n' Drop".
Click "Shared Folders" in the left menu and click the "Plus" icon to the right.
Under "Folder Path", click the drop-down and select "Other".
Choose the Downloads folder and click "Open".
Enable the "Auto-mount" option and click "OK".
Click "OK" to save all changes and close the settings.
Click the "Start" option and press any key when prompted.
If presented, click the white icon next to any VirtualBox pop-ups to eliminate them.
If the screen is too small, click "View" in the VirtualBox menu and select "Virtual Screen 1" > "Scale
to 200%". Most users will not need to do this.
In the Windows installation screen, click "Next".
When you see "Install Now", press Shift and F10 simultaneously (FN+Shift+F10 on Apple).
Enter "regedit" and strike Enter.
Navigate to Computer\HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM\Setup.
Right-click on the Setup folder, click "New" then "Key".
Name the new key "LabConfig" and press Enter (Right-click and Edit is necessary).
In the right frame, right-click, select "New" then "DWORD (32-bit) Value".
Name the new value "BypassSecureBootCheck" and press "Enter".
Double-click this new entry and change the value to "1", then click "OK".
In the right frame, right-click, select "New" then "DWORD (32-bit) Value".
Name the new value "BypassTPMCheck" and press "Enter".
Double-click this new entry and change the value to "1", then click "OK".
In the right frame, right-click, select "New" then "DWORD (32-bit) Value".
Name the new value "BypassCPUCheck" and press "Enter".
Double-click this new entry and change the value to "1", then click "OK".
In the right frame, right-click, select "New" then "DWORD (32-bit) Value".
Name the new value "BypassRAMCheck" and press "Enter".
Double-click this new entry and change the value to "1", then click "OK".
Close the Registry Editor and Command Prompt, then click "Install Now".
When prompted, choose "I don't have a product key".
Select the "Windows 11 Pro" version of Windows 11 and click "Next".
Accept any license terms and choose the custom installation option.
Select the default drive and click "Next", then allow the installation to finish and restart.
Choose the desired location and keyboard layout, skipping additional layouts.
Skip the naming option and choose the option for use with work or school.
Choose "Sign-in Options".
Choose the option to connect to a "Domain".
Provide a username and password, then confirm the password.
Choose three security questions and provide your desired answers.
Disable all options in the privacy settings, then click "Next" and "Accept".
Allow the final process to complete and provide your password when prompted.
Click "Devices" in the VirtualBox menu and select "Insert Guest Additions CD Image".
If required, click "Download" and "Insert".
Open Windows Explorer and select the "CD Drive".
Double-click "VBoxWindowsAdditions", click "Yes", "Next", "Next", then "Install".

Windows VM Software 43

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•
•
•
•
•

Click "Finish" and allow a reboot (end any hung applications if necessary).
Enter your password to log into Windows (ignore any errors).
Shut down the VM and enter the Settings menu.
Select the Storage option and click the "VBoxGuestAdditions.iso" CD.
Click the blue CD icon to the right, remove the disc, and click "OK".

This may have seemed exhausting for a simple Windows installation. Many of these steps were required because
Windows 11 now conducts numerous checks to see if your computer should have the privilege of possessing its
software. The registry modifications eliminate these checks since Microsoft would otherwise block the VM
installation without these settings. We also had to choose specific options to avoid a mandatory Microsoft online
account. These are yet more reasons I avoid Microsoft Windows. When we build our ultimate OSINT Linux
VM, this process will be much simpler.
You now have a fully functioning and legal Windows 11 VM at your disposal. You can resize the window as
desired and install any Windows applications. This is a trial, and the trial will eventually expire. When it does,
you could replicate these steps to generate a new machine. Surprisingly, this is allowed and encouraged from
Microsoft. You may notice branding within the desktop advising it is a trial. If that bothers you, you must acquire
a license and install from traditional media. This method is the easiest option to possess a legal copy of Windows
within a VM at no cost.
VirtualBox USB Connection
VirtualBox offers USB device access for Windows and Linux VMs, but this requires some configuration.
Navigate to the settings for your desired VM and select the "USB" option in the left menu. Click the first blue
icon to the right to create a new filter, and click "OK". Start the VM and allow it to completely boot. While any
USB drive is attached to the Windows host computer, select the "Devices" VirtualBox menu item and highlight
"USB". This will allow you to select the USB drive within the host to access within the VM.
By default, VirtualBox uses a generic USB 3.0 driver for access to external USB drives. This should work for
most purposes. On occasion, I have had to switch this to the USB 2.0 driver when inserting older USB drives.
If you encounter a USB drive which cannot be recognized by the VM, shut down the VM and go to the
VirtualBox VM settings. Change "USB 3.0" to "USB 2.0" (or vice versa) within the "USB" tab. You can also
disable USB support entirely in this menu, but it is generally not recommended.
VirtualBox Exports
If you ever want to preserve a specific state of a VM within VirtualBox, you can export an entire session. This
may be important if you are preserving your work environment for court purposes. When I am conducting an
investigation that may go to trial, or discovery of evidence will be required, I make an exact copy of the operating
system used during the investigation. This can be completed a couple of different ways.
The simplest route is to copy the entire folder of a desired VM. You can right-click on any VM while it is shut
down and select "Show in File Manager". You could then copy this folder to an external drive or other location.
This does not require any export or creation of a new file. You could also export the entire VM into a single file.
This is the method I prefer. While the VM is shut down, select "File" > "Export Appliance" within VirtualBox.
Select your VM and click "Next", "Next", then "Finish" or "Export". This will create a new file within your
Documents folder which can later be imported into any instance of VirtualBox.
At the end of my OSINT work on a case, I shut down the machine and export it to a file. This file can be
imported later and examined by anyone else who has a copy. The exported file is added to my digital evidence
on an external drive. I now know that I can defend any scrutiny by recreating the exact environment during the
original examination.

44 Chapter 7

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

VirtualBox Clones
Once you have a VM configured and ready for use, you may want to clone it and work from the copy. This way,
the original VM stays uncontaminated. We will discuss this much more later when we build our ultimate OSINT
VM. For now, let's conduct an example with the Windows 11 VM we just built. Conduct the following.
•
•

Right-click on the Windows VM and select "Clone".
Provide a name such as "Windows11Clone", click "Next", and click "Finish".

You now have two identical VMs, each in their own data folders. If you were to work within the cloned copy
and do any damage, you still have the original VM in a perfect state. For clarity, consider my routine for every
OSINT investigation I conduct, which takes advantage of the "Clone" option within VirtualBox.
•
•
•

Launch the Original VM weekly to apply updates or global changes, then close the VM.
In the VirtualBox menu, right-click on the Original VM and select "Clone".
Create a new name such as Case #19-87445 and click "Continue" (or "Next") then "Clone".

This creates an identical copy of the VM ready for your investigation. You have no worries of contaminating
your original VM. You can keep this clone available for as long as needed while you continue to work within
several investigations. You can export the clone in order to preserve evidence, or delete it when finished. Neither
action touches the original copy. It is similar to possessing a new computer for every case and having all of them
at your disposal whenever you want to jump back into an investigation.
VirtualBox Snapshots
A great feature of virtual machines is the use of Snapshots. These "frozen" moments in time allow you to revert
to an original configuration or preserve an optimal setup. Most users install the virtual machine as previously
detailed, and then immediately create a snapshot of the unused environment. When your virtual machine
eventually becomes contaminated with remnants of other investigations, or you accidentally remove or break a
feature, you can simply revert to the previously created snapshot and eliminate the need to ever reinstall.
Consider how you might use snapshots, as detailed in the following example.
•
•
•
•

After creation of your new virtual machine, apply all updates.
Completely shut down the machine.
Click the three lines menu next to the VM and select Snapshots.
Click the "Take" button and name the Snapshot, such as today's date, and click "OK".

You could now start this machine and download every virus known. You could then shut it down and return to
the Snapshots menu. Clicking on the Snapshot and selecting "Restore" would wipe out all of the activity which
had occurred since the snapshot was taken, and would allow you to boot to your original clean environment.
Clicking "Delete" would remove the Snapshot and prevent you from ever going back to the pristine state (not
recommended).
Today, I rarely use snapshots, as I believe they are prone to user error. I much prefer cloned machines or exports.
These require more disk overall space, but provide a greater level of usability between investigations. Snapshots
will also generate more wasted space, especially if you create many within one VM.
VirtualBox VM Size & Shrinking
The hard drive space of your Windows and Linux VMs will keep growing unnecessarily. When you make changes
within the VM, all of the data is somewhat preserved, even deleted content. Unfortunately, VirtualBox does not

Windows VM Software 45

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

make the shrinking process as easy as UTM for macOS. To replicate, we will take a few steps within the Windows
VM (Linux VMs will be explained later).
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Remove any undesired files and empty the trash.
Search within Windows for "Defrag" and open "Drive Optimization".
Choose your C Drive and click "Optimize".
Search for, and execute Command Prompt.
Execute the following command:
curl
https://download.sysinternals.com/files/SDelete.zip
SDelete.zip
Execute the following command:
tar -xf SDelete.zip
Execute the following command:
sdelete64.exe c: -z
Accept any terms and shut down the Windows VM when process is complete.

-o

This procedure technically filled your VM completely with blank space, which may not sound ideal. With the
VM turned off, open Command Prompt within the Windows host and navigate to the folder containing the VM
file you want to shrink. For me, this was the following.
cd "C:\Users\OSINT\VirtualBox VMs/Windows11"
Next, we must add the program to our path with the following command.
PATH "C:\Program Files\Oracle\VirtualBox"
You must then execute a command which compacts the "vdi" file within the VM folder. For me, the command
was the following.
VBoxManage modifymedium disk Windows11.vdi --compact
You will see the size decrease if free space was available. I do this after every major update to any Windows or
Linux VM, but this will become more important once we have created our ultimate OSINT VM later.
VirtualBox Issues
I wish I could say that every reader will be able to easily build virtual machines on any computer. This is simply
not the case. While most computers are capable of virtual machine usage, many demand slight modifications in
order to allow virtualization. Let's take a look at one of the most common errors presented by VirtualBox.
VT-x is Disabled: Any version of this error is the most common reason your VMs will not start. This indicates
that the processor of your computer either does not support virtualization or the feature is not enabled. The fix
for this varies by brand of machine and processor. Immediately after the computer is turned on, before the
operating system starts, enter the BIOS of the machine. This is usually accomplished by pressing delete, F2, F10,
or another designated key right away until a BIOS menu appears. Once in the BIOS, you can navigate through
the menu via keyboard. With many Intel processors, you can open the "Advanced" tab and set the "Virtualization
(VT-x)" to "Enable". For AMD processors, open the "M.I.T." tab, "Advanced Frequency" Settings, "Advanced
Core" settings, and then set the "SVM Mode" to "Enable". If none of these options appear, conduct an online
search of the model of your computer followed by "virtualization" for instructions.
VT-x is not available: This is usually isolated to Windows 10 machines. Navigate to the Windows Control
Panel and open "Programs and Features". Click "Turn Windows features on or off" and uncheck all "Hyper-V"
features. Click "OK" and reboot. If the Hyper-V option is not enabled, enable Hyper-V, restart the computer,

46 Chapter 7

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

disable Hyper-V, and reboot again. Attempt to start your VM with these new settings. This may seem backwards,
but it makes sense. Previous versions of VirtualBox cannot run if you are using "Hyper-V" in Windows.
Basically, both systems try to get exclusive access to the virtualization capabilities of the processor. Hyper-V
within Windows receives the access first and impedes VirtualBox from the capabilities. The latest version of
VirtualBox attempts to correct this. If the previous setting did not help, try to re-enable all of the Hyper-V
options within Windows, reboot, and try to boot your VM again. If you are still experiencing problems, read the
troubleshooting chapter of the VirtualBox manual on their website. Expand any errors received and search the
provided error codes to identify further solutions.
VirtualBox Displays: Some users have reported the inability to resize VM windows within VirtualBox and see
the "Auto-resize Guest Display" menu option greyed out. The following commands within Terminal of the
Linux VM should repair this issue. There is no harm running these if you are unsure.
sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y build-essential dkms gcc make perl
sudo rcvboxadd setup && reboot
VMWare Workstation Pro Windows VM on Windows Host
The previous tutorials all rely on VirtualBox as our VM software. VirtualBox is not without flaws. Many users
become frustrated and seek other VM clients. While I prefer VirtualBox due to its open-source nature, I respect
that others may want something a bit more polished. I recommend most readers also possess VMWare
Workstation Pro. VMWare now offers the fully-functioning Workstation Pro software for personal use, but
requires corporations and other entities to obtain a commercial license. Make sure you understand your own
requirements. This section is also completely optional. I respect it if some people prefer to avoid Windows
altogether. If you would like the practice, consider the following.
First, determine if you already have the required software. If you possess the deprecated VMWare Workstation
Player, launch it and see if it prompts you to upgrade to the full VMWare Workstation Pro version. If so, allow
this to complete. If there are errors, which is common, or you are not presented an option to upgrade, uninstall
the deprecated Player version. VMWare Workstation Pro can be manually installed with the following steps,
which bypass the need to create an online account with them.
•
•
•
•

Navigate to https://www.techspot.com/downloads/189-vmware-workstation-for-windows.html.
Click "Workstation Windows" and download the file.
Double-click the downloaded file and allow all default options for installation, except be sure to disable
"Join the VMWare Customer Experience".
Launch the program and choose the personal use option (if you qualify).

Let's replicate the previous tutorial from installing Windows 11 into VirtualBox, with modifications which are
appropriate to VMWare Workstation Pro.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Click "File" then "New Virtual Machine" in the menu.
Choose the "Typical" option and click "Next".
Select "Installer disc image file" and select the Windows installation file previously downloaded.
Click "Next" and enter a name, such as "Windows11", then click "Next".
Enter and confirm an encryption password to bypass Windows restrictions and click "Next".
Choose the maximum size of your drive (64 GB) and select "Store Virtual Disk as a single file".
Click the "Customize Hardware" button.
Choose a memory size of half of your system's memory.
Change the "Processor(s)" to half of the available CPUs.
Click "Close" then "Finish".
Click within the VM and press any key when prompted (this disappears quickly).
Windows VM Software 47

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

In the Windows installation screen, click "Next" then "Install Now".
When prompted, choose "I don't have a product key".
Select the "Windows 11 Pro" version of Windows 11 and click "Next".
Accept any license terms and choose the custom installation option.
Select the default drive and click "Next".
Allow the installation to finish and restart.
Choose the desired location and keyboard layout, skipping additional layouts.
Skip the naming option.
Choose the option for use with work or school.
Choose "Sign-in Options".
Choose the option to connect to a "Domain".
Provide a username and password, then confirm the password.
Choose three security questions and provide your desired answers.
Disable all options in the privacy settings, then click "Next" and "Accept".
Allow the final process to complete.
When prompted, click "Install VMWare Tools".
If required, choose this option from the "VM" menu.
Click "Install", select the notification of a new drive in Windows, and click "Run Setup.exe".
Accept the default options and install the software.
Click "Finish" and allow a reboot (end any hung applications if necessary).
Enter your password to log into Windows (ignore any errors).

That was quite simpler than the VirtualBox tutorial. VMWare allowed us to bypass some of the Windows
restrictions without registry modification and the overall configuration was more straight-forward. So, what is
the catch? VMWare Workstation Pro has some limitations. The most vital is that file sharing within VMWare
Workstation Pro is difficult and often fails.
Overall, I believe you should have both programs installed within your Windows or Linux host. Only you can
decide which client is better for your needs.
VMWare Workstation Pro Issues
•
•
•
•

Windows VMs on top of Windows hosts often display an "EFI" warning which may prevent a machine
from booting. If you see this error, click within the VM as quickly as you can and press any key.
If you get your cursor stuck within a VM window, pressing the "alt" and "ctrl" keys simultaneously
should release it.
If you encounter other errors, you are not alone. Running any Windows VM on top of a Windows 10
or 11 host is frustrating to say the least. Search your errors online and research the issues and remedies.
If you are unable to install a Windows 11 VM on top of a Windows host, don't worry. We should have
much better success installing our Linux VM later.

VirtualBox & VMWare Workstation Pro VPN Issues
Several readers have reported that using the Windows Proton VPN application in "Kill Switch" mode blocks all
internet to a VM. I was able to replicate this, and now recommend disabling "Kill Switch" mode in the Proton
VPN host application while using a VirtualBox or VMWare Workstation Pro VM.
Summary
Hopefully, you now have VirtualBox and VMWare Workstation Pro installed and configured within your
Windows host. We will rely on these later when we build our ultimate OSINT VM.

48 Chapter 7

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER EIGHT

OSINT VM OPERATING SYSTEMS
Finally, we can begin creating our ultimate OSINT VM. Until now, we have focused on preparing our host
machines; configuring virtual machine software clients; and generating non-Linux VMs to understand the
virtualization process. Next, we will create a Linux VM which will be the foundation for our OSINT investigative
VM. We will use all of the principles explained previously, but apply everything toward Linux instead of macOS
or Windows. First, we must pick a version of Linux for our needs.
This may be quite controversial to some Linux enthusiasts, but I now recommend Debian as an ideal Linux
operating system for our OSINT machine. While I use Pop!_OS for my personal host machine due to the
privacy, security, and overall convenience of that operating system on my hardware, pure Debian is more
appropriate for a wider audience on VMs.
Unlike Ubuntu, Debian offers an official ARM-based build for Apple machines; presents no default telemetry;
does not force premium features such as Ubuntu Pro on us; and does not follow a release schedule based on
specific dates and years. While Debian has been known to present hardware driver issues on some host
machines, it will work well inside our VM software. If you are comfortable with Pop!_OS or any other Debian
flavor of Linux such as Ubuntu, and insist on using it versus Debian, go for it. For those who want an easier
option, I will only explain the OSINT VM process using Debian. If you are new to Linux, I highly
recommend that you replicate my steps presented here verbatim until you find a specific need to deviate to
another operating system. Overall Debian is more minimal than popular options such as Ubuntu or Pop!_OS.
You may be surprised I no longer recommend Ubuntu. It is one of the most popular Linux distributions, and it
is based on Debian as its backbone. Ubuntu is the product of a corporation called Canonical. Some still criticize
Ubuntu for including Amazon software in the default downloads, which provided affiliate funding to Ubuntu
when you made an online purchase, but this has been removed in current versions. Many people dislike the
forced usage of their proprietary Snap software, but that is also going away soon. Most of the steps within the
rest of this guide could be replicated with Ubuntu and even other non-Debian flavors of Linux if desired, with
minimal differences within installation menus, but you would encounter some errors. The general functions
should all remain the same.
As I write this, the current official release of Debian is 12.5 stable, and my entire build is based on that release.
This version will receive updates and security patches for at least three years while it is the current release, plus
two additional years of long-term support after the next major version is released. This means that we should
have support patches for Debian 12 until at least mid 2027, and likely into 2028. By then, we will have migrated
to Debian 13. I will update this guide once a new major revision to Debian is available. Always use the most
current stable release.
Previous versions of this content presented a combination of instructions for various operating systems. This
was mostly due to limited printed page space. With this digital guide, I present isolated detailed instructions for
each host operating system (macOS, Linux, and Windows). This should prevent any confusion about the steps
required for your specific host operating system. As you go through this chapter, you should choose the
appropriate path for your host, and ignore instructions for other operating systems. I present obvious paths and
subsequent steps as we go along. I promise this will all make sense once we start. Let's go in order, and start
with macOS hosts. If you have a Linux or Windows host, you should skip to the relevant section.

OSINT VM Operating Systems 49

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

UTM Linux OSINT VM on macOS Host (ARM Processor)
In a previous chapter, we used UTM to create a Windows 11 VM on a macOS device with an Apple processor.
This required us to find an ARM version of Windows for use with newer macOS machines. This brings us to
our need to choose the proper Linux path based on our hardware. You must choose the appropriate version of
Debian for your processor. If you have an M1, M2, M3, or later processor, you need the ARM version of Debian.
You can click the Apple logo in the upper-left of your device and select "About This Mac" to identify your
version. Below is the current download link for ARM builds. Once you are on the page for your hardware,
download the current ISO file, similar to "debian-12.5.0-arm64-netinst.iso".
Debian arm64: https://cdimage.debian.org/debian-cd/current/arm64/iso-cd/
If choosing the ARM version, make sure you do not accidentally select the AMD version, and vice versa. Let's
work through the entire Debian installation process for macOS hosts together. Launch UTM and conduct the
following.
•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•

Click "File", then "New".
Choose the "Virtualize" option and then select "Linux".
Click the "Browse" button, select the Debian ISO file, click "Open", then click "Continue".
Choose half of your system's memory and CPU cores. If you had 16 GB of RAM and an eight-core
processor, you would change the RAM to "8192" and the CPU Cores to "4". Never leave the cores as
"Default", as it can confuse the operating system. Click "Continue" when complete.
The size of the drive should be set to the maximum you will ever need. This is not the size of the VM
as it grows, it is only the max. I set mine to "150" GB. Click "Continue".
I prefer to enable file sharing, as it makes it easier to extract evidence from your investigation onto your
host. Browse to your desired shared folder (I chose Downloads) and click "Open" then "Continue".
Provide a name for your new VM, such as "Debian Stock" and click "Save".
Click the arrow icon to start your new Linux VM. The screen may appear black for a while.

You are now ready to install Debian. Upon initial boot of your new VM within UTM, conduct the following
steps. The traditional and ARM versions will have differences, but the idea is to work through any installation
screens. Consider the following.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Select "Install" and strike the Enter or Return key.
Strike the Enter or Return key to select the default language, location, and keyboard.
If desired, use the arrow keys to select a more appropriate option on each screen.
Strike the Enter or Return key to accept a hostname of "debian".
Strike the Enter or Return key to decline a domain name.
Do not provide any "root" password! Since this is a VM, we will allow the primary user to have root
privileges. Simply strike Enter or Return twice.
Enter "osint" (lowercase and without quotes) as the user account, username, full name, and user
password. This is a mandatory step as part of the tutorials and scripts presented in this book.
While any other usernames and passwords could work at first, you will face issues as you proceed. Make
sure all usernames, computer names, and passwords are "osint".
Choose your desired time zone and strike the Enter or Return key.
Choose the "Guided - use entire disk" option.
Choose the "Virtual disk" option and "All files in one partition".
Strike Enter or Return to "Finish"; then left arrow key to select "Yes"; then Enter or Return.
When prompted, strike Enter or Return to skip any other media.
Strike the Enter or Return key to accept the default package manger and archive mirror.
Strike the Enter or Return key to bypass any proxy.
Strike the Enter or Return key to bypass anonymous statistics.

50 Chapter 8

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•

•
•
•

Press the spacebar to select "Debian desktop environment"; strike the down arrow key to highlight
"GNOME"; press the spacebar to select it; ensure "standard system utilities" are selected; then strike
Enter or Return. This is the default desktop environment I will use during my tutorials. If you have a
strong opinion that another environment is better, choose your preference.
Allow Debian to complete the installation. Once you see "Installation complete", click the "CD" icon
in the upper-right of the UTM VM window; highlight the CD/DVD option, and click "Eject".
Strike Enter or Return to "Continue" and restart.
If you only see a black screen for too long, press the "left triangle" within UTM to restart.

Your device should boot to the operating system. I have occasionally encountered the following issues.
•

•

•

If it boots into the installation ISO again, shut the machine down. In the main UTM window, select
your new machine and click the settings icon in the upper-right. Under "Drives", identify the CD/DVD
drive and change "Image Type" to "None". Reboot the VM and boot into the Debian Desktop.
If receiving a pop-up about errors, I prefer to enable "Remember this in future" and "Ignore future
problems", then click "Don't Send". We will apply updates soon which should correct any pending
issues.
Click "Install Now" if prompted for updates, and let them finish.

The following will finish the default configuration upon initial boot.
•

Log in to your VM and select "Next" twice; disable "Location Services"; click "Next"; then "Skip"; then
"Start Using Debian GNU/Linux".

Some desired capabilities, such as clipboard and file sharing, require the installation of UTM's Spice daemon.
Click the "Activities" menu (upper-left) within the VM; click the nine dots (Show Applications) within the lowerright; click "Terminal"; and execute the following.
sudo apt install spice-vdagent spice-webdavd -y
Copy and paste capabilities should be working after a reboot, but you may not see your shared folder within
Files on Debian. The following should fix this.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Shut down the VM (upper-right menu > power button) and close the UTM VM window.
Within the main UTM window, click the "Settings" icon in the upper-right for your VM.
Select "Sharing" on the left.
Change "Directory Share Mode" to "Spice WebDAV" and click "Save".
Reboot the VM.
Click the "Shared folder" icon in the upper right of the UTM Debian VM window.
Confirm your desired shared folder location.
Open the "Files" icon within Debian and click the "Other Locations" option in the left menu.
You should see a folder titled "Spice client".
Single click that folder and wait for your system to recognize the share.
Confirm you can access the shared folder within the left menu of Files.

Sometimes, it can take several minutes for the share to become available to Debian. Once it does, it
should appear until the VM reboots. Whenever you need to access the shared folder, simply click the Spice
folder under "Other Locations" for that session. You can now copy files from your VM directly to your macOS
host and vice versa. I typically only do this after the VM has been booted for a while and I need the shared
folder.

OSINT VM Operating Systems 51

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

While the machine is shut down, I like to confirm the following options within the settings menu by rightclicking and choosing "Edit" (or click the Settings icon).
•
•
•
•

Input > USB Support > USB 3.0
Sharing > Directory Share Mode > Spice WebDAV
Display > Emulated Display card > virtio-ramfb
Display > Retina Mode > Enabled

You can now shut down the VM and continue to the section titled "Preserve Stock Debian".
UTM Linux OSINT VM on macOS Host (Intel Processor)
If you possess an older macOS device with an Intel processor, you should not use the ARM version of Debian
for your VM. Instead, you can use the default Debian amd64 ISO available on the Debian website. You can
click the Apple logo in the upper-left of your device and select "About This Mac" to identify your version. Below
is the current download link. Once you are on the page for your hardware, download the current ISO file, similar
to "debian-12.5.0-amd64-netinst.iso".
Debian amd64: https://cdimage.debian.org/debian-cd/current/amd64/iso-cd/
If choosing the AMD version, make sure you do not accidentally select the ARM version, and vice versa. Let's
work through the entire Debian installation process for macOS hosts together. Launch UTM and conduct the
following.
•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•

Click "File", then "New".
Choose the "Virtualize" option and then select "Linux".
Click the "Browse" button, select the Debian ISO file, click "Open", then click "Continue".
Choose half of your system's memory and CPU cores. If you had 16 GB of RAM and an eight-core
processor, you would change the RAM to "8192" and the CPU Cores to "4". Never leave the cores as
"Default", as it can confuse the operating system. Click "Continue" when complete.
The size of the drive should be set to the maximum you will ever need. This is not the size of the VM
as it grows, it is only the max. I set mine to "150" GB. Click "Continue".
I prefer to enable file sharing, as it makes it easier to extract evidence from your investigation onto your
host. Browse to your desired shared folder (I chose Downloads) and click "Open" then "Continue".
Provide a name for your new VM, such as "Debian Stock" and click "Save".
Click the arrow icon to start your new Linux VM. The screen may appear black for a while.

You are now ready to install Debian. Upon initial boot of your new VM within UTM, conduct the following
steps. This traditional AMD and the ARM versions have some differences, but the idea is to work through any
installation screens. Consider the following.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Select "Graphical Install" or allow it to load as default.
Choose your Language and select "Continue".
Choose your Location and select "Continue".
Choose your Keyboard and select "Continue".
Leave the name as "debian" and click "Continue"; then click "Continue" again.
Do not set a Root password, and simply click "Continue".
Provide a user account name as "osint" (lowercase and without quotes); a username of "osint"; and a
password of "osint". This is a mandatory step as part of the tutorials and scripts presented in this
book. While any other username could work at first, you will face issues as you proceed. Please make
sure all entries are "osint". Since this is a virtual machine inside a secure computer, minimal security
is acceptable.

52 Chapter 8

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•

•

Choose your Time Zone and click "Continue".
Choose the "Guided - use entire disk" option and click "Continue".
Choose "QEMU HARDDISK" and "All files in one partition", clicking "Continue" after each.
Click "Continue"; select "Yes"; and click "Continue" to begin the installation.
When prompted, confirm "No" to bypass local media and click "Continue".
Choose the default package manager and click "Continue" three times.
Select "No" and click "Continue" to disable statistics.
Select "GNOME"; ensure "Debian desktop environment" and "standard system utilities" are also
enabled; and click "Continue" to accept the desktop environment I will use during my tutorials. If you
have a strong opinion that another environment is better, choose your preference.
If prompted, click "Continue" to install GRUB; choose "QEMU HARDDISK" and click "Continue".
Allow Debian to complete the installation. Once you see "Installation complete", click the "CD" icon
in the upper-right of the UTM VM window; highlight the CD/DVD option; click "Eject"; then click
"Continue" within Debian.
After reboot, log in and click "Next" twice; disable "Location Services"; click "Next" then "Done"; then
"Start Using Debian...".

Your device should boot to the operating system. I have occasionally encountered the following issues.
•

•

•

If it boots into the installation ISO again, shut the machine down. In the main UTM window, select
your new machine and click the settings icon in the upper-right. Under "Drives", identify the CD/DVD
drive and change "Image Type" to "None". Reboot the VM and boot into the Debian Desktop.
If receiving a pop-up about errors, I prefer to enable "Remember this in future" and "Ignore future
problems", then click "Don't Send". We will apply updates soon which should correct any pending
issues.
Click "Install Now" if prompted for updates, and let them finish.

Some desired capabilities, such as clipboard and file sharing, require the installation of UTM's Spice daemon.
Click the "Activities" menu (upper-left) within the VM; click the nine dots (Show Applications) within the lowerright; click "Terminal"; and execute the following.
sudo apt install spice-vdagent spice-webdavd -y
Copy and paste capabilities should be working after a reboot, but you may not see your shared folder within
Files on Debian. The following should fix this.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Shut down the VM (upper-right menu > power button) and close the UTM VM window.
Within the main UTM window, click the "Settings" icon in the upper-right for your VM.
Select "Sharing" on the left.
Change "Directory Share Mode" to "Spice WebDAV" and click "Save".
Reboot the VM.
Click the "Shared folder" icon in the upper right of the UTM Debian VM window.
Confirm your desired shared folder location.
Open the "Files" icon within Debian and click the "Other Locations" option in the left menu.
You should see a folder titled "Spice client".
Single click that folder and wait for your system to recognize the share.
Confirm you can access the shared folder within the left menu of Files.

Sometimes, it can take several minutes for the share to become available to Debian. Once it does, it
should appear until the VM reboots. Whenever you need to access the shared folder, simply click the Spice
folder under "Other Locations" for that session. You can now copy files from your VM directly to your macOS

OSINT VM Operating Systems 53

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

host and vice versa. I typically only do this after the VM has been booted for a while and I need the shared
folder.
While the machine is shut down, I like to confirm the following options within the settings menu by rightclicking and choosing "Edit" (or click the Settings icon).
•
•
•
•

Input > USB Support > USB 3.0
Sharing > Directory Share Mode > Spice WebDAV
Display > Emulated Display card > virtio-ramfb
Display > Retina Mode > Enabled

You can now shut down the VM (if booted) and continue to the section titled "Preserve Stock Debian".
VirtualBox Linux OSINT VM on Linux Host
If you tested both VirtualBox and VMWare Workstation Pro during previous chapters, you may now have a
preference for a VM client. I prefer VirtualBox over VMWare when using new powerful hardware, but VMWare
tends to be faster on older hardware. Ideally, you will use both throughout this chapter and make a decision
once you experience real-world results. Download the latest Debian ISO at https://cdimage.debian.org/debiancd/current/amd64/iso-cd/. Always download the proper file, similar to "debian-12.5.0-amd64-netinst.iso".
Next, let's work through the entire Debian installation process for Linux hosts together. Some versions of
VirtualBox may present these options in a different order with slight changes to the wording. Launch VirtualBox
and conduct the following.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Click "Machine" then "New" in the menu.
Enter a name of "Debian Stock".
Click the drop-down in the "ISO Image" section; select "Other"; and choose the ISO file.
Enable the "Skip Unattended Installation" option and click "Next".
Choose a memory size of half of your system's memory.
Change the "Processor(s)" to half of the available CPUs.
Deselect "Enable EFI" and click "Next".
Choose the maximum desired size of your VM as 150 GB, and click "Next" then "Finish".
Click "Settings" for this new VM.
Click the "Advanced" tab and enable "Bidirectional", "Shared Clipboard" and "Drag n' Drop".
Click "Shared Folders" in the left menu and click the "Plus" icon to the right.
Under "Folder Path", click the drop-down and select "Other".
Choose the Downloads folder and click "Open".
Enable the "Auto-mount" option and click "OK".
Click "OK" to save all changes and close the settings.
Click the "Start" option and boot the VM.
If presented, click the white icon next to any VirtualBox pop-ups to eliminate them.
If the screen is too small, click "View" in the VirtualBox menu and select "Virtual Screen 1" > "Scale
to 200%". Most users will NOT need to do this.
Select "Graphical Install" or allow it to load as default.
Choose your Language and select "Continue".
Choose your Location and select "Continue".
Choose your Keyboard and select "Continue".
Leave the name as "debian" and click "Continue"; then click "Continue" again.
Do not set a Root password, and simply click "Continue".
Provide a user account name as "osint" (lowercase and without quotes); a username of "osint"; and a
password of "osint". This is a mandatory step as part of the tutorials and scripts presented in this
book. While any other username could work at first, you will face issues as you proceed. Please make

54 Chapter 8

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•

sure all entries are "osint". Since this is a virtual machine inside a secure computer, minimal security
is acceptable.
Choose your Time Zone and click "Continue".
Choose the "Guided - use entire disk" option and click "Continue".
Choose "VBOX HARDDISK" and "All files in one partition", clicking "Continue" after each.
Click "Continue"; select "Yes"; and click "Continue" to begin the installation.
When prompted, confirm "No" to bypass local media and click "Continue".
Choose the default package manager and click "Continue" three times.
Select "No" and click "Continue" to disable statistics.
Select "GNOME"; ensure "Debian desktop environment" and "standard system utilities" are also
enabled; and click "Continue" to accept the desktop environment I will use during my tutorials. If you
have a strong opinion that another environment is better, choose your preference.
If prompted, click "Continue" to install GRUB; choose "VBOX..." and click "Continue".
Allow Debian to complete the installation. Once you see "Installation complete", click "Continue" to
allow a reboot.
After reboot, log in and click "Next" twice; disable "Location Services"; click "Next" then "Done"; then
"Start Using Debian...".
Shut down the VM.

Currently, the automated option to download and install Guest Additions does not work properly within Debian.
Therefore, we will manually download the file and install within the VM.
•
•

•
•
•
•
•

Within your VirtualBox client software, click "Help" and "About" to identify the exact version of your
software. Mine was 7.0.10.
Navigate to https://download.virtualbox.org/virtualbox within your Linux host; select your exact
version of VirtualBox; download the VBoxGuestAdditions ISO file; open the VirtualBox settings for
the VM; click "Storage"; click the "Empty" CD icon; click the CD icon to the far right; select "Choose
a Disk File"; select your Guest Additions ISO; select "Open" and "OK".
Start the OSINT VM and click "Activities" in the upper-left once booted.
Click the Files icon in the center of the lower Dock.
Navigate to the "VBox..." option in the left menu and click "Run Software" to the right.
Confirm to "Run" the software; enter your password when prompted; and restart the VM.
Click "Activities", the nine dots, then "Terminal", and execute the following to enable sharing.

sudo groupadd vboxusers
sudo usermod -aG vboxusers osint
sudo groupadd vboxsf
sudo usermod -aG vboxsf osint
•
•
•
•

Shut down the VM.
Within the VirtualBox program, click the Settings for the VM.
Under "Storage", right-click VBoxGuestAdditions and choose "Remove Attachment".
Confirm with "Remove", click "OK", and restart the VM.

You should now have VirtualBox Guest Additions installed. You can test this by resizing the screen. If you
make the VM full screen, you should see the overall screen resolution change with it. If you previously changed
the scaling of the window in VirtualBox, you may want to change it back to 100%. If it looks good, do not make
the change. If the screen is still too small, right-click the Debian VM desktop and choose "Display Settings". If
the option is present, choose a "scale" of 200% and see if that works better for you. Overall, I like the VM to
possess maximum resolution possible within the VM client, in full screen mode, with a choice of the
higher scale within the VM if needed. Every computer (and user) is unique, so use these settings to make it
look best for your eyes.

OSINT VM Operating Systems 55

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Your device should now boot to the operating system with the ability to resize the screen as desired. You should
also be able to access the Downloads folder of the host machine from within the VM through the
"sf_downloads" mounted disk. After any pending updates are installed, shut down the VM and continue to the
section titled "Preserve Stock Debian".
VMWare Workstation Pro Linux OSINT VM on Linux Host
If you tested both VirtualBox and VMWare Workstation Pro during previous chapters, you may now have a
preference for a VM client. I prefer VirtualBox over VMWare when using new powerful hardware, but VMWare
tends to be faster on older hardware. Ideally, you will use both throughout this chapter and make a decision
once you experience real-world results. Download the latest Debian ISO at https://cdimage.debian.org/debiancd/current/amd64/iso-cd/. Always download the proper file, similar to "debian-12.5.0-amd64-netinst.iso".
Next, launch VMWare Workstation Pro and conduct the following.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•

Click "File" then "New Virtual Machine" in the VMWare menu.
Choose the "Typical" option and click "Next".
Select "Use ISO image"; select the Debian file previously downloaded; and click "Next".
Provide a name of "Debian Stock" and click "Next".
Choose the max size of your drive as 150 GB and select "Store Virtual Disk as a single file".
Click "Next" then click the "Customize Hardware" button.
Choose a memory size of half of your system's memory.
Change the "Processor(s)" to half of the available CPUs.
Click "Close"; deselect "Automatically power on..."; and click "Finish".
Launch the machine and if prompted, click "OK" on any windows about hardware.
Select "Graphical Install" or allow it to load as default.
Choose your Language and select "Continue".
Choose your Location and select "Continue".
Choose your Keyboard and select "Continue".
Leave the name as "debian" and click "Continue"; then click "Continue" again.
Do not set a Root password, and simply click "Continue".
Provide a user account name as "osint" (lowercase and without quotes); a username of "osint"; and a
password of "osint". This is a mandatory step as part of the tutorials and scripts presented in this
book. While any other username could work at first, you will face issues as you proceed. Please make
sure all entries are "osint". Since this is a virtual machine inside a secure computer, minimal security
is acceptable.
Choose your Time Zone and click "Continue".
Choose the "Guided - use entire disk" option and click "Continue".
Choose "VMWare" and "All files in one partition", clicking "Continue" after each.
Click "Continue"; select "Yes"; and click "Continue" to begin the installation.
When prompted, confirm "No" to bypass local media and click "Continue".
Choose the default package manager and click "Continue" three times.
Select "No" and click "Continue" to disable statistics.
Select "GNOME"; ensure "Debian desktop environment" and "standard system utilities" are also
enabled; and click "Continue" to accept the desktop environment I will use during my tutorials. If you
have a strong opinion that another environment is better, choose your preference.
If prompted, click "Continue" to install GRUB; choose "/dev/sda"; and click "Continue".
Allow Debian to complete the installation. Once you see "Installation complete", click "Continue" to
allow a reboot.
After reboot, log in and click "Next" twice; disable "Location Services"; click "Next" then "Done"; then
"Start Using Debian...".
Reboot the VM.

56 Chapter 8

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Your device should now boot to the operating system with the ability to resize the screen as desired. I have
occasionally encountered the following issues.
•
•
•
•

Click "Install Now" if prompted for updates.
If you do not see your VM within the VMWare home screen, make sure you have enabled "File History"
under the host's "Settings" > "Privacy" > "File History & Trash" menu.
If your cursor is not available within the VM, or you cannot select anything, restart it.
The shared folder within the VM will likely not function. VMWare requires several commands specific
to your installation to temporarily share a folder with the host. At the time of this writing, a known bug
was preventing this. I currently recommend using a USB device connected to the VM to transfer files,
which we will do together later.

After any pending updates are installed, shut down the VM and continue to the section titled "Preserve Stock
Debian".
VirtualBox Linux OSINT VM on Windows Host
If you tested both VirtualBox and VMWare Workstation Pro during previous chapters, you may now have a
preference for a VM client. I prefer VirtualBox over VMWare when using new powerful hardware, but VMWare
tends to be faster on older hardware. Ideally, you will use both throughout this chapter and make a decision
once you experience real-world results. Download the latest Debian ISO at https://cdimage.debian.org/debiancd/current/amd64/iso-cd/. Always download the proper file, similar to "debian-12.5.0-amd64-netinst.iso".
Next, let's work through the entire Debian installation process for Windows hosts together. Launch VirtualBox
and conduct the following.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Click "Machine" then "New" in the menu.
Enter a name of "Debian Stock".
Click the drop-down in the "ISO Image" section; select "Other"; and choose the ISO file.
Enable the "Skip Unattended Installation" option and click "Next".
Choose a memory size of half of your system's memory.
Change the "Processor(s)" to half of the available CPUs.
Deselect "Enable EFI" and click "Next".
Choose the maximum desired size of your VM as 150 GB, and click "Next" then "Finish".
Click "Settings" for this new VM.
Click the "Advanced" tab and enable "Bidirectional", "Shared Clipboard" and "Drag n' Drop".
Click "Shared Folders" in the left menu and click the "Plus" icon to the right.
Under "Folder Path", click the drop-down and select "Other".
Choose the Downloads folder and click "Select Folder".
Enable the "Auto-mount" option and click "OK".
Click "OK" to save all changes and close the settings.
Click the "Start" option and boot the VM.
If presented, click the white icon next to any VirtualBox pop-ups to eliminate them.
If the screen is too small, click "View" in the VirtualBox menu and select "Virtual Screen 1" > "Scale
to 200%". Most users will NOT need to do this.
Select "Graphical Install" or allow it to load as default.
Choose your Language and select "Continue".
Choose your Location and select "Continue".
Choose your Keyboard and select "Continue".
Leave the name as "debian" and click "Continue"; then click "Continue" again.
Do not set a Root password, and simply click "Continue".
Provide a user account name as "osint" (lowercase and without quotes); a username of "osint"; and a
password of "osint". This is a mandatory step as part of the tutorials and scripts presented in this
OSINT VM Operating Systems 57

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•

•

book. While any other username could work at first, you will face issues as you proceed. Please make
sure all entries are "osint". Since this is a virtual machine inside a secure computer, minimal security
is acceptable.
Choose your Time Zone and click "Continue".
Choose the "Guided - use entire disk" option and click "Continue".
Choose "VBOX HARDDISK" and "All files in one partition", clicking "Continue" after each.
Click "Continue"; select "Yes"; and click "Continue" to begin the installation.
When prompted, confirm "No" to bypass local media and click "Continue".
Choose the default package manager and click "Continue" three times.
Select "No" and click "Continue" to disable statistics.
Select "GNOME"; ensure "Debian desktop environment" and "standard system utilities" are also
enabled; and click "Continue" to accept the desktop environment I will use during my tutorials. If you
have a strong opinion that another environment is better, choose your preference.
If prompted, click "Continue" to install GRUB; choose "VBOX..." and click "Continue".
Allow Debian to complete the installation. Once you see "Installation complete", click "Continue" to
allow a reboot.
After reboot, log in and click "Next" twice; disable "Location Services"; click "Next", "Skip", and
"Done"; then "Start Using Debian...".
Within the VirtualBox top menu, click "Devices"; click "Insert Guest Additions..."; click "Activities" in
the upper-left of Debian; open the Files application; click the "VBox" option in the left; click "Run
Software in the upper-right; confirm with "Run"; enter your password when prompted; allow the
installation to complete; and press Enter to close the window when prompted.
Click "Activities", the nine dots, then "Terminal", and execute the following to enable sharing.

sudo groupadd vboxusers
sudo usermod -aG vboxusers osint
sudo groupadd vboxsf
sudo usermod -aG vboxsf osint
•
•
•
•

Shut down the VM.
Within the VirtualBox program, click the Settings for the VM.
Under "Storage", right-click VBoxGuestAdditions and choose "Remove Attachment".
Confirm with "Remove", click "OK", and restart the VM.

You should now have VirtualBox Guest Additions installed. You can test this by resizing the screen. If you
make the Debian VM full screen, you should see the overall screen resolution change with it. If you previously
changed the scaling of the window in VirtualBox, you may want to change it back to 100%. If it looks good, do
not make the change. If the screen is still too small, right-click the Debian VM desktop and choose "Display
Settings". If the option is present, choose a "scale" of 200% and see if that works better for you. Overall, I like
the Debian VM to possess maximum resolution possible within the VM client, in full screen mode,
with a choice of the higher scale within the Debian VM if needed. Every computer (and user) is unique,
so use these settings to make it look best for your eyes.
You should also be able to access the Downloads folder of the host machine from within the VM through the
"sf_downloads" mounted disk. Notice that it boots to a view of the Dock at the bottom and a windowed
Desktop above. Clicking within this Desktop navigates to it and hides the Dock. We will change this soon. After
any pending updates are installed, shut down the VM and continue to the section titled "Preserve Stock Debian".

58 Chapter 8

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

VMWare Workstation Pro Linux OSINT VM on Windows Host
If you tested both VirtualBox and VMWare Workstation Pro during previous chapters, you may now have a
preference for a VM client. I prefer VirtualBox over VMWare when using new powerful hardware, but VMWare
tends to be faster on older hardware. Ideally, you will use both throughout this chapter and make a decision
once you experience real-world results. Download the latest Debian ISO at https://cdimage.debian.org/debiancd/current/amd64/iso-cd/. Always download the proper file, similar to "debian-12.5.0-amd64-netinst.iso".
Next, launch VMWare Workstation Pro and conduct the following.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•
•

Click "File" then "New Virtual Machine" in the VMWare menu.
Choose the "Typical" option and click "Next".
Select "Installer disc image file"; select the Debian ISO file; and click "Next".
Provide a name of "Debian Stock" and click "Next".
Choose the max size of your drive as 150 GB and select "Store Virtual Disk as a single file".
Click "Next" then click the "Customize Hardware" button.
Choose a memory size of half of your system's memory.
Change the "Processor(s)" to half of the available CPUs.
Click "Close"; deselect "Power on..."; and click "Finish".
Launch the machine and if prompted, click "OK" on any windows about hardware.
Select "Graphical Install" or allow it to load as default.
Choose your Language and select "Continue".
Choose your Location and select "Continue".
Choose your Keyboard and select "Continue".
Leave the name as "debian" and click "Continue"; then click "Continue" again.
Do not set a Root password, and simply click "Continue".
Provide a user account name as "osint" (lowercase and without quotes); a username of "osint"; and a
password of "osint". This is a mandatory step as part of the tutorials and scripts presented in this
book. While any other username could work at first, you will face issues as you proceed. Please make
sure all entries are "osint". Since this is a virtual machine inside a secure computer, minimal security
is acceptable.
Choose your Time Zone and click "Continue".
Choose the "Guided - use entire disk" option and click "Continue".
Choose "VMWare" and "All files in one partition", clicking "Continue" after each.
Click "Continue"; select "Yes"; and click "Continue" to begin the installation.
When prompted, confirm "No" to bypass local media and click "Continue".
Choose the default package manager and click "Continue" three times.
Select "No" and click "Continue" to disable statistics.
Select "GNOME"; ensure "Debian desktop environment" and "standard system utilities" are also
enabled; and click "Continue" to accept the desktop environment I will use during my tutorials. If you
have a strong opinion that another environment is better, choose your preference.
If prompted, click "Continue" to install GRUB; choose "/dev/sda"; and click "Continue".
Allow Debian to complete the installation. Once you see "Installation complete", click "Continue" to
allow a reboot.
After reboot, log in and click "Next" twice; disable "Location Services"; click "Next", "Skip" and
"Done"; then "Start Using Debian...".
Click "Install Tools" from the bar at the bottom of the screen; click "Activities" within the Debian VM;
and select the "Files" application visible in the lower Dock.
Select "VMWare Tools" within the left menu; right-click the "VMWareTools...gz" file and select
"Copy"; select "Downloads" and click within the empty area to the right; right-click and select "Paste";
right-click the "VMWareTools...gz" file; and choose "Extract".

OSINT VM Operating Systems 59

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•

•

Click through the VMWare folders within Downloads until you see a file called "vmware-install.pl".
Right-click this file and choose "Run as program". If you receive a warning, type "n" and press Enter.
You should now have VMWare Tools installed.
Reboot the VM.

Your device should now boot to the operating system with the ability to resize the screen as desired. I have
occasionally encountered the following issues.
•
•
•

Click "Install Now" if prompted for updates.
If your cursor is not available within the VM, or you cannot select anything, restart it.
The shared folder within the VM will likely not function. VMWare requires several commands specific
to your installation to temporarily share a folder with the host. At the time of this writing, a known bug
was preventing this. I currently recommend using a USB device connected to the VM to transfer files,
which we will do together later.

After all updates are installed, shut down the VM and continue to the section titled "Preserve Stock Debian".
Preserve Stock Debian
Regardless of your host operating system (macOS, Linux, or Windows) or VM client (UTM, VirtualBox, or
VMWare Workstation Pro), you should now possess a VM with a clean version of stock Debian. You could
launch this VM and start configuring your OSINT investigative environment, but I encourage you to first create
a clone of this machine while it is in such a pristine state. This way, you can always return to an untouched
version of Debian which has not been modified if needed. I often need to do this when I mess something up
while testing new software. This prevents me from creating a new Debian VM from scratch every week. Shut
down all VMs and consider the following.
UTM (macOS): You can right-click on any VM within UTM and choose the option of "Clone" to create an
identical copy. You can then right-click the new version and select "Edit" to change the name. In the following
image, I created a clone titled "OSINT VM", which can be customized without impacting my "Debian Stock"
VM.

VirtualBox (Linux and Windows): You can right-click on any VM within VirtualBox and choose the option of
"Clone" to create an identical copy. You can provide a unique name during this process and accept the default
options. I created a clone titled "OSINT VM", which can be customized without impacting my "Debian Stock"
VM. The image below displays my software.

60 Ch

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

VMWare Workstation Pro (Linux and Windows): You can right-click on any VM within VirtualBox and
choose the option of "Manage" then "Clone" to create an identical copy. You can provide a unique name during
this process and accept the default options. I created a clone titled "OSINT VM", which can be customized
without impacting my "Debian Stock" VM. The following image displays my software.

You sho
clones if
is the op
will use t

r future
NT VM
shed, we

Remove
We can r
•
•
•

UTM (macOS): Right-click any VM and select "Delete". This will remove the entry from the menu and
delete any files associated with the VM.
VirtualBox (Linux and Windows): Right-click any VM and select "Remove". This presents an option to
remove the entry from the menu or remove the entry and delete any associated files.
VMWare Workstation Pro (Linux and Windows): Right-click any VM and select "Remove". This
provides options to remove from the library or delete completely.

Display Settings
You should be able to adjust your VM window as desired, or make it full screen for best view. However, the
resolution is likely still low. Consider the following.
•
•
•

Right-click on the Debian desktop and choose "Display Settings".
Change the resolution to the maximum for your screen's ratio and click "Apply" then "Keep Changes".
If the text is now too small, select the "200% Scale" and click "Apply" then "Keep Changes".

Play with these setti
within the VM client
preferences.

t resolution available
n the Debian display

Debian Desktop In
The following image
Dock at the bottom
Dock. We will chang

ots to a view of the
es to it and hides the

OSINT VM Operating Systems 61

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Debian Customization
From this point forward, only use the "OSINT VM" for any customization. The only exception should
be to occasionally open the "Stock Debian" VM to apply any updates.
Persistent Dock
When Debian boots, you see the dock at the bottom of the screen, but it disappears once you click on the
workspace. I prefer a static Dock within my VM, on the left of the screen, which is always visible. If you do too,
conduct the following.
•
•
•
•
•
•

Open your web browser by clicking the Firefox icon after entering the "Activities" menu.
Navigate to https://extensions.gnome.org/extension/307/dash-to-dock.
Click "Install" and confirm twice.
Click the Activities menu; search "Extensions"; and open the Extensions application.
Under Dash to Dock, click "Settings".
Select "Left", disable "Intelligent Autohide"; enable "Panel mode"; and adjust the icon size as desired (I
prefer 32). You should see a much better environment for launching applications.

Terminal in Dock
We will use Terminal more than any other application throughout this guide. While we will use an automated
script to rebuild our Dock icons later, we should go ahead and add Terminal to it now.
•
•
•

Click the nine dots in the lower-left of Debian.
Hover over the Terminal application.
Right-click and select "Pin to Dash".

Terminal Appearance
Unlike Ubuntu, the default Gnome Terminal in Debian has a white background. Many of the Linux applications
which we will use force white text which would not be visible within this window. Therefore, consider changing
the appearance of Debian's Terminal with the following steps.
•
•

From within Terminal, select the three bars menu and choose "Preferences".
Change the "Theme Variant" from "Light" to "Dark" and close the settings.

Debian Background and Windows
Personally, I do not like the default colors and wallpaper of Debian, and prefer something more professional.
Debian removed the ability to easily change wallpaper to a solid color, so we will do it all through Terminal. I
conducted the following on my new VM. The fourth and final command adds maximize, minimize, and fullscreen buttons to all windows.
gsettings set org.gnome.desktop.background picture-uri ''
gsettings set org.gnome.desktop.background picture-uri-dark ''
gsettings set org.gnome.desktop.background primary-color 'rgb(66, 81,
100)'
gsettings set org.gnome.desktop.wm.preferences button-layout
":minimize,maximize,close"

62 Chapter 8

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

The remaining steps within Debian create a better OSINT investigations environment.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Launch "Settings" from the "Show Applications" Menu.
Click "Notifications" and disable both options.
Click "Privacy", then click "Screen Lock" and disable all options.
Click "File History & Trash", then disable all options.
Click the back arrow, "Power", then disable "Automatic Suspend".
If desired, click "Mouse & Touchpad" then enable "Natural Scrolling".
Close all Settings windows.

Debian Centered Windows
By default, Debian opens all new windows to the left of the screen. I prefer them to be centered, especially when
launching the custom scripts, which we will download later. You can modify this setting with the following steps.
•
•
•
•

Click the nine dots in the lower-right of Debian.
Search "Tweaks" and open the application.
Click "Windows" and enable "Center New Windows".
Close the Tweaks application.

Debian Desktop Icons
By default, Debian does not display icons on the Desktop. There is much debate about whether this is a benefit
or a nuisance. I prefer to see files within the Desktop folder display on the Desktop itself. We can enable this
with the following steps, but we will use Terminal commands to replicate this in Chapter Fourteen.
•
•
•
•

Open your web browser by clicking the Firefox icon after entering the "Activities" menu.
Navigate to https://extensions.gnome.org/extension/2087/desktop-icons-ng-ding.
Click "Install" and confirm twice.
Within Terminal, execute cd ~/Desktop && rm *.desktop to eliminate the unnecessary
icons.

Debian Updates
It is important to keep the software on this original VM updated. There are different ways to do this, but I will
only focus on the direct Terminal method. Execute the following commands.
sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade -y
I typically check for updates weekly. Later, I present a script which does this for us. You should now have at
least one Debian VM titled "OSINT VM" which we will customize for our OSINT investigations. Once we
have finished, we will use the previous tutorials to clone this VM for each investigation.

OSINT VM Operating Systems 63

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER NINE

OSINT VM WEB BROWSERS
Your internet browser is likely the most vital application within your ultimate OSINT VM. If you are a Windows
user, your default web browser is either Internet Explorer or Microsoft Edge. Apple users are presented Safari
by default. Many computers now rely on Google's Chrome browser for internet access. I believe OSINT
professionals should avoid all of these if possible. All are inferior in my opinion, and you will encounter
difficulties with some of the websites you visit. Therefore, we need a better browser.
Firefox (mozilla.org)
The Firefox browser is my primary window into the internet on all of my machines, including my OSINT VMs.
It has enhanced security and a feature called "Add-ons" or "Extensions". These are small applications which
work within the browser that perform a specific function. They will make searching and documentation much
easier. I occasionally use a Chromium-based web browser when absolutely necessary, and will explain an option
later. However, many of the extensions that I need are more compatible with Firefox.
For the purposes of this chapter, I will assume you are configuring the Firefox application included in your new
Debian VM. However, all of the methods explained here could be replicated within your host or any other
computer. If you will be using your host computer for any web browsing, Firefox is highly recommended as the
default browser. Regardless of where you will be conducting your online investigations, have a properly
configured Firefox application.
Throughout this chapter, we will build an ideal configuration of Firefox for OSINT investigations. At the end
of the chapter, I offer a pre-configured profile which you can download into your VM for a turn-key approach.
However, I encourage you to replicate my steps manually to understand each feature before relying on the
downloadable profile. Whenever you need to quickly build a new VM for investigative use, you can import my
configuration to bypass all the labor.
Firefox Security
Before identifying Firefox resources which will aid in our OSINT research, we must first secure our browser to
the best of our ability. While the default Firefox installation is much more private and secure than most other
browsers, we should still consider some modifications. I personally use Firefox for all of my OSINT
investigations in my VMs, and as my default web browser on my personal laptop. I no longer possess multiple
browsers for various tasks. I believe that Firefox is the most robust, secure, and appropriate option for almost
any scenario. However, I recommend changing the following settings within Firefox.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Click on the menu in the upper right and select "Settings".
In the "General" options, uncheck "Recommend extensions as you browse" and "Recommend features
as you browse", which prevents some usage information from being sent to Firefox.
In the "Home" options, change "Homepage and new windows" and "New tabs" to "Blank page". This
prevents Firefox from loading their default page.
Disable all Firefox "Home Content" options.
Uncheck everything in the "Address Bar" menu.
Click the "Privacy & Security" menu option and select "Strict" protection.
Check boxes "Tell websites not to sell or share my data" and "Do Not Track".
Check the box titled "Delete cookies and site data when Firefox is closed".
Uncheck the box titled "Show alerts about passwords for breached websites".
Uncheck the box titled "Suggest Firefox Relay...".

64 Chapter 9

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Uncheck the box titled "Suggest strong passwords".
Uncheck the box titled "Fill usernames and passwords".
Uncheck the box titled "Ask to save passwords".
Uncheck the box titled "Save and fill addresses".
Uncheck the box titled "Save and fill payment methods".
Change the History setting to "Firefox will use custom settings for history".
Uncheck "Remember browsing and download history" and "Remember search and form history".
Check the box titled "Clear history when Firefox closes". Do not check the box titled "Always use
private browsing mode", as this breaks Containers.
In the Permissions menu, click "Settings" next to Location, Camera, Notifications, and Virtual Reality.
Check the box titled "Block new requests…" on each of these options. If you will never need audio
communications within this browser, you could do the same for Microphone.
Uncheck all options under "Firefox Data Collection and Use" and "Website Advertising Preferences".
Uncheck all options under "Deceptive Content and Dangerous Software Protection". This will prevent
Firefox from sharing potential malicious site visits with third-party services.
Select "Enable HTTPS-Only Mode in all windows".
Enable "Max Protection" under "DNS over HTTPS" and select "NextDNS".

This is where I again deviate from previous editions. I often walk a fine line between OSINT and privacy. In
my book Extreme Privacy, I took many actions in order to protect every facet of our online privacy and security.
This included a complete hardening of the Firefox browser which I use as a daily driver on my personal machine.
In previous editions of that book, I carried over many advanced Firefox settings into the recommended OSINT
machine. Today, I no longer feel these actions are appropriate. Over the past year, many of the Firefox
"about:config" modifications which I had previously presented began causing minor issues within investigations.
Some invasive sites, which needed documented as part of an investigation, could not be viewed due to
overprotective settings. I have had to remind myself of the scope of this book. It is designed to assist with
investigations and collection of digital evidence.
Several readers have asked if I recommend the latest "Global Privacy Control" and "Do Not Track" settings
within Firefox for OSINT investigations. While I encourage people to activate these options within their
personal machines, I do not recommend them for our OSINT browsers. These two settings can modify the way
a target website interacts with your browser. If you are trying to capture the way a site delivers data to the end
user, but you are preventing the site from exchanging information with your browser, you may be altering the
content which would have been delivered to a normal user. While we want to practice good digital hygiene while
we conduct investigations, we do not want to strictly prohibit all intrusive data from reaching our screens.
Our OSINT machine is not designed for personal internet usage and simply does not need the same security
through modifications which I believe are appropriate for a personal computer. Therefore, I have removed all
advanced Firefox settings from this book. Doing so eliminates the likelihood that problems will occur, and
enables the browser to be seen as another common configuration ready to view any website.
Firefox natively respects your privacy and security more than other browsers. These recommendations are for
those that want to tweak additional settings that may provide a new layer of protection, even if minimal.
I want to stress that the enhanced Firefox privacy and security settings presented within Extreme Privacy are
still very appropriate for personal machines. I just don't believe they are necessary here. For those who follow
both sides of my work (OSINT and privacy), please continue to use the advanced strategies within your personal
machines. With this book I want to strive harder to isolate these two worlds. While OSINT and privacy
complement each other, they should not be lumped into one bucket when it comes to our digital strategies.

OSINT VM Web Browsers 65

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Default Search Engine
In the previous configurations, I left Google as the default search engine whenever text is typed into the URL
bar. This was because Google typically brings us the best results. This may be appropriate for your investigations,
but you may be missing out on results from Bing and other engines. I prefer to use SearXNG for all initial
queries, and then migrate to Google or Bing if I need to dig deeper into a result.
SearXNG is a metasearch engine which aggregates the results of multiple search engines, such as Google, Bing,
and others, but does not share information about users to the engines queried. It is also open source and can be
self-hosted. The easiest way to get started is to visit https://searx.space/ and test a few public instances. If you
want to make one of them your default search engine within Firefox, conduct the following.
•
•
•
•

Navigate to your chosen public server and conduct any search.
Right-click on the URL and select "Add" next to the magnifying glass icon.
Navigate to Firefox's Settings menu and click the "Search" option.
Change your default search engine to the new option.

From any search result, I prefer to click the "Preferences" option on the far right and make a few modifications.
I disable any auto-complete options; disable SafeSearch; switch to a light theme; enable results in new tabs; and
enable additional search engines throughout all topics.
If you want to store these changes so they will be preserved after you restart Firefox, you must conduct the
following.
•
•
•
•

Navigate to Firefox's Settings menu and click the "Privacy & Security" option.
Click "Manage Exceptions" next to "Delete cookies...".
Enter the URL of your SearXNG instance, such as "https://baresearch.org" or " https://searxng.site".
Click "Allow" and "Save Changes".

If you do not trust a public instance of SearXNG, you can host your own, as explained next. I currently have a
self-hosted SearXNG instance running in my VM, which allows me to query dozens of search engines
simultaneously from my browser without trusting any third-party middle man. You may have a policy which
prohibits you from conducting investigations through untrusted online third-party search engine aggregators. If
you decide to use SearXNG as part of your routine, consider running your own instance locally. If you have
played with any of the public instances of SearXNG, you may now see the benefits of an aggregated search
service. You may also be considering the risks associated with this behavior. Let's start with the benefits of a
public instance.
•
•
•

All queries are submitted to search engines from a third-party server.
The IP addresses collected from engines are those of the server, not yours.
Your queries cannot easily be associated to one user by the engines.

That may sound great, but there are risks with public instances. Consider the following.
•
•
•

The host of the instance could monitor your queries.
If the host is popular, some engines may block access.
If the host has an outage, you are without service.

Overall, I believe it would be very unusual for a SearXNG host to monitor queries. This cannot be done with
the SearXNG software, and they would have to go out of their way to collect data about users. I just do not see
the motive of that. However, anything is possible. Personally, I prefer to self-host my own instance of SearXNG.
Consider the following benefits.
66 Chapter 9

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•
•
•
•

All queries are submitted from your machine directly to the engines.
The tracking code on engine websites is removed from the SearXNG pages.
Minimal usage ensures that all options function reliably.
Does not rely on the uptime of an online instance for my queries.

As always, there are also risks. My IP address is submitted with every query I make, but I am always behind a
VPN so I am not bothered by that. The ability to host my own code and know that no one else is intercepting
that data is more important to me. You can never hide the queries from the search engines themselves, but you
can limit the information loaded into your browser by not visiting their sites directly. Receiving results from
multiple search engines simultaneously is very advantageous. Take some time to determine whether you are
better served with a public instance or your own. I took the following steps on my Linux VM to configure my
own host locally. If you decide to replicate these steps, you should copy and paste this in its entirety.
sudo -H apt-get install -y \
python3-dev python3-babel python3-venv \
uwsgi uwsgi-plugin-python3 \
git build-essential libxslt-dev zlib1g-dev \
libffi-dev libssl-dev
mkdir ~/Documents/searxng
cd ~/Documents/searxng
git clone "https://github.com/searxng/searxng"
python3 -m venv searxngEnvironment
source searxngEnvironment/bin/activate
pip install -U pip
pip install -U setuptools
pip install -U wheel
pip install -U pyyaml
cd searxng
pip install -e .
sudo -H mkdir -p "/etc/searxng"
sed -i "s|ultrasecretkey|$(openssl rand -hex 32)|g" searx/settings.yml
sudo -H cp searx/settings.yml /etc/searxng/settings.yml
export SEARXNG_SETTINGS_PATH="/etc/searxng/settings.yml"
deactivate
My machine was now configured to run the SearXNG software. The following commands execute the program.
cd ~/Documents/searxng
source searxngEnvironment/bin/activate
cd searxng
python searx/webapp.py
The software is now running in the background. You can minimize this Terminal window. As long as it is not
closed completely, the service is running. You can launch Firefox and navigate to http://127.0.0.1:8888 to load
your own instance. Any modifications you make to this will be stored within your software, regardless of cookies.
You can execute the following to fetch any updates.
cd ~/Documents/venv/searxng/searxng
git pull "https://github.com/searxng/searxng"
If desired, you can add these two commands to the Linux update script, which is explained later. You could also
add the launch commands to the maintenance scripts we will build later in this guide.

OSINT VM Web Browsers 67

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Firefox Add-ons (Extensions)
There are thousands of extensions available for Firefox. Some are helpful, some are worthless, and some are
just fun. This chapter will discuss several of them. The Firefox Add-ons, sometimes called extensions, detailed
here will include a website for each option. You can either visit the website and download the add-on, or search
for it from within Firefox. The latter is usually the easiest way. While Firefox is open, click on the menu in the
upper right and then "Add-ons and Themes". This will present a page with a search field in the upper right
corner. Enter the name of the extension and install from there. The following are my recommendations, in order
of importance.
Firefox Containers: Isolate specific sites within tabs.
uBlock Origin: Block undesired scripts from loading.
DownThemAll: Download bulk media automatically.
Bulk Media Downloader: Download bulk media automatically.
FireShot: Generate screenshots of partial and entire web pages.
Nimbus: Alternative screen capture for large web pages.
SingleFile: New alternative screen capture option for HTML files.
Exif Viewer: Identify metadata embedded inside a photograph.
User-Agent Switcher and Manager: Emulate various browsers and devices.
Image Search Options: Conduct automatic reverse image searches.
Search By Image: An alternative tool for reverse image search.
Web Archives: Search archived versions of the current website.
Copy Selected Links: Quickly copy all hyperlinks from a website.
OneTab: Collapse or expand tabs into a single resource.
Stream Detector: Identify embedded video streams for archiving.
The following pages provide explicit instructions for installing and configuring each of these Add-ons. At the
end, I will explain how you can export your settings and replicate your work across practically any Firefox
installation. This will preserve your work and allow you to receive an identical experience if conducting
investigations across multiple computers. I will also present an option to run a few commands to replicate the
setup explained within this chapter. This will also benefit your virtual machines. Ideally, you would complete all
browser configurations within your original VM before cloning, exporting, or use of snapshots.
Firefox Containers (https://addons.mozilla.org/addon/multi-account-containers)
The first Firefox Add-on which I use daily is the Multi-Account Containers option from Mozilla. Multi-Account
Containers allows you to separate your various types of browsing without needing to clear your history, log in
and out, or use multiple browsers. These container tabs are like normal tabs, except the sites you visit will have
access to a separate slice of the browser's storage. This means your site preferences, logged-in sessions, and
advertising tracking data will not carry over to the new container. Likewise, any browsing you do within the new
container will not affect your logged in sessions, or tracking data of your other containers.
OSINT investigators can use this technique in many ways. With a traditional browser, you can only be logged
in to one instance of a social network. If you are logged in to a covert Facebook account, then open a new tab
and navigate to Facebook, you will be presented with the same logged-in account used in the previous tab. With
containers, we can isolate this activity.
You can log in to one Facebook account in one container, another Facebook account in a second container,
and any additional accounts in their own containers. This applies to any service, such as X (Twitter), Reddit, or
others. This allows us to simultaneously access multiple accounts within the same service without logging out
or opening a different browser. Let's configure it.

68 Chapter 9

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Once installed, you might see a new icon in the upper right in your Firefox browser which appears as three
squares and a "+" character. Many readers may not see this icon because it is in the "Extensions" menu item in
the upper-right which appears similar to a puzzle piece. Click this icon; right-click "Firefox Multi-Account
Containers"; and select "Pin to Toolbar". This will place our new extension icon directly within the browser
toolbar.
Click on this new icon and click your way through the introduction windows. Choose "Not Now" for any
Firefox features. You can now select the container you want to open. Default options include choices such as
Personal and Shopping, but you can modify these any way you desire. You can create, delete, and edit containers
from the main menu. When you click the "Manage Containers" option, you can change the color or icon
associated with a container or change the container name. The following tutorial replicates my configuration.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Open the Multi-Account Containers menu.
Click "Manage Containers".
Delete all containers by selecting each and clicking "Delete This Container".
In the "Manage Containers" menu, click the + in the upper left.
Enter the name of your new container, such as "Alias 01".
Choose a desired color and icon.
Repeat this process to create the number of containers desired.

At a bare minimum, I recommend containers labeled "Alias 01", "Alias 02", "Alias 03", and "Alias 04". You can
now either open a new container as a blank page or open links in a new or different container. The following
are a few of my usage examples.
Multiple Logins: While in Firefox, I want to open Facebook inside a unique container. I click on the containers
menu and select Alias 01. This opens a new blank tab within this container. I navigate to Facebook and log in
to an alias account. I then want to log in to a second Facebook account, so I click on the containers menu and
select Alias 02. This opens a new tab in that container. I then navigate to Facebook and receive a login prompt.
I log in to my second account and can switch back and forth between tabs. You should note that Facebook can
see you have the same IP address for each login, but they cannot see your cookies from one session to the other.
You could replicate this process for any other service. You could also have numerous Gmail accounts open
within one browser.
Safety: While I am viewing my target's X (Twitter) profile, I see a link to an external website from his page. I
am logged in to a X (Twitter) account within this container and I do not know what this linked website will try
to load. I do not want to jeopardize my investigation. I right-click on the link and choose "Open link in New
Container", and then select the desired container tab. The page I open cannot see any cookies stored within my
container associated with my X (Twitter) login.
Dedicated Container: I assign specific websites to a container so they will always open in that container. I use
this for Google because I do not want my search history associated with other investigation activities. If I ever
visit Google as part of an investigation, the site will open in a new container tab which I designated "Google".
This is regardless of which tab I try to use. The following steps configure this option.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Create a Containers tab titled "Google".
Click on the Containers menu.
Open a new Google tab.
Connect to google.com and click the Containers menu.
Select "Always open This Site in…".
Select the desired container.
Navigate to google.com from a standard tab.
Select "Remember my decision…".
Click "Open in…" the desired container.

OSINT VM Web Browsers 69

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

When complete, you have created a rule within Firefox. Any time you connect to google.com, regardless of the
container you are in, or if you have Google set as your default search from within the URL field, Firefox will
open a new "Google" tab to complete your connection. This isolates your Google traffic from any other tab,
and applies to any Google sites, such as Google Voice, Gmail, etc.
If you regret making this type of rule, you can either delete the entire container or just the policy for that site.
In this example, I can go to the Containers menu; click the "Manage Containers" option; then select the Google
container; then click the delete option.
When I first installed this add-on, I went a bit too far with customized containers. I wanted all Facebook pages
to load in their own container, which prevented the ability to log in to multiple accounts. I removed this option
and established the rule mentioned previously which allowed me to have multiple logins, but lost the isolation
from Facebook to other websites. I created containers for most of the sites I visited, which was overkill.
There is no perfect solution. Evaluate your needs and create the most appropriate set of containers vital to your
investigation. If you want to isolate a container to only open designated sites, click "Manage Containers"; select
the desired container; and enable the "Limit to Designated Sites" option. This prevents accidental openings of
undesired sites within a secure container.
uBlock Origin (addons.mozilla.org/firefox/addon/ublock-origin/)
I have previously recommended NoScript, Adblock Plus, Privacy Badger, and Disconnect as privacy Add-ons
that would help stop unwanted ads, tracking, and analytics. These are no longer present on any of my systems.
I now only use uBlock Origin, as it replaces all of these options. This section may seem a bit overwhelming, but
experimenting with the advanced settings should help you understand the functionality. Install uBlock Origin
from the Firefox Add-ons page or directly at the previous URL. You are now protected on a basic level. By
default, most known advertisements, tracking code, and malicious content is blocked. This step alone would
provide much needed protection from the internet. However, we can take it further.
Click on the uBlock Origin icon in the Firefox toolbar and select the "Dashboard" icon to the right, which
appears as a settings option. This will open a new tab with the program's configuration page. On the "Settings"
tab, click the option of "I am an advanced user". This will present an expanded menu from the uBlock Origin
icon from now forward. Click on the "Filter lists" tab and consider enabling additional data sets that may protect
your computer. I find the default lists sufficient, however I enable "Block outsider intrusion into LAN" under
"Privacy" and "EasyList/uBO-Cookie Notices" under "Annoyances". Click "Apply Changes" and Update Now"
after these selections. You now have extended protection that will be applied to all visited websites without any
interaction from you. When you encounter a web page with a lot of advertisements, such as a news media
website, it should load much faster. It will block many of the pop-ups and auto-play media that can be quite
annoying when conducting research. This protection will suffice for most users, but dedicated OSINT analysts
may choose to take a more advanced approach.
After you have enabled the Advanced settings as explained above, clicking on the uBlock Origin icon should
now present an expanded menu which will change as you visit different sites. In order to explain the function
of this menu, I will conduct a demonstration using the website cnn.com as it appeared in late 2022. Figure 9.01
displays the default view of uBlock Origin with the site loaded. Scrolling down this list of scripts that have either
been loaded or blocked, you can see several questionable scripts such as X (Twitter), Amazon, and Turner.
These scripts allow tracking across multiple websites and are the technology responsible for monitoring your
interests, web history, and shopping habits.
This menu is split into three columns. The first simply identifies the type of code or domain name of the script.
The second column is global settings. Anything changed here will apply to all website visits. The third column
contains settings for the current website. A single plus sign (+) indicates that less than ten scripts were allowed
from that specific option. Two plus signs indicate that between ten and one hundred scripts were allowed. The

70 Chapter 9

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

single minus sign (-) indicates that between one and nine scripts were blocked from that domain, while the dual
minus signs tell us that ten to one hundred scripts were blocked. In Figure 9.01, we see that over ten scripts
were allowed from cnn.com, and at least one script was blocked from sending data to X (Twitter). This is all
default behavior and provides a balance of functionality and security. uBlock Origin decides which content
should be allowed and which should be blocked.
Using this same page, let's modify the options. In Figure 9.02 (left), I have clicked on the far-right portion of
the first cell in the third column. This turned the entire third column red in color. This action activated an option
to refresh the page (arrows) and an option to save the change (padlock). Clicking the padlock and then refreshing
the page presented me with the example in Figure 9.02 (right). Since I blocked every script, the page would not
fully execute. It could not load images, design scripts, or any JavaScript. This is not useful at all, so I disabled
my actions by clicking on the left (grey) section of the top cell in the third column, which turned the entire
column back to grey in color. Saving these changes and refreshing the page brought me back to the example in
Figure 9.01.

Figure 9.01: An advanced view of uBlock Origin.
We can also take this to the opposite extreme. In Figure 9.03 (left), I clicked on the "power button" in the upperright. This turned the entire left edge green in color, and allowed all scripts to load on cnn.com. This includes
the dozens of intrusive scripts that could load advertisements on the page. You can also see that small plus signs
confirm that scripts were allowed to run while the minus signs in Figure 9.03 (right) state the opposite. For most
users, this allowance would seem irresponsible. However, there is a specific reason that we want the ability to
allow all scripts. If you are collecting evidence, especially in criminal cases, you may want to archive a page
exactly as it was meant to be seen. When we block scripts, we are technically modifying the page (evidence). By
intentionally allowing all scripts before the collection of the screen capture, we know that we are viewing the
page in an unmodified format. This may be overkill for many investigators, but you should know your options.
Next, we will modify the second (middle) column, which will apply settings globally. By default, all options are
grey in color, which is desired by most users. This indicates that the default block list is applicable, and only
invasive scripts will be blocked everywhere. For demonstration, I clicked on the right (red) portion of the top
cell in the second column. This turned the entire column red, and indicates that all scripts across all websites
will be blocked. After I saved my changes, every website will only load the most basic text content. This will
prohibit much of our research.

OSINT VM Web Browsers 71

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Loading a page such as a X (Twitter) profile resulted in no usable content. By clicking on the uBlock Origin icon
and clicking the left (grey) sections of specific cells within the third column, I enabled those scripts without
allowing everything on the page. While you may not be able to see the colors in Figure 9.03 (right), you can see
the difference in shading. In this example, the entire second column is red. This indicates that all scripts are
blocked globally. The third column is mostly red, but the options for twitter.com and twimg.com are grey. Those
scripts will be allowed, if approved by uBlock Origin's rules, only for that domain. If I load a blog that has scripts
from X (Twitter), they would still be ignored.
These are extreme examples. Let's bring this back to some sanity. The following is how I recommend using
uBlock Origin. Install, enable advanced options, and proceed with your work. When you arrive at a website that
is blocking something you want to see, open the menu and click on the left (grey) section of the top cell in the
third column. That will allow everything to load on that page, and that page only. When you are about to navigate
to a questionable site that may try to install malicious code on your machine, click on the right (red) section of
the top cell in the second column. That will block all scripts on all pages. Conduct your research and reverse the
change when you are finished. Remember to click the save button (padlock) after each change and refresh the
page.
Hopefully, you are practicing these settings and learning how this program functions. It is an amazing option
that has protected me many times. If you are doing things right, you have likely completely messed-up your
settings and are now blocking things you want while allowing things you do not. Don't worry, we can reverse all
of our mistakes by first changing the global (second column) settings back to grey (left section of top cell). Next,
return to the dashboard settings of the add-on, and click on the "My Rules" tab. In the second column
(Temporary Rules), select all of the text and press the delete key on your keyboard. Click the "Save" button in
this same column and then the "Commit" button to apply these settings everywhere. This resets our extension
and brings us back to default usage regardless of your modifications. This is important in the event you go too
far with settings in the future. Removing and reinstalling the extension does not always wipe this data out of
your system.
The primary benefit of uBlock Origin over other options is the simple ability to block malicious scripts without
customization, while having an option to allow or block any or all scripts at our disposal. This is a rarity in these
types of Add-ons. Another benefit is the ability to bypass website restrictions, such as a news site blocking
articles unless the visitor has a subscription service. Consider the following example with the Los Angeles Times.
Visiting the page allows you to view three articles for free, but you must have a paid subscription in order to
continue using the site. If I click on the uBlock Origin menu while on this page, select the right (red) option on
the right (third) column under the setting for "3rd party scripts", then the padlock icon, and reload the page, I
see a different result. I am now allowed to see the article. This is because this website relies on a third-party
script to identify whether a visitor is logged in to the service. This modification presents unlimited views of
articles without registration on this and thousands of other websites.

Figure 9.02: Disabled scripts within uBlock Origin.

72 Chapter 9

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Figure 9.03: Fully and partially enabled scripts with uBlock Origin.
The final example of uBlock Origin within this chapter, which I rely on with my daily browsing, is the Inline
Scripts blocker. For this demonstration, I will navigate to cnn.com. Clicking on almost any article presents a
new page, including new annoyances. An undesired video begins playing while scrolling down the page, multiple
images from unrelated articles populate over some of the article text, a pop-up advertisement interrupts my
view, and over 56 scripts attempt to monitor your activity. uBlock Origin blocks the malicious scripts, but not
all of the annoyances. We could block each script individually, but that is time consuming. Instead, consider a
simple modification of the inline scripts setting.
Click on the uBlock Origin menu while on the desired page, select the right (red) option on the right (third)
column under the setting for "inline scripts", then the padlock icon, and reload the page. The site should load
much faster and block all of the inline scripts being pushed to you by the provider. You should notice that all
pages on cnn.com load immediately, and without all of the undesired media interfering with your research.
Clicking the grey area in this same box reverses the action. I apply this feature to practically every news website
I visit. It blocks vital information if your desire is to obtain a screen capture as evidence, but provides a much
more pleasing environment if you simply want to read the articles.
DownThemAll (addons.mozilla.org/firefox/addon/downthemall)
DownThemAll simplifies the process of extracting bulk data from a web page. It attempts to identify linked
video, audio, images, documents, or any other type of media within a site. It then allows you to easily download
everything at once. Consider the following example. Archive.org possesses a copy of a website which once
offered several gigabytes of marketing data containing millions of records on Americans, including full names,
addresses, telephone numbers, and interests. The archive can be found at the following URL.
https://web.archive.org/web/20151110195654/http://www.updates4news.com:80/kyledata/
This URL presents hundreds of large CSV and TXT files. Later in this book, I discuss how to properly parse
through this content and create your own searchable file with this example. For now, I simply need to download
each file. While on the page, click on the DownThemAll toolbar menu and select "DownThemAll". In the new
window, you should see all of the data links present on this site. Clicking the "All Files" box near the bottom
selects each of the files. Clicking "Download" in the lower right begins the process of downloading all of the
data from the page (which may take hours), and places each file in the default download location for your
operating system. Please do not download this data set yet, as it will fill your disk space in your VM. We will
discuss external storage methods later. This add-on is a requirement for any browser I use. I find it to work
better than the next option, but consider all alternatives for your own needs.
Bulk Media Downloader (addons.mozilla.org/firefox/addon/bulk-media-downloader)
Similar to DownThemAll, this add-on can make downloading a large number of media files easy. It should serve
as a backup in the event you find a page which DownThemAll will not function properly. If you locate a page
OSINT VM Web Browsers 73

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

of several audio or video files, it can be time consuming to save them all manually. Additionally, you run the risk
of accidentally skipping a file. Bulk Media Downloader provides a solution. As an example, I navigated to X
(Twitter) and searched the word Video. This presented hundreds of embedded videos within a single page. I
launched Bulk Media Downloader, which displayed a pop-up option over my browser. In this pop-up, I can
select specific file types such as Video or Audio. I chose only the Video option and reloaded the X (Twitter)
page in the background. The Bulk Media Downloader tool began populating video links as I scrolled down the
X (Twitter) page. Clicking the Download button retrieved all of the videos in MP4 format. This utility works
well on sites that have a large number of embedded audio or video files, as well as those that contain numerous
documents. You can select or deselect entries individually, or select categories at the bottom that fit your needs.
Fireshot (addons.mozilla.org/en-us/firefox/addon/fireshot/)
Documenting and archiving your progress with an OSINT investigation is as important as the intelligence
discovered. The general rule is that if you do not have proof of your findings, then they never existed. Full Web
Page Screenshots, also known as FireShot, provides you with an easy solution to capturing all of your results.
When enabled, this extension is a button in the upper right portion of your browser. It appears as a blue square
containing the letter "S". Clicking the icon presents a menu with options. The best option is to select "Capture
entire page" and then "Save to PDF". This will create a PDF document of the entire page exactly as it appears
in your browser and then save it to anywhere you choose. The file can later be archived to a removable storage
device. The title of the document will match the title of the web page and it will include the URL of the page.
This method is preferred over a standard screen capture for several reasons. A typical screen capture only
captures the visible area and not the entire page. You must then open a program into which you "paste" the data
and then save the file. This extension automates this and saves it in a format that is difficult to edit. This can be
beneficial during testimony.
By accessing the "Options" area of the menu, you can assign customized naming features. Click "Show filename
template settings" in the options page and change the default value to the following.
%n-%u-%t-%y-%m-%d-%H-%M-%S
This setting will change the default name of each page capture. Each file will be named a numerical value,
followed by the website URL, followed by title, and followed by the date and time of capture. Changing the %n
value to 0 and the Pad option to 3 will ensure that your captures always start with a numerical value of 0 and
ascend chronologically. This can help determine the order of evidence you retrieved. Be sure to "Apply" and
then "Save" after you have made your desired changes. Notice that you can quickly see the order captured (first
three digits), target website, description, and date & time.
Nimbus (addons.mozilla.org/firefox/addon/nimbus-screenshot)
While FireShot is my preferred screen capture utility within Firefox, there are some instances where it does not
perform well. If you have a target's Facebook page that has a lot of activity present, this may create a screen
capture too large for FireShot. The rendering process will likely expend all of the computer's video memory and
fail to create the file. When this happens, I use Nimbus as my first backup.
Nimbus allows you to specify whether you want to capture only the visible portion of the page, the entire page,
or a custom selection from the page. The drop-down menu presents these choices and the result is saved as a
PNG file. This is not optimal for online investigations, but is better than no capture at all. Another feature of
Nimbus is the ability to manipulate captures. I believe that this is bad practice as we usually want to provide the
most authentic and accurate evidence as possible. I do not want to manipulate any potential evidence. Therefore,
I recommend the following configurations.
•

Click on the Nimbus icon and choose the "gear" icon in the lower-right.

74 Chapter 9

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•
•

In the "File name pattern" field, insert {url}-{title}-{date}-{time}. This will name every capture with
the URL and title of the target website along with date and time of capture.
Check "Enable Quick Screenshot" and select the "Entire Page" option in the first row and "Download"
option in the second row.

After these changes, clicking the Nimbus icon in the menu bar will no longer present a menu with options.
Instead, it will automatically select the entire page, apply the proper file naming, and download the capture as a
maximum quality PNG file to your Desktop. While a PDF file created with FireShot is the preferred file format,
a PNG file has other advantages. The PNG file is more universal and does not require PDF viewing software
such as Acrobat Reader. However, PNG files are easy to edit, and establishing the integrity of the file may be
difficult. I believe that Nimbus should be used as a supplement to FireShot.
One common failure of both FireShot and Nimbus is the capture of extremely large Social Network pages.
While this is rare on computers that have ample resources such as processing power and RAM, it can be quite
common on older machines with low specifications. Surprisingly, I have found FireShot to work better on large
X (Twitter) profiles and Nimbus to be best for large Facebook pages. I have no logic to offer for this discovery.
Again, having both at our disposal will make us better prepared for online evidence collection. When both fail,
consider Firefox's own solution, displayed next.
Firefox Screenshot
You may not like either FireShot or Nimbus. In general, you get what you pay for with these (they are free).
When I have an extremely long Facebook or X (Twitter) page, I find both of those options mediocre at best.
Lately, I find myself using the embedded Firefox Screenshot utility more than anything else. Consider the
following example. I loaded my own X (Twitter) profile and scrolled back to posts from a year prior. This
generated quite a long page and my computer fans increased speed due to the heat generated from my processor.
I attempted a screen capture with both FireShot and Nimbus, and each failed. I then executed the following
with Firefox.
•
•

Right-click within the page and select "Take Screenshot".
Choose "Save full page" and click "Download".

The process ran for about three minutes and saved an image .png file to my default downloads directory. It was
several megabytes in size. The default filename includes the word Screenshot, date, and title from the webpage.
SingleFile (addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/single-file/)
The previous options have always been the standard way of saving content. However, we should always embrace
new services. In late 2022, I was struggling to archive a large page, which led me to seeking alternative capture
Add-ons. SingleFile saves any page as a HTML file, which can bypass many resource restrictions while generating
a PDF. Before we test it, let's modify several settings. After right-clicking the SingleFile icon in the menu bar
and choosing "Manage Extension", I conducted the following.
•
•
•
•

Click the "Preferences" tab.
Expand "User Interface" and enable "Open saved pages in a new tab".
Expand "HTML Content" and disable "Remove hidden elements".
Enable "Save original URLs of embedded resources".

You can now load any page and click the SingleFile icon to begin the process. The add-on will collect all of the
content from the page and embed it into a single HTML file within the Downloads folder of your VM or host.
You can open this file within your web browser to see the archive. Our changes simply apply settings which try
to save an archive close to the original. By opening the result in a new tab after completion, we will know that
everything worked.

OSINT VM Web Browsers 75

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

We can also save multiple tabs all at once within the SingleFile menu. Executing this feature archived each page
as a separate file and also opened each archive for immediate viewing. You should notice the file names now
include the title of the page and full timestamp. The sizes assure us that all of the data is embedded into the file.
Since this utility is embedding Base64 images directly into the HTML file, we only have one file to archive or
export. Lately, this tool has been much more reliable than PDF export options, and the source of the HTML
captures additional pieces of data for our investigation.
Exif Viewer (addons.mozilla.org/en-us/firefox/addon/exif-viewer)
This extension provides right-click access to the Exif data embedded into images. Later chapters explain what
Exif data is and how it can be useful. With this extension enabled, you can right-click on any full-size image
located on a web page. The menu option is "View Image Exif Data" and a new window will open when selected.
This window will identify any available metadata about the image. Figure 9.05 (left) displays the right-click menu
with a new option to View Image Exif Data. Overall, most photos on social networks do not contain any
metadata. They have been "scrubbed" in order to protect the privacy of users. However, many blogs and
personal websites display images that still contain metadata. While Chapter Twenty will explain online websites
that display this metadata, a browser add-on is much more efficient. In my experience, this extension will increase
the number of times that you will search for this hidden content.
User-Agent Switcher (addons.mozilla.org/firefox/addon/user-agent-string-switcher)
Occasionally, you may visit a website that does not want to cooperate with Firefox. Browsers notify websites of
their identity and websites can alter or refuse content to certain products. One example is that some older
websites require Microsoft's Internet Explorer to view the content. Even though Firefox is capable of displaying
the information, a website can refuse the data to the browser. Another example is mobile websites that display
different content if viewing from an iPhone instead of a computer. This can now all be controlled with UserAgent Switcher and Manager. Note that this is a different application than the recommendation within the
previous edition of this book (User-Agent Switcher). User-Agent Switcher and Manager offers many new
features, one of which we will discuss in the Instagram chapter.
When installed, you have a new option in your browser. The menu allows you to choose a mobile operating
system, such as iOS or Android, or a desktop browser such as Internet Explorer or Chrome. It will also allow
you to specify your operating system such as Mac or Windows. Whatever you choose, this data will be sent to
any site that you visit. If you visit a website of a tech-savvy target, he or she may know that you were looking
around. You may also be revealing that you are using a specific browser, such as Firefox, and a Windows
computer (common in government). You could now change your agent to that of a mobile device or Google
Chromebook which may not look as suspicious.
To do so, you would click on the menu bar icon; select the desired browser to emulate (such as Edge), select
the desired operating system (such as Windows); choose exact offering (such as Edge 92.0.1 Windows 10); and
click "Apply (container on window)". Click the "Test UA" button to visit a page which will confirm your new
active user-agent. To return to the default Firefox option in your native operating system, click on the "Restart"
button and refresh the page. Figure 9.04 displays an example where a mobile version of Yahoo was delivered to
a desktop computer. Figure 9.05 displays the same page without any user-agent spoofing.
I have used this on several occasions to bypass poor security protocols. During one investigation, I had
encountered a web forum of a hacking group that always appeared blank upon visit. Google had indexed it, but
I could not see any content. By changing my default agent to Firefox on a Linux machine, I was allowed to see
the content. The group had enabled a script that would only allow the page to be viewed on Linux computers.
In another situation, while still employed by the government, various mandated online training needed to be
completed in order to maintain specific certifications. This government-hosted training was poorly designed and

76 Chapter 9

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

required users to access via Internet Explorer. Since I used an Apple computer, I could not connect until I
changed my agent to Internet Explorer within my Firefox browser.
Please note that user-agent spoofing will not fool every website. If the target site includes JavaScript which scans
for additional identifiers, such as touch points and video cards, the real details may be presented. I host a
demonstration page at https://inteltechniques.com/logger which you can use to see how some sites may
bypass your trickery. While this level of scrutiny is rare, it is a possibility. Always know what websites may be
able to see about your computer and connection before any sensitive investigation. Refresh my test page as you
make changes to this extension.

Figure 9.04: User-Agent Switcher and Manager disguising a desktop system as a mobile device.

Figure 9.05: A page without user-agent spoofing.
Image Search Options (addons.mozilla.org/firefox/addon/image-search-options/)
A later chapter explains reverse image search engines and how they can identify more target photographs.
Popular options include Google Images and TinEye. This extension automates the reverse search when an image
is right-clicked. When installed, "Image Search Options" is present when you right-click on an image.
Highlighting this option presents several reverse image search services including Google, Bing, TinEye, Yandex,
OSINT VM Web Browsers 77

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Baidu, and others. You will later learn how my online search tool will execute an image search across all of those
services at once. However, this tool can be beneficial due to the convenience and obscure services such as Karma
Decay, which looks for copies of images on Reddit. This add-on removes any excuse to not always check reverse
images on target websites. With this add-on enabled, you will be ready to enhance your searches during that
investigation.
Search By Image (addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/search_by_image)
The previous option has been present in my OSINT VMs for a long time. Recently I added Search By Image as
an alternative add-on. While it seems to be updated more often and has additional options, Image Search
Options also has unique services missing from this one. I plan to keep them both available in case one should
ever become blocked by a specific service. However, Search By Image has one huge advantage. It allows you to
capture an image from a page without knowing the source URL or being able to right-click an image file.
Consider the following scenario.
Assume you are on a website which has either restricted right-click access or has embedded images in a way
which makes them inaccessible. This is very common within newer social networks. Search By Image allows you
to crop any visible part of a page and then conduct a reverse image search analysis across multiple services. The
following steps walk through the process.
•
•
•
•
•

Left-click the Search By Image icon in the upper-right of the browser.
Change the "Select URL" drop-down menu to "Capture".
Select the desired service, such as Bing.
Use your cursor to draw a rectangle around the target image.
Click "Search" in the lower popup menu.

A new tab should open with your reverse image search results. This can be a vital utility when you encounter
sites which strive to prevent unauthorized copying of content. I have also used this on protected PDF files
which contain images but do not allow right-click access or ability to extract images. You could even open a
locally-stored PDF within Firefox in order to take advantage of this tool.
Web Archives (addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/view-page-archive)
This extension provides a link to archived versions of websites whenever a page has been modified, is
unavailable, or has been deleted. Let's change a few settings before we tackle usage. I clicked the Web Archives
icon in the menu bar; expanded the three dots to see the menu; selected "Options"; and enable all search engines.
We can now click the Web Archives icon and choose from multiple services. Each will query the current tab for
archives from previous dates. We also have the "All" option which opens a new tab for each activated service,
which can be fairly resource intensive.
Copy Selected Links (addons.mozilla.org/firefox/addon/copy-selected-links/)
This simple add-on will identify any hyperlinks within the selected text of an individual web page. It will store
the links within your operating system's clipboard, which allows you to paste them into any application of your
choice. While only a small utility, it can quickly turn a large project into an easily completed task.
Using the utility is fairly straightforward. While on any website, select any or all text, right-click anywhere in the
page, and select the "Copy selected links" option in the menu. The links will be stored in your clipboard and you
can paste them into Notepad, Excel, or any other productivity application. There are unlimited uses for Copy
Selected Links, and below are a few of my favorite.

78 Chapter 9

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•
•
•
•
•
•

Facebook: When I am on my target's list of Facebook friends, I will select all text and use Copy Selected
Links to quickly record each hyperlink to an individual's profile. I will then paste these into Excel for
later analysis. Comparison with previous captures identifies those that were "unfriended".
X (X (Twitter)): When I am viewing a X (Twitter) profile, I will use this utility to capture all links to
external websites and photos.
YouTube: When viewing a person's YouTube videos page, Copy Selected Links allows me to paste the
entire collection of linked videos into a report.
eBay: While viewing results from a search for a specific fraudulent product, I can quickly copy the
active hyperlinks to each auction and paste them directly into a report in seconds.
Human Trafficking: While viewing ad results for suspected human trafficking victims, I can copy all
active hyperlinks and paste directly into a report, email, or memo for other investigators.
PDFs: Since I can open PDF files within Firefox, I can also use this tool to extract all hyperlinks from
within the file.

Performing screenshots during my investigation in these examples would never identify the direct links to the
visible content. A combination of screen captures and links provides a more comprehensive report. I always
press "ctrl-a" to select all of the content; right-click within the page; and choose "Copy selected links". I can
then paste all hyperlinks from that page within any text editor.
OneTab (addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/onetab/)
This extension provides simple and effective management of browser tabs by allowing you to collapse any open
pages into a list of bookmarks. Once installed, it is activated by clicking on the blue funnel icon on your toolbar.
Doing so will close any open tabs and open the OneTab management page. The collapsed tabs are displayed on
this page as a group of bookmarks. Each individual bookmark is made up of a page title, with the respective
URL embedded as a link. Any previously saved tab groups are stored further down the page in reverse
chronological order.
Interacting with the management page is straight forward. At the top of each tab set is an editable title which
defaults to the number of tabs in that group. Left-click on the title to change it to something logical for that set
of links, such as "Username Subject X". To the right of the title is a date and timestamp indicating when the list
was saved. You can drag and drop individual bookmarks to change the order in each group or to move links
from one group to another. Clicking on "Restore all" will re-open each of the bookmarks into its own tab.
The bookmarks are links, not saved pages, so you will be reloading any non-cached page content from the
remote host. Selecting "Delete all" will destroy the bookmarks in that group. Selecting "More…" gives options
to rename, lock, or star the tab group. "Star this tab group" pins that group to the top of your management page,
independent of the date and time created.
Using "Share as web page" is not recommended as it creates an html page of your tab group on the OneTab
servers. The preferred method for transferring OneTab bookmarks is to use the export feature, which is found
in the upper right menu. This will allow you to copy links as plain text and paste them into a secure platform.
OneTab defaults to deleting the bookmarks from a group if you select "Restore all". To change this behavior,
select "Options" and select "Keep them in your OneTab list". Right-clicking on a web page will bring up the
OneTab context menu which allows for more granular tab selection. OneTab collects no user data unless you
intentionally click on the "Share as web page" feature. Barring that feature, all data is stored locally.
Stream Detector (addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/hls-stream-detector)
This extension has become vital during my daily OSINT routines due to the prevalence of streaming video
within my daily investigations. Whether pre-recorded or live, many websites now deliver video via embedded
streams rather than traditional files. While we could once easily right-click an online video and download the file
OSINT VM Web Browsers 79

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

as an MP4, that is rare today. We must now be prepared to encounter video stream protocols such as playlists
(M3U8) and transport stream (TS).
Let's take for example videos posted on X (X (Twitter)) by CNN. When presented with a video on CNN's X
(Twitter) feed right-clicking this video provided an option to copy the video address, but nothing to download
it. Monitoring the network activity of the page through "Inspect Element" presented numerous small files, none
of which were the entire video. However, clicking on the Stream Detector extension and refreshing the page
presented the options visible in Figure 9.06. These M3U8 URLs represent streaming videos available on the
current page. If there is a M3U8 listed as "master" that is typically the video of interest but often I will need to
test each M3U8 link and locate the specific video of interest by process of elimination. Clicking this link copies
it to the clipboard so that it may be pasted into VLC for playback or conversion.
Downloading and opening this link within VLC media player, which is explained in the next chapter, plays the
entire video within the software. The Linux-based Python tools which we create in the next chapter help us
do
fy
ar
nt
ou
le
w
e
wi

Figure 9.06: The Stream Detector extension displaying embedded video streams.
If this extension provides value to your investigations, but you find some sites which do not function, consider
adding another Firefox extension titled The m3u8 Stream Detector (addons.mozilla.org/firefox/addon/them3u8-stream-detector). It may pick up missing streams. This add-on will be vital during the Broadcast Stream
chapter much later in the book. We will use it to immediately identify files which stream live news coverage
from all over the world, and that file will be used to populate our custom search tool. This is a great example of
how one OSINT resource works in tandem with others.
Firefox Toolbar Customization
Remember that many Firefox extensions will be embedded into the "puzzle" icon, which I do not like. I want
them available to me instantly, and I want them in my preferred order. I conduct the following.
•
•
•

Right-click any empty spot on the toolbar and select "Customize Toolbar".
Drag any undesired icons, such as "Pocket" and "Account" down to remove.
Drag remaining items into the order desired and click "Done" when finished.

80 Chapter 9

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Exporting and Importing a Pre-Configured Profile
At this point, it may seem overwhelming when thinking about the abundance of Add-ons and their proper
configurations. I currently use several Windows, Apple, and Linux virtual machines and must keep my Firefox
browser updated on all of them. I no longer manually update each browser. Instead, I maintain a single Firefox
browser that includes all customizations that I desire. I then import these settings into any other browsers in
order to replicate the experience across every computer I use. In a moment, I share my profile for easy import.
The following instructions allow you to export your final settings and import the same customizations into other
investigative computers. Only execute this tutorial on a new install of Firefox that has no saved settings, or
within a version of Firefox that you want to be overwritten. Do not overwrite your current version if you have
bookmarks, extensions, or other data that you want to keep. You should backup any settings if proceeding on
an older install. As a final warning, the following steps will overwrite any custom options applied to your target
Firefox installations.
•
•
•
•
•
•

Open your CONFIGURED version of Firefox; click the menu button (three horizontal lines); click
"Help"; then "More Troubleshooting Information".
Under the "Application Basics" section, click on "Open Directory". A window with your profile files
will open. Close Firefox, but leave this window open.
Copy these files into a new folder on a removable drive.
Open your NEW version of Firefox; click the menu button (three horizontal lines); click "Help"; then
"More Troubleshooting Information".
Under the "Application Basics" section, click on Open (or Show) Folder (or Directory). A file window
will open. Close Firefox, but leave the window open.
Paste the content of the new folder on your removable drive into this folder. Overwrite any files when
prompted. Restart Firefox.

The result should be a copy of Firefox which contains every add-on you configured from this chapter. This
profile could be copied to an unlimited number of computers, as long as the versions of Firefox were identical.
Custom Firefox Profile
While I prefer readers create their own Firefox configuration, I respect that a lot of effort is required to replicate
these steps within multiple machines. Therefore, I have created a custom file which includes every configuration
explained within this chapter. It can be used within a new Debian VM with an untouched Firefox installation.
The following will only work within Debian. First, launch Firefox then close it. Open Terminal and copy and
paste the following commands all at once.
sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y curl
cd ~/Desktop
curl -O https://inteltechniques.com/data/osintvm/ff-template.zip
unzip ff-template.zip -d ~/.mozilla/firefox/
cd ~/.mozilla/firefox/ff-template/
cp -R * ~/.mozilla/firefox/*.default-esr*
cd ~/Desktop && rm ff-template.zip
Future chapters explain more about these types of commands, but let's digest these for future use. The first
command installs curl, which we will use to download a file via Terminal. The second command changes the
path within Terminal to our desktop. The next command downloads my custom Firefox template to the
desktop. The fourth command decompresses the file and extracts all data. The next command changes our
directory to the downloaded decompressed files and the final commands copy our Firefox template file into the

OSINT VM Web Browsers 81

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

appropriate folder and delete the downloaded file. Re-launching Firefox should now present the following
customizations.

Firefox Custom Profile Issues
As I was preparing to publish this edition, I noticed that Firefox occasionally resets the profile within the
browser. If you are missing the extensions, you can conduct the following at any time to restore them. First,
close Firefox and execute the following within Terminal to delete the current profile and create a new build.
Enter "A" if prompted to overwrite files. This can also be done if you simply want to rebuild your Firefox
installation to the default settings from this chapter.
cd ~/.mozilla/firefox/*.default-esr*
rm -r *
cd ~/Desktop
curl -O https://inteltechniques.com/data/osintvm/ff-template.zip
unzip ff-template.zip -d ~/.mozilla/firefox/
cd ~/.mozilla/firefox/ff-template/
cp -R * ~/.mozilla/firefox/*.default-esr*
cd ~/Desktop && rm ff-template.zip
NOTE: The default version of Firefox within Debian is the Extended Support Release (ESR) build. While I
would not use this on my personal host machine, it works well for an OSINT VM. It receives updates less
frequently than the traditional version, but offers better stability for usage within our VM.
Chromium-Based Browser
I always prefer the previous custom Firefox configuration for my daily investigations. However, I also want the
availability of an untouched Chromium-based browser when needed. This might be to appear as a more standard
user to whatever website I am accessing or in the event I have tweaked my Firefox browser to the point of
blocking some online content. It could also be to take advantage of a Chromium-based extension which is not
available within Firefox. Sometimes, I want an untouched browser to document the exact way an intrusive
website appears to the average user without any modification extensions. I believe every good OSINT machine
should have a secondary browser option.
Google Chrome is an excellent browser that is known for being very fast and responsive, and it is also very
secure by nature, but compromises privacy since Google receives a lot of data about your internet usage. Chrome
is based on open-source Chromium, but Chromium can be tricky to install and keep updated, especially for
ARM-based machines. Both Firefox and Chromium "sandbox" each tab. Sandboxing restricts the content in
that tab to that tab only, preventing it from "touching" other tabs in the browser, or the computer's hardware.
This is a very important feature in preventing malware from being installed when you visit a malicious website.
This is where I deviate again from previous editions. I believe our best Chromium-based browser within an
OSINT VM is Brave. This is for two reasons. First, Brave has removed most of the connections to Google
which helps prevent sharing of usage details. Second, Brave works the same on traditional and ARM-based
systems. We can install it with the following commands.

82 Chapter 9

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

sudo curl -fsSLo /usr/share/keyrings/brave-browser-archive-keyring.gpg
https://brave-browser-apt-release.s3.brave.com/brave-browser-archivekeyring.gpg
echo "deb [signed-by=/usr/share/keyrings/brave-browser-archivekeyring.gpg] https://brave-browser-apt-release.s3.brave.com/ stable
main"|sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/brave-browser-release.list
sudo apt update && sudo apt install brave-browser -y
After installation, launch Brave and skip all onboarding options. Disable any options to "make Brave better"
which sends diagnostic data to their servers. You are now ready to use the browser.
If you do not need a Chromium-based browser, and can complete all of your investigations within Firefox,
Brave can be omitted from your VM. However, possessing this option can be beneficial when needed. You can
also use it to access Tor network sites, as explained next. I keep Brave ready on my VM, but rarely open it.
Tor Browser (torproject.org)
Tor is an acronym for The Onion Router. Basically, it allows you to mask your IP address and appear to be
browsing the internet from a false location. It also allows you to access sites hosted on the Tor network, which
is the reason we need it within our VM. If you ever encounter a URL which ends in ".onion", you should open
that link in the Tor Browser. Installing Tor Browser into Linux is no longer an easy task. Most Terminal
commands floating around the internet no longer work and the official Tor website recommends manual steps
which require launching via Terminal every time. This is a good opportunity to install the application manager
Flatpak onto our system, which will make the Tor Browser installation and execution easy. It will also provide
a graphical software repository for future application installation. Conduct the following, and reboot after full
installation and configuration.
sudo apt update && sudo apt install flatpak -y
flatpak remote-add --if-not-exists flathub
https://dl.flathub.org/repo/flathub.flatpakrepo
flatpak install flathub org.torproject.torbrowser-launcher -y
flatpak run org.torproject.torbrowser-launcher
This will configure the Tor Browser and present two new applications on your device. After reboot, launch the
option titled "Tor Browser". The next task that Tor will complete is to create a connection to a Tor server. This
connects you to a server and routes all of your internet traffic through that server. After the connection is
successful, it will load a custom version of the Firefox browser. Now, every website that you visit through this
browser will assume you are connecting through this new IP address instead of your own. This provides a layer
of privacy to stay hidden from a suspect and allow access to the Tor network.
Tor Browser may be overkill for most investigations. If you are only searching and monitoring common services
such as Facebook, X (Twitter), or YouTube, this service is not needed. If you are visiting personal websites and
blogs of a tech savvy hacker, you should rely on your VPN. I only use this to access sites on the Tor network.
When using Tor, you may notice a drastic decrease in the speed of your internet. This is normal and unavoidable.
This often improves the longer you are connected. To stop the service, simply close the browser. This will
disconnect the Tor network and stop all services. Any activity conducted through the Tor browser is not
associated with your real internet connection or VPN. You can update Tor Browser, and all other Flatpak
applications, with the following command.
flatpak update

OSINT VM Web Browsers 83

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

If you are attempting this through UTM on a newer macOS device, expect problems. Tor Browser currently
does not support ARM-based hardware. There are a few unofficial projects supplying ARM-based builds, but I
avoid them for now. I will monitor the situation and update this guide once we have a reliable solution. Until
then, you can launch Brave and choose the "New Private Window with Tor" option within the far-right menu.
This will allow you to access Tor network websites.
Hard Page Refresh
I close this chapter with one last important tip. Internet cache can be a hurdle within your investigations. Any
time you visit a website, files are downloaded to your computer. Many sites have instructions embedded into
them which tell your browser how it should behave. It may instruct it to load images from your local cache from
your computer instead of fetching them again from the web server in order to decrease demand on the network.
You can click the refresh button all day, but it might only renew the page with previously downloaded content.
If images on your target website have changed, you may never know. This is where a hard refresh can assist.
The following steps force your browser to reload an entire page from the online resources instead of any locallystored cache files. I make a habit of doing this often to make sure I am viewing the most recent content.
•
•
•

Brave or Firefox (Linux and Windows): Press Shift+CTRL+R.
Brave or Firefox (macOS): Press Shift+Command+R.
Most browsers: Hold Shift while clicking the reload icon.

Summary
Your browser might be the most vital piece of your OSINT investigations. Make sure you spend some time
customizing it the way you need it.

84 Chapter 9

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER TEN

OSINT VM APPLICATIONS
Hopefully, you now have a functioning Linux Debian OSINT VM ready for further customization. That alone
provides a very secure environment for your online research. However, possessing customized software
applications within your VM would greatly enhance your investigations. Debian provides some basic
applications in the default installation, but I want to take that to the next level. In this chapter, we are going to
customize your Debian VM with numerous OSINT applications which will provide many new investigative aids.
Until now, much of this guide has been similar to my previous tutorials, while providing much more extensive
details. In my book OSINT Techniques, 10th Edition, this portion of the content combined Linux-based
applications with custom scripts which automated many tasks. This is where I deviate from the previous book.
In this chapter, I will only focus on manual installation and execution of several OSINT applications, without
explaining any of the automated scripts. This is for two reasons.
First, I want you to be able to articulate the behind-the-scenes manual processes. If you ever need to testify or
explain your actions, I don't want a response to be "I just pushed the button". Second, I want you to be able to
troubleshoot problems which may arise as commands change. Knowing how to manipulate the commands to
execute Linux-based apps will take you much further than waiting on me to update a script. Don't worry, I will
still provide automation to every task within this chapter through the use of bash scripts, including completelyconfigured files which can be downloaded from my website, but you will have to wait until Chapter Eleven for
that. Until then, please allow yourself to absorb the boring manual processes and their results. While this chapter
may seem dry and tedious at times, I promise the future benefits will be worth the effort.
Consider this chapter to be the manual approach in order to understand every detail of our ultimate OSINT
VM, and Chapter Eleven to be the "easy" way. Later, in Chapter Fourteen, my automated installation script will
allow you to create our entire machine, including all scripts, with only one command and almost no effort. Please
do not jump to that chapter, we still have a lot to learn. This is a long chapter.
Debian possesses a software "store" in which you can point and click through various Linux applications and
install them with ease. However, I discourage users from this method. Your choices are minimal and there are
likely better alternatives available. Instead, we will use the Terminal for almost all of our application installations.
If you followed the previous tutorials, you may already have the Terminal application in your software Dock
within your Debian VM created earlier. If not, you can always find the Terminal application by clicking the
"Activities" menu and then the nine dots within the Dock on the left of your screen. Open the Terminal
application and leave it open while we install some required software. I present this chapter in sections according
to the type of OSINT data being retrieved. Let's ease into things slowly and cover some basics surrounding
online videos.
Videos: VLC Media Player (https://www.videolan.org/)
By default, your Windows and Mac operating systems include media players which allow execution of audio and
video files. Your default Debian virtual machine may not have this luxury. However, this is easy to correct. VLC
is an application which can play practically any media files you throw at it. You could find VLC within the
Debian Software application, but I prefer to manually install it. This also provides our first explanation of
installation commands in Linux. Within Terminal, type the following commands, pressing return after each.
sudo apt update
sudo apt install vlc -y
Let's break this down, as you will see similar instructions throughout this chapter.

OSINT VM Applications 85

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

sudo: This command executes any following text with elevated privileges. It is similar to running a program in
Windows or Mac as the administrator. When using this command, you will be required to enter your password.
Note that passwords entered within Terminal do not appear as you type them, but they are there. Simply press
enter when finished typing. Any additional sudo commands in the same terminal session should not ask for the
password again until enough time passes in which Debian wants to make sure you still want these elevated
privileges.
apt update: This command updates the Debian lists of available upgrades to packages which need
upgrading, as well as new packages that have just come to the repositories. It basically fetches information about
updates from the repositories previously mentioned.
apt install: This tells D
to the command, we do not

s VLC. Since we added "-y"

After you have executed the
clicking the nine dots icon in
be set as the default option
metadata network access" op

the "Applications" menu by
ithin this menu and it should
st launch, disable the "Allow

Videos: FFmpeg (https://ffmpeg.org/)
This is another set of media tools, but these only work within Terminal. We will need them when we start adding
utilities to manipulate and download videos. Enter the following into Terminal and press enter.
sudo apt install ffmpeg -y
Later, we will create scripts which will automate the following functions. For now, let's understand the manual
process. Assume that you possess a video file named evidence.mpg in your Downloads folder, and you have
already navigated to that folder within Terminal with "cd Downloads".
Play Video: This option will force FFmpeg to attempt to play any video file with multiple video codecs. This
will often play videos that would not otherwise play using standard media players such as Windows Media Player
and VLC. This will also play many surveillance videos without the need for third-party programs. I once used
this technique to play a corrupt video file which captured a homicide, but standard video players could not
understand the data.
ffplay evidence.mpg
Convert Video to MP4: This option simply converts any target video to a standard MP4 format. This is
beneficial when the target video possesses a unique codec that prohibits playing universally. If the above option
can play the video, this option can convert it so that any computer should be able to play it natively. I often used
this to send copies of videos to prosecutors forced to use Windows computers. this is especially important when
dealing with ".webm" videos from YouTube. Not everyone will have the software for playing these videos, but
an MP4 should play on any system.

86 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

ffmpeg -i evidence.mpg
Extract All Video Frames: This is likely the most used utility within this set of applications. After supplying a
target video, this tool will extract the still images from the video. The result is a folder of uncompressed bitmap
(bmp) image files depicting practically every frame of the video. This is beneficial when close examination of
frames is necessary. I include this every time a crucial video will be used during prosecution of a crime.
ffmpeg -y -i evidence.mpg %04d.png
Extract Video Frames Every Second: The previous example may download way more images than you desire.
If you have a video five minutes in length at a high frame-rate, you may generate thousands of images. The
following command extracts only one image per second.
ffmpeg -i

-vf fps=1 %04d.png

Extract Audio: This option extracts the raw audio file out of any video, converts it to a 320k MP3 file, and
saves the file. I have used this to extract audio from video confessions and interviews, and it works well on any
online videos downloaded from the internet.
ffmpeg -i evidence.mpg -f mp3 -ab 320000 -vn
Rotate Video: You may encounter a video which has been captured from a mobile device and is rotated 90
degrees clockwise. This option allows us to rotate the video counterclockwise to a traditional view, and flips the
video vertically to generate a traditional view of a cellular video. This is beneficial during courtroom presentation,
especially when a jury is involved. this also converted to a universal MP4 file.
ffmpeg -i evidence.mpg -vf transpose=0
Merge Videos: You might have multiple video segments from the same original video which need combined
into one file. The following command assumes that I have a file called "video1.mp4" which needs another file
titled "video2.mp4" added to the end of it. After the execution, one file called "output.mp4" will possess both
videos as one.
ffmpeg -i video1.mp4 -i video2.mp4 -filter_complex
"[0:v][0:a][1:v][1:a]concat=n=2:v=1:a=1" -vsync vfr output.mp4
Remove Redundant Frames: This option removes single frames of a video that appear extremely similar to
the frame preceding it. In other words, it takes out all of the frames which are the same (no action) and only
leaves desired activity. This is great for surveillance video which contains hours of one scene without motion
detection.
ffmpeg -i evidence.mpg -strict -2 -vf
"select=gt(scene\,0.005),setpts=N/(25*TB)" evidence.mp4
As you can see, these commands can be lengthy and technical. We will later create one single custom script
which will allow us to easily choose which service we want to execute. The following image displays a folder of
generated screen captures with one file opened.

OSINT VM Applications 87

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Importa
I presen
install co
by the ap
the prog
complications.

ill fail to
required
ait until
run into

You will see some Pip errors or warnings displayed while you install some apps. These are often
dependency version conflicts, and typically do not impact the functions of the program. Since we will install
most programs within isolated virtual environments, these errors will not actually break any programs as they
claim. While we will take steps to eliminate as many errors as possible, yellow warning and red error text within
Terminal is common, especially warning about executing commands as Root. Please ignore these warnings on
our OSINT VM.
Python Virtual Environments
The installation of the previous applications using Apt were very basic. However, many applications will require
installation through the Package Installer for Python (pip), which will also install multiple dependencies which
are required for each program. Some programs only want specific versions of these dependencies and may not
work if newer versions are installed. In past editions, I lumped all Python applications within the root operating
system, which began to cause dependency conflicts. I no longer configure all applications and dependencies
within the root operating system. Today, I place Python programs within their own virtual environment using
either Python venv or pipx, each of which creates an isolated environment for the installation. This prevents
conflicts from one PIP program to another and keeps our system clean. Enter the following into Terminal,
which will provide the necessary configuration for both venv and pipx in Debian.
sudo apt update
sudo apt install python3-pip -y
sudo apt install python3-venv -y
sudo apt install pipx -y
We could now install applications via pipx by entering the following commands (Please do not replicate these
steps yet).
pipx install streamlink
pipx ensurepath
After closing and reopening Terminal, we would have full access to the Python application Streamlink (explained
soon). The installation and all dependencies were performed in an isolated environment which will not impact
any current or future Python applications. This is much easier than the venv option, but will not work on all
installations. We could have conducted the following to achieve the same result with venv (Please do not
replicate these steps yet).

88 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

mkdir ~/Downloads/Programs
mkdir ~/Downloads/Programs/Streamlink
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/Streamlink
python3 -m venv streamlinkEnvironment
source streamlinkEnvironment/bin/activate
sudo pip install streamlink
deactivate
Now, let's walk through each of these commands to better understand the strategy.
mkdir: Makes new directories for our software.
cd: Changes the directory to our Programs folder.
python3 -m venv streamlinkEnvironment: Creates environment.
source streamlinkEnvironment/bin/activate: Activates it.
sudo pip install streamlink: Installs the application.
deactivate: Stops listening for instructions.
Basically, we created a new isolated folder which will contain the pip installation and all supporting files. We
activated the environment before we started installing our software, and the installation was performed in a
folder isolated from the other applications within our operating system. Once we were finished, we stopped the
environment so nothing else would be placed within it. This prevents many software conflicts, and is especially
important as we continue to pour more Python applications. Overall, I prefer pipx whenever I have an option
to install a Python application which supports pip. Whenever I have a Python application which requires the
installation of several dependencies, I prefer venv. I will offer many more examples of each throughout this
chapter.
Software Dependencies
Before we proceed into the next sections, we need to apply two configurations to our OSINT VM. The first
installs Git, which will be heavily used in upcoming tutorials. Execute the following within Terminal.
sudo apt install git -y
Next, we must disable an annoyance which has presented itself within some Debian-based systems. Anytime we
install anything with pip, we receive an error about installing dependencies globally, even though we are installing
them within isolated virtual environments. We should disable this warning with the following Terminal
commands.
cd /usr/lib/python3.11
sudo rm EXTERNALLY-MANAGED
Videos: YT-DLP (https://github.com/yt-dlp/yt-dlp)
This may be my most-used Linux utility. The original Python script called YouTube-DL was the backbone which
helped us download bulk videos from YouTube and other sources. In recent years, a fork of this script called
YT-DLP has taken over as a more reliable option. Install with the following.
pipx install yt-dlp && pipx ensurepath
After we close and reopen Terminal, we will now have the necessary utilities installed for our media needs. This
process is not too exciting, and you will not immediately see anything useful after these actions. However, you
are laying the groundwork for the upcoming scripts. The YT-DLP script is ready to use, but only through the

OSINT VM Applications 89

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Terminal application. Let's conduct an example in order to understand the features, and then discuss a way to
automate queries.
Assume that we are looking for videos of Bob Ross teaching viewers how to paint with oils. You found the Bob
Ross video channel located at https://www.youtube.com/user/BobRossInc. Clicking on the "Videos" option
on that page presents https://www.youtube.com/user/BobRossInc/videos. This page displays over 600 full
episodes of his television program, along with other recent related videos. Clicking one of these videos presents
the following URL.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lLWEXRAnQd0
You want to download the video from this page in the best quality possible in order to attach it to your case.
The default YT-DLP command to do this is as follows.
yt-dlp "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lLWEXRAnQd0"
This will download the video to whichever directory you are in within Terminal. By default, you are likely in
your home folder, but that is not a great place to save a video. Therefore, let's change the saved location to your
desktop with the following commands.
cd ~/Desktop
yt-dlp "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lLWEXRAnQd0"
You should now see the video file on your Desktop in Debian. Playback will likely appear poor within the VM,
but you could copy that file out to your host for proper playback through the shared folder on your Desktop.
When you retrieved this video, you may have noticed that two files actually downloaded (one video and one
audio). This is because YT-DLP has detected that you have FFmpeg installed, and it chose to download the
highest quality option for you. If you had not possessed FFmpeg, you would have been given a lower quality
version. This is because YouTube presents separate audio and video files to the viewer when a high-quality
output is chosen. YT-DLP works in tandem with FFmpeg to download the best quality option and merge the
result into a playable file. This is the best way to extract a single video from YouTube and other video sources.
However, the true power is on bulk downloads.
Assume you downloaded the previous file in reference to your investigation. You then see that your target
possesses hundreds of videos on his YouTube "Videos" page. You want all of these videos, located at
https://www.youtube.com/user/BobRossInc/
videos. YT-DLP can download these with the following.
yt-dlp "https://www.youtube.com/user/BobRossInc/videos"
This will take some time to download everything, especially if the videos are long. If you want to cancel this
command, press "Ctrl" and "C" on your keyboard at any time. This terminates any process within Terminal and
may be beneficial throughout this chapter.
YT-DLP now includes features to download other data associated with a YouTube video, including comments,
subtitles, and description. We can modify our first download command to download all data associated with the
video as follows.
yt-dlp "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lLWEXRAnQd0" --write-comments
yt-dlp "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lLWEXRAnQd0" --write-subs
yt-dlp "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lLWEXRAnQd0" --writedescription

90 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

These commands target the desired video page; load all of the data requested; export it to a JSON text file; then
download the video file wherever your current Terminal path is set. If you want to download the data without
the entire video, you can add "--skip-download" to your command, as follows.
yt-dlp "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lLWEXRAnQd0" --write-subs -skip-download
In this example, the subtitle file appeared on my Desktop, as that was the last place I had navigated within
Terminal. This produced a text file with a .vtt file extension. Below are the first two lines of it.
00:00:29.988 --> 00:00:32.108
- Hello, I'm Bob Ross and I'd like to welcome
This generated the default language of English for the file. However, there may be more languages within this
data. The following command repeats the process and downloads all languages.
yt-dlp "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lLWEXRAnQd0" --write-subs -sub-langs all --skip-download
The following is the first two lines of the file containing Spanish subtitles
00:00:29.988 --> 00:00:32.108
- Hola, soy Bob Ross
Imagine the following scenario. You have a suspect on YouTube with hundreds of videos. You have been tasked
to download every video and identify the exact files and timestamps of every time he said the word "kill". One
command within YT-DLP would provide all of the data you need to conduct a search within all text files, and
the corresponding video evidence. We can also combine all of this into one command to download the video,
all comments, all subtitles, and description with the following command.
yt-dlp "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lLWEXRAnQd0" --write-comments -write-subs --sub-langs all --write-description
If you wanted the text-based information without downloading the video (or entire channel of videos), you
would conduct the following.
yt-dlp "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lLWEXRAnQd0" --write-comments -write-subs --sub-langs all --write-description --skip-download
We can also use YT-DLP to embed the default subtitles into the video, which will appear when played back,
with the following command.
yt-dlp "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lLWEXRAnQd0" --embed-subs
Note that all text files downloaded will be in JSON format. While the files can be opened within any text editor,
the format will be difficult to digest. I always recommend opening these JSON files within Firefox for the
best view.
While named YT-DLP, this utility works on most popular video websites. You should have no issues
downloading individual or bulk videos from YouTube, Vimeo, and many others. The bulk download option has
saved me numerous hours of manually downloading videos individually. I have yet to find any size or file number
limitations. This utility is likely my most used program within Linux, aside from browsers.

OSINT VM Applications 91

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

In 2019, I discovered a potential issue with this command. Since many video websites are now offering "UltraHD" 4K resolution videos, the file size can be quite large. Downloading an entire channel can take hours and
the files may contain over a terabyte of data. While I appreciate that YT-DLP always defaults to the highest
resolution video available, I may want to choose a lower resolution when downloading hundreds of files. The
following commands execute YT-DLP; queries a new high-definition target video; downloads the best quality
video up to a resolution of 1440p, 1080p, 720p, or 480p respectively; downloads the best quality audio available;
merges the two streams into one media file; and saves the video for archiving. Note that you would need to
delete each video if you wanted to test another resolution.
yt-dlp "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h6XCQUuZQU4" -f
'bestvideo[height<=1440]+bestaudio'
yt-dlp "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h6XCQUuZQU4" -f
'bestvideo[height<=1080]+bestaudio'
yt-dlp "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h6XCQUuZQU4" -f
'bestvideo[height<=720]+bestaudio'
yt-dlp "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h6XCQUuZQU4" -f
'bestvideo[height<=480]+bestaudio'
In the previous section about FFmpeg, I explained how you could extract the audio from a video file and save
it as an MP3. We can do the same thing with YT-DLP with even more features. Assume you want to extract the
audio from an online video which you do not possess on your device. The following extracts the native audio
in the best quality available.
yt-dlp "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h6XCQUuZQU4" -x
The result was a file with an extension of ".opus", which is common for YouTube. The following command
extracts that same audio, but saves it a s universal MP3 with high 320 kbps encoding.
yt-dlp "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h6XCQUuZQU4" -x --audio-format
mp3 --audio-quality 320k
Most videos you download from YouTube will be in their own ".webm" format, which not play on many
computers. You could use FFmpeg to convert downloaded videos to MP4, or just use the following YT-DLP
command which does this for you.
yt-dlp "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lLWEXRAnQd0" --recode-video mp4
If this seems overwhelming, please don't worry. Once we get to our video download script, you will click a
couple of buttons to replicate everything here.
Videos: Fragmented Videos
It is very common for websites to present embedded videos which consist of hundreds of small pieces of
streaming video frames. These files load seamlessly while viewing a video, but this delivery method can make
the download process difficult. Some sites do this to prevent copying of proprietary content, while others
eliminate unnecessary download of large single files if the video is stopped before the end. While YT-DLP is a
great program, it is not perfect. Submitting a URL which contains a fragmented video is likely to fail. Therefore,
we need to understand a manual way to approach this issue. Consider the video at the following URL
https://www.dailymotion.com/video/x42bdc7

92 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Any ".ts" files are small video fragments which are being streamed to your browser. This target video URL
contains hundreds of these files. Instead of targeting the video fragments, we want the "m3u8" file which acts
as a playlist for all of the video pieces. An example is displayed above in the second row. Right-click on this
option; highlight "Copy"; and select "Copy URL". Paste this URL into your video download tool. I prefer the
yt-dlp option. In this example, my URL is as follows.
https://vod.cf.dmcdn.net/sec2(Ssb3Z4xaO2eyCTqKmR8svWl6x777TzWc4q1-MZbefmErwTwS9w
fE3wMrlFkfXT-xJ3p81ftUrViKBXwYfQCXzeKYC_gyQep0C-jTum0FvhL9p1Lqj1vWrUfFRSfItglzNz
Gnhi6w69stLQ1k6mvL6w)/video/934/457/245754439_mp4_h264_aac.m3u8
Since you are providing a playlist of these video fragments to the download tool, the software can identify the
list of videos and reconstruct them into a single video file. The previous URL resulted in a one-hour single video
in MP4 format without any sign of spilt files. I rely on this technique weekly. It works for 99% of streaming
videos, but I occasionally find a difficult target. I can usually bypass most download restrictions with the next
technique.
Videos: Blocked Downloads
Some services generate much effort toward prevention of video downloads from their sites. If the previous
download tactics resulted in errors, you may have encountered a blocked file or stream. In most scenarios, you
can bypass this with a modified "referer". Consider the following example and modify for your own usage. In
2021, I was contacted by a former colleague who had a unique request. He was trying to download an old episode
of the television show "Live PD" as part of an investigation. The episode originally aired in 2016 and pirated
copies on torrent sites had all disappeared. It was the 56th episode of the first season and he had exhausted his
search. A query of "live pd" "s01e56" "watch" on Google displayed several sites which claimed to possess the
video. The first page of results loaded a video player but encountered an error when the stream was attempted.
Basically, the video file no longer existed so it could not be streamed within the browser. I finally found the
following website which would play a video stream of the target episode.
https://ww1.123watchmovies.co/episode/forensic-files-ii-season-4-episode-1/
I could watch the video, but submitting this URL to YT-DLP resulted in an error. The Firefox plugin previously
explained could not detect the actual video stream URL because this site embeds the video within a custom
player which intentionally makes the download process difficult. I right-clicked the page while the video was
streaming; selected the "Inspector" option; clicked the "Network" tab; and sorted the results by "Transferred"
size. I immediately saw the following file streaming through the browser and becoming a large file.
https://or245qq.cloudatacdn.com/u5kj2vhwwtelsdgge5wtopkhjl7tagkowrpl3m35xkwqxdinp6aynmbmyjaa/y1
b18peb5s~67XyWB6C5D
OSINT VM Applications 93

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

I submitted this new URL to YT-DLP, but the result was a small empty video file without any content. This is
because the target website includes a strict policy which prevents download of content from any source besides
an approved URL. While this site is allowed to stream the video, I would be blocked if I tried to stream it on
my own site. Therefore, our video download attempt appears to be an unauthorized source. This is becoming
more common. I clicked on the "v.mp4" file within the Inspector menu in my browser and looked for the
"Referer" field. It appeared as "Referer: https://gomoplayer.com/". This instruction tells the target website that
gomoplayer.com is referring its own content into its embedded player software and the video should be allowed
to play on this site. We now know the required referer and can emulate this within our own computer. The
following command was entered.
cd ~/Downloads && yt-dlp
https://or245qq.cloudatacdn.com/u5kj2vhwwtelsdgge5wtopkhjl7tagkowrpl3m3
5xkwqxdinp6aynmbmyjaa/y1b18peb5s~67XyWB6C5D?token=2t191sedw3sid3l1afayx
j68 --referer https://dood.la/
This changes our working directory to the Downloads folder; launches the yt-dlp software; provides the direct
URL of the target video; and informs the service that the original referer is the same option as required (even
though this is not true).
Videos: Streamlink (https://streamlink.github.io/)
YT-DLP presented an option to download an online video file. This can be useful if you know the exact location
of the data. This is great, but it can be unforgiving. If you do not know the exact stream URL, you are out of
luck. This is where Streamlink can assist. This powerful software can identify, play, and archive many live or
pre-recorded video streams by simply providing the URL of the website in which it can be viewed. We will need
to install it with the following commands.
pipx install streamlink
We can now restart Terminal and use the tool. The following command played the best quality version of a live
stream from a Twitch user conducting a cooking lesson, through VLC. If there is no live stream at this URL,
you can find another stream on Twitch to replicate.
streamlink
Pressing ctrl+c on the keyboard kills the execution. Instead of watching the stream, we can capture it to a file
named "happycheftv" within our default directory with the following command.
streamlink https://www.twitch.tv/happycheftv best -o happycheftv
If we wanted to watch and archive the data in real-time, we can use the following command.
streamlink https://www.twitch.tv/happycheftv best -r happycheftv
Finally, when the live stream is over, I can convert the archived data into a standard video file within my
Documents folder titled happycheftv.mp4 with the following command.
ffmpeg -i happycheftv -c copy ~/Documents/happycheftv.mp4
This utility works well with most live and pre-recorded video streams within popular platforms such as Twitch
and Vimeo. However, some sites cause errors. I prefer to use this tool in tandem with the Stream Detector
extension mentioned in the next chapter. After entering the live news video stream from KTLA into Streamlink,
I was notified "No plugin can handle URL". However, when I loaded this site within my custom Firefox build,

94 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

as explained in the next chapter, I could see that the Stream Detector extension captured the M3U8 stream from
this live broadcast. I copied the link and then executed it within Streamlink. Streamlink immediately began
playing and archiving the video since I had provided the direct stream. No video capture utility is perfect, and
do not expect this option to work every time. However, it is one of the best options we have.
Videos: Custom Scripts Teaser
By now, you may feel overwhelmed at the commands which must be executed every time you need to capture
online evidence. I will warn you that it gets worse throughout this chapter. However, as I have said several times
now, the custom scripts explained within Chapter Eleven make all of this easy. I want to pause here for a
moment to show you how these scripts appear. The following image (left) displays the selection menu of the
Videos script which you will download soon. The image (right) displays a prompt for a target URL which will
be executed on your behalf. This script covers everything we have discussed in this chapter up to this point.
When using this script in your ultimate OSINT VM, you will never need to memorize a Terminal command.
The hard work will happen behind the scenes so you can focus on the investigation. This will be the last time I
mention the scripts until we install them. I simply want you to see what is coming up so you do not abandon
this chapter completely.

OSINT VM Applications 95

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Usernames: Sherlock (github.com/sherlock-project)
Sherlock queries a username and tries to identify online accounts which might be associated with the target.
While I prefer newer options, it is one of the first Linux tools to search username data and is a staple in any
OSINT VM. However, any username tool will occasionally display false positives, including Sherlock. This is
why we will install multiple options. Sherlock is installed with the following command.
pipx install sherlock-project
We must now construct a proper execution of the command, as follows, with an explanation after.
sherlock inteltechniques --csv -o ~/Documents/Report.csv
sherlock: This is the application.
inteltechniques: This is the target username.
--csv: This creates a CSV spreadsheet file as the output.
-o ~/Documents/Report.csv: This specifies the output save location.
The results follow, and provide numerous leads for our target.
[+] AllMyLinks: https://allmylinks.com/inteltechniques
[+] CGTrader: https://www.cgtrader.com/inteltechniques
[+] Contently: https://inteltechniques.contently.com/
[+] GitHub: https://www.github.com/inteltechniques
[+] Kik: https://kik.me/inteltechniques
[+] Linktree: https://linktr.ee/inteltechniques
[+] Reddit: https://www.reddit.com/user/inteltechniques
[+] Snapchat: https://www.snapchat.com/add/inteltechniques
[+] SteamGroup: https://steamcommunity.com/groups/inteltechniques
[+] Telegram: https://t.me/inteltechniques
[+] Twitch: https://www.twitch.tv/inteltechniques
[+] WordPress: https://inteltechniques.wordpress.com/
Usernames: SocialScan (github.com/iojw/socialscan).
SocialScan is very similar to Sherlock, but the execution is much simpler. It can be installed with the following
Terminal commands.
pipx install socialscan
Within Terminal, you can now execute queries of usernames as follows.
socialscan inteltechniques
It currently only queries a few services, but the on-screen results are reliable. The first query above confirmed
that I have accounts on GitHub, Reddit, and X (Twitter), as seen below.

96 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

While we are searching usernames, we can also query an email address through SocialScan, as previously
explained, with the following command. Since this program relies on color-coding the results in Terminal, we
will force a JSON file with the following command.
socialscan test@gmail.com --json ~/Documents/test@gmail.com-ss.txt
The following partial result tells us that the email address of test@gmail.com is not available on Pinterest, which
indicates someone with that email address created an account there.
"platform": "Pinterest",
"query": "test@gmail.com",
"available": "False",
"valid": "True",
"success": "True",
"message": "Unavailable"
Usernames: Blackbird (github.com/p1ngul1n0/blackbird)
While the previous two options were fairly basic, Blackbird is quite thorough. It checks over 500 sites. We can
install it with the following.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs
git clone https://github.com/p1ngul1n0/blackbird
cd blackbird
python3 -m venv blackbirdEnvironment
source blackbirdEnvironment/bin/activate
sudo pip install -r requirements.txt
deactivate
We can submit a query with the following command.
python3 blackbird.py -u inteltechniques --pdf
This presents the results on the screen, but also creates a file called inteltechniques.pdf in the "results" folder
within the Blackbird package (~/Downloads/Programs). The following is a partial display of results, which
identifies many new leads and also displays content associated with some of the accounts.
[!] Searching 'inteltechniques' across 582 social networks
[+] - #10 Reddit account found - https://www.reddit.com/user/inteltechniques/about.json
[+] - #1 Facebook account found - https://www.facebook.com/inteltechniques [200 OK]
[+] - #14 Linktree account found - https://linktr.ee/inteltechniques [200 OK]

OSINT VM Applications 97

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

|--Name: @inteltechniques
|--Description: Linktree. Make your link do more.
|--picture: https://assets.production.linktr.ee/profiles/_next/static/logo-assets/default-image.png
[+] - #19 Xhamster account found - https://xhamster.com/users/inteltechniques [200 OK]
[+] - #16 Twitter Archived accounthttp://archive.org/wayback/available?url=https://twitter.com/inteltechniques
[+] - #12 Github account found - https://github.com/inteltechniques [200 OK]
|--picture: https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/64741023?v=4?s=400
[+] - #25 WordPress Site account found - https://inteltechniques.wordpress.com/ [200 OK]
[+] - #43 Kik account found - https://ws2.kik.com/user/inteltechniques [200 OK]
[+] - #83 TryHackMe account found - https://tryhackme.com/p/inteltechniques [200 OK]
[+] - #99 Snapchat Stories account found - https://story.snapchat.com/s/inteltechniques [200 OK]
[+] - #312 GitHub account found - https://github.com/inteltechniques [200 OK]
Usernames: Maigret (github.com/soxoj/maigret)
This is a fork of Sherlock, which was previously explained, but currently scans over 2800 sites. This makes it the
most thorough of all options. It also includes text, CSV, HTML, JSON, and PDF reporting, which is a great
benefit to this utility over the others. Install with the following.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs
git clone
cd maigret
python3 -m venv maigretEnvironment
source maigretEnvironment/bin/activate
sudo pip3 install .
deactivate
We can submit a query with the following command, which forces all modules to be used, and outputs data to
both a text file and PDF file within the "reports" folder for the program. The text file only contains links to
profiles associated with the target. The PDF contains more information including URLs, follower counts,
account creation dates, and additional details. The following image (left) displays a partial result of a Reddit
account, as exported to a PDF. Compare that with the generic account details presented in the text file in right
image. Of all username tools available in this chapter, I believe Maigret is the most robust.
maigret -a -P -T inteltechniques

98 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Usernames: WhatsMyName-Python (github.com/C3n7ral051nt4g3ncy)
This is a fork of WhatsMyName, which no longer functions as an application. This version relies on the lastknown working code, and can provide value if the previous options did not. This program is very slow, but very
thorough. Let's install it with the following.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs
git clone
cd WhatsMyName-Python
python3 -m venv wmnpythonEnvironment
source wmnpythonEnvironment/bin/activate
sudo pip3 install -r requirements.txt
deactivate

-Python.git

We can now execute a query with the following commands.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/WhatsMyName-Python
python3 whatsmyname.py -u inteltechniques
This test required several minutes to complete, but I did receive a few results which I did not see previously.
The image below displays a partial sample of the results. Instead of only displaying potential accounts, it also
tells you which services did not possess an account.
We see a lot of redundancy within these username options. This is never a bad thing. Sometimes, one or more
of these lookup services fails or blocks my VPN. When that happens, I move on to another option. While I
prefer Blackbird over the others, you may have a different favorite. I like Blackbird because of the JSON output
and easy readability within Firefox. You may prefer a tool which compresses the data right into Terminal. Please
be familiar with each and never expect them all to work well on any given day. Having multiple options allows
us to raise or lower our confidence with the displayed results.

Usernames: BDFR (https://github.com/aliparlakci/bulk-downloader-for-reddit)
I have found Reddit to become a common source for online evidence within my investigations. If you have
discovered a target Reddit username with the previous tools, you should consider archiving all posts made by
the target. BDFR can be installed with the following commands.
pipx install bdfr
The following command downloads all "submissions" from a specific user on Reddit into a designated folder in
the Documents directory. These are also referred to as "posts" (but not comments to a post).

OSINT VM Applications 99

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

mkdir ~/Documents/inteltechniques/
bdfr archive ~/Documents/inteltechniques/ --user inteltechniques -submitted
The following command downloads all comments from a specific user on any post.
bdfr archive ~/Documents/inteltechniques/ --user inteltechniques --allcomments
The results will be saved into .json files within folders labeled for each Subreddit name. These files are best
viewed within Firefox. While BDFR also allows download options for entire Subreddits, I find it too slow and
unreliable. Archiving a user's data is also slow, but will typically complete with good results. The following
displays a downloaded post as opened within Firefox.

Email: Holehe (github.com/megadose/holehe)
This program is similar to the previous username options, but only allows input of an email address. It queries
dozens of services using several identification strategies such as registered users and password recovery prompts.
Installation is completed with the following commands.
pipx install holehe
The following command within Terminal queries an email address through all services and outputs the results
to a text file titled as the target email address.
holehe test@gmail.com > ~/Documents/test@gmail.com-Holehe.txt
A partial result follows. Anything with a "+" indicates a positive presence of the target email address within a
website; a "-" indicates that the address is not associated with an account; and an "x" indicates that no result was
found either way due to an automated block.
[-] wattpad.com
[+] wordpress.com
[-] xing.com
[x] yahoo.com
[+] zoho.com
[+] Email used, [-] Email not used, [x] Rate limit

100 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

You can eliminate the ">" and everything after to force the results to populate the screen, but I would rather
output my results to a file for later viewing.
Email: Eyes (https://github.com/N0rz3/Eyes)
This program is similar to Holehe, but with different options. It provides an easy passive way to determine if
an email address on a custom domain is hosted at Proton Mail, and then attempts to associate it with accounts
on X (Twitter) and GitHub. Let's install it together.
mkdir ~/Downloads/Programs/eyes
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/eyes
git clone
cd Eyes
python3 -m venv eyesEnvironment
source eyesEnvironment/bin/activate
sudo pip install -r requirements.txt
deactivate
We can now query an email address with the following commands.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/eyes/Eyes
python3 eyes.py test@gmail.com
Email: GHunt (github.com/mxrch/Ghunt)
This Terminal-based program requires some work to configure it properly, but the rewards justify the efforts.
Expect some frustration as you configure your VM for future use of GHunt. First, let's install everything with
the following commands.
pipx install ghunt
Next is the hard part. You must possess valid login cookies from an active Google account. This is because the
Google API, which you will use to find information about various accounts, requires you to be logged in to an
account in order to access these details. Therefore, you must acquire several pieces of data from your own
Google account.
I recommend using an account which you rarely access. As long as you do not log in to this account from a web
browser AFTER you obtain these cookies, they should stay valid for long-term usage. Conduct the following.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Navigate to mail.google.com within your VM version of Firefox
Make sure you are logged in to your desired account.
Right-click within Firefox and select "Inspect"
Select the "Network" tab.
Refresh the page.
Click the small magnifying glass in the center.
Search for "oauth2_4/" and "aas_et/".
Copy the characters immediately following these entries.
Execute ghunt login from Terminal.
Choose the option to enter the oauth_token and provide the "oauth2_4/" value.
Choose the option to enter the master token and provide the "aas_et/" value.

If this fails, and it often does, you can also use the GHunt Firefox browser extension to gather the required data.
Details for this can be found at https://github.com/mxrch/GHunt. GHunt will attempt to populate your

OSINT VM Applications 101

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Google identifiers from a logged-in account without manual access. This is much easier, and only requires the
extension to be active while you are generating the data required for configuration. You can remove the
extension once GHunt is functioning. I prefer the manual method in order to document the data and its location,
but I respect the easy route.
The exact protocol for applying login details to GHunt changes often. I suspect many readers will have issues
with this, due to no fault of their own. Visit the GitHub page for the project to see which method is currently
working the best. Once you have the required data stored within GHunt, we can conduct the following queries
through GHunt.
ghunt email larry@google.com
The result is as follows.
[+] 1 account found !
Name : Larry Page
[+] Custom profile picture !
=> https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/a/AOh14GiUjlWnt4MNgr7Wmeyb3PzXlka4E8PFEIlF27oIxIA
Profile picture saved !
Last profile edit : 2021/11/27 10:01:21 (UTC)
Email : larry@google.com
Gaia ID : 111627209495762463002
Hangouts Bot : No
[+] Activated Google services :
- Hangouts - Photos - Maps
[+] YouTube channel (confidence => 37.5%) :
- [Larry Page]
- [Larry Page]
- [Larry Page]
-gLQ
- [Larry Page]
Google Maps :
https://www.google.com/maps/contrib/111627209495762463002/reviews
[-] No reviews
Google Calendar :
https://calendar.google.com/calendar/u/0/embed?src=larry@google.com
[-] No public Google Calendar.
Let's dissect our findings. We now know the name of the user and his profile photo has been saved within the
"profile_pics" folder inside the GHunt installation directory. We are provided a date and time of his last profile
update; his Google Accounts and ID Administration ID (GAIA); his four YouTube channels; and confirmation
that he uses Hangouts, Photos, and Maps. We also know that he has not written any map reviews. This summary
was provided almost instantaneously.
The following Terminal command would search a Google Drive ID, and a fictitious result follows.
ghunt drive BxiMVs0XRA5nFMdKvBdBZjgmUUqptlbs74OgvE2upms
Drive ID : BxiMVs0XRA5nFMdKvBdBZjgmUUqptlbs74OgvE2upms
[+] Creation date : 2011/05/12 18:29:28 (UTC)
[+] Last edit date : 2011/05/12 18:29:28 (UTC)
Public permissions :
- reader

102 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

[+] Owner found !
Name : A Googler
Email : gdocsteam@gmail.com
Google ID : 02845897149113753960
[+] Custom profile picture !
=> https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/a/AOh14GhXaVAhS8Ci08Xito5iVJVsooEhsgUIGhZ45NjTfQ=s64
Profile picture saved !
We now know the document creation date/time; the last modified date/time; owner name; owner email; owner
Google ID; and owner Google profile image. The automated version of this can also be found in your
"Username/Email" tool within your OSINT VM.
Next, we can query a Google Accounts and ID Administration ID (GAIA) with the following command.
ghunt gaia 105144584335156066992
The result follows.
Name : Thrice
Gaia ID : 105144584335156066992
[+] YouTube channel (confidence => 50.0%) :
- [Thrice]
-AQqoOUZ4ykZBCLdvww
Google Maps :
https://www.google.com/maps/contrib/105144584335156066992/reviews
Any time I encounter a Google email address, Google Drive account, or GAIA, I launch this tool. However, it
can be quite finnicky. It commonly fails and requires me to enter fresh Google account identifiers. I often refer
to this as an advanced tool, but wanted to include it here because of its presence within the custom tools.
Email: H8Mail (https://github.com/khast3x/h8mail)
This program queries email addresses against breach data search services. We can install with the following.
pipx install h8mail
The program is now installed, but will not function because we have not created a configuration file. The
following must be done only once.
cd ~/Downloads
h8mail -g
The program is now installed and the configuration file has been generated, but it will still not function because
we have specified any services which should be queried. The following must also be done only once, and will
enable queries through the free Leak Lookup engine.
sed -i 's/\;leak\-lookup\_pub/leak\-lookup\_pub/g' h8mail_config.ini
The program is now ready to be used. The following command queries an email address against all enabled
services. Notice that we must specify the location of the configuration file within the command.
h8mail -t test@gmail.com -c ~/Downloads/h8mail_config.ini

OSINT VM Applications 103

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

We can also force a username query option with the following.
h8mail -t test -q username -c ~/Downloads/h8mail_config.ini
The results appear similar to the following, which present several new OSINT leads. We now know that our
target is present within several specific data breaches. Several other services are available within the configuration
file, but they demand a premium API key. Leak Lookup is the only valuable free option, but you may wish to
explore the other opportunities by visiting the H8Mail website.
LEAKLOOKUP_PUB |
LEAKLOOKUP_PUB |
LEAKLOOKUP_PUB |
LEAKLOOKUP_PUB |
LEAKLOOKUP_PUB |
LEAKLOOKUP_PUB |
LEAKLOOKUP_PUB |
LEAKLOOKUP_PUB |
LEAKLOOKUP_PUB |

lorangb@gmail.com > collection-1
lorangb@gmail.com > collection-4-u
lorangb@gmail.com > zeeroq.com
lorangb@gmail.com > cointracker.io
lorangb@gmail.com > collection-4-eu
lorangb@gmail.com > dropbox.com
lorangb@gmail.com > ledger.com
lorangb@gmail.com > myfitnesspal.com
lorangb@gmail.com > myheritage.com

Email: Hash Tools
If you search any breach data about your target's email address or username, you are likely to encounter hashed
passwords. Most websites store passwords in "hashed" form. This guards against the possibility that someone
who gains unauthorized access to the database can retrieve the plain-text passwords of every user in the system.
Hashing performs a one-way transformation on a password, turning the password into another string, called the
hashed password. "One-way" means that it was practically impossible to go the other way and turn the hashed
password back into the original password. This was true many years ago, but not so much today. There are
several mathematically complex hashing algorithms that fulfill these needs. Some are very insecure and others
are nearly impossible to crack.
I recommend Name That Hash and Search That Hash (github.com/HashPals/) for identification of hash
types and the passwords behind them. You can install each within your OSINT virtual machine with the
following commands.
pipx install search-that-hash
pipx install name-that-hash
Within Terminal, you can now execute the following to search a hash within multiple online services.
nth --text "5f4dcc3b5aa765d61d8327deb882cf99"
The result appears as follows.
Most Likely MD5, HC: 0 JtR: raw-md5 Summary: Used for Linux Shadow files.
You can also conduct the following with Search That Hash.
sth --text "5f4dcc3b5aa765d61d8327deb882cf99"
The result appears as follows.
5f4dcc3b5aa765d61d8327deb882cf99
Text : password
Type : MD5

104 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

We now know that the hash value is a MD5 representation of the password "password".
Images: Gallery-DL (https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl)
I previously explained YT-DLP as an all-in-one bulk online video download solution. Gallery-DL
(github.com/mikf/gallery-dl) is a similar option for image collections. You can easily install this within Terminal
by entering the following commands, which also provide an isolated Python environment.
pipx install gallery-dl
Let's conduct a demonstration. Assume you have located a target's online Flickr account at
flickr.com/photos/henrik_lindberg and you want to archive all of the images within a specific album. The
following command would download the data to the current folder within Terminal (command is entered as
one line).
gallery-dl
https://www.flickr.com/photos/henrik_lindberg/albums/72157630549692722
The result is all 187 images from the photo gallery. This is a very valuable and efficient resource. Gallery-DL
currently supports over 150 services including Tumblr, 4chan, Flickr, Imgur, Reddit, and numerous "adult"
websites. The following displays the program in action (left) and downloaded files (right).

Images: RipMe (github.com/RipMeApp/ripme)
Next, you might want a graphical solution for your investigation when you encounter a situation which presents
a large number of photos. I previously mentioned browser extensions which help automate this process, but
they have limits. My preference is always the Gallery-DL, but it may not function on the site which you have
targeted. We should always consider other automated options. I have had great success with RipMe. This
application requires Java to be installed on your machine. I refuse to install Java on any Windows or Mac host
due to security concerns, as it adds an additional layer of vulnerability. However, I have no objection to installing
it within a Linux virtual machine. Enter the following within Terminal.

OSINT VM Applications 105

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

cd ~/Downloads
sudo apt install wget
sudo apt install default-jre -y
wget
https://github.com/ripmeapp/ripme/releases/latest/download/ripme.jar
chmod +x ripme.jar
Debian has made the process to open Java files difficult, but you can enter the following Terminal commands
to launch RipMe. Fortunately, our custom scripts will bypass this entire requirement later.
cd ~/Downloads
java -jar ripme.jar
Once you have the program open, enter any target URL and click "Rip". This application supports image
downloads from Imgur, X (Twitter), Tumblr, Instagram, Flickr, Photobucket, and Reddit. The following displays
Terminal (left) and the program (right).

I
There are several independent programs which assist with bulk-download of Instagram data. The first is
Instaloader, which has been a staple within Buscador since the beginning. Since it occasionally stops working,
pending an updated release, we also want Toutatis and Osintgram available at all times. The results of each
are very similar, but it is good to have redundant options. Since Instagram aggressively tries to break these
programs, expect problems with any or all of them at some point. Let's install the first two applications
within our new pipx environment.
pipx install instaloader && pipx install toutatis
Let's install Osintgram with the following venv environment.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs
git clone https://github.com/Datalux/Osintgram.git
cd Osintgram
python3 -m venv OsintgramEnvironment
source OsintgramEnvironment/bin/activate
sudo pip install -r requirements.txt
deactivate

106 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Next, you should open Firefox within your VM and sign into the Instagram account you will use for OSINT
investigations. This tells Instagram that you are intentionally logging into your account from your current IP
address, and is required before the next steps will work. We must now sign into this same account within the
programs. Begin with Instaloader by executing the following.
instaloader --login=username
Make sure you replace username with your Instagram username and supply the password for that account when
prompted. This only needs to be supplied once during configuration, and the application will store the
credentials. Next, let's discuss Toutalis. This application provides Instagram account details, often including full
email addresses and partial telephone numbers. This extra level of disclosure requires a unique piece of
information from our account. Each time you run the command, you are required to enter your Instagram
"Session ID". The following steps will identify this information.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Log in to an Instagram account from your Firefox browser.
Right-click an empty area of the page and choose "Inspect".
Click the "Network" tab in the new menu at the bottom.
Navigate to any user's Instagram page.
In the Inspector menu, click on an entry similar to "200 GET www.instagram.com" and click the
"Cookies" tab in the menu to the right.
Scroll down this list and find "sessionid:".
Copy the alphanumeric entry.

Keep this Session ID somewhere which is easy to access. Next, execute the following from within
~/Download/Programs/Osintgram to replicate this login credential storage for Osintgram.
make setup
Now that you have all programs installed and configured with credentials, we can test them. Start with the
following commands for Instaloader within Terminal. Please note this is not my account but serves as a good
demonstration with minimal content.
cd ~/Desktop && instaloader user mikeb
Instaloader should have created a new folder titled mikeb on your Desktop containing the user's images. The
following command would execute Toutatis for the target of "mikeb" with your Session ID of
24316:Lh59ygrmY4N:4.
toutatis -u mikeb -s 24316:Lh59ygrmY4N:4
The result is similar to the following, which I have partially redacted.
Full Name: Mike Brandon | userID : 1144153003
Is business Account : False
Is private Account: False
Follower: 70 Following : 31
Number of posts: 18
Number of tag in posts : 0
Obfuscated phone
: +44 **** ****77
I find this information extremely valuable, and the process only takes a few seconds to complete. You could
easily copy and paste these details into your report. Next, let's look at Osintgram. First, navigate to the software
folder with the following command.

OSINT VM Applications 107

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

cd ~/Downloads/Programs/Osintgram/
We can conduct numerous types of queries on "mikeb". The following would display this user's photos, stories,
comments, captions, followers, followers' telephone numbers, followings, followings' telephone numbers, and
general account information.
python3 main.py -c photos mikeb
python3 main.py -c stories mikeb
python3 main.py -c comments mikeb
python3 main.py -c captions mikeb
python3 main.py -c followers mikeb
python3 main.py -c fwersnumber mikeb
python3 main.py -c followings mikeb
python3 main.py -c fwingsnumber mikeb
python3 main.py -c info mikeb
I would be shocked if all three Instagram programs worked for you. This is because Instagram likes to
block access to these types of applications. If you received any "challenge" errors, that means Instagram has
found your activity to be suspicious. You would need to log in to your Instagram account again through Firefox
and confirm the activity as non-malicious. If you execute any of these tools and receive no results, it may also
be because of this error. I am intentionally leaving extra room on this page for future modifications to these
utilities.
Domains: EyeWitness (https://github.com/ChrisTruncer/EyeWitness)
This Python script automates the collection of screen captures from websites. Imagine the following scenario.
You are investigating a long list of website addresses that was provided to you as a lead. Maybe they were
websites visited from a suspect's computer; a list of social network profiles discovered during your previous X
(Twitter) scrapes; or just a self-created list of URLs associated to your investigation. Manually visiting each site
and using a screen capture tool can be overwhelming. Instead, let's automate the task. Install EyeWitness to your
VM with the following official commands within a new instance of Terminal.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs
git clone https://github.com/ChrisTruncer/EyeWitness.git
cd EyeWitness/Python/setup
sudo
We need to add a few commands to our installation process, and you should copy and paste all of these at once
into Terminal.
wget
https://github.com/mozilla/geckodriver/releases/download/v0.34.0/geckod
river-v0.34.0-linux-aarch64.tar.gz
tar -xvzf geckodriver*
chmod +x geckodriver
sudo mv geckodriver /usr/local/bin
You can now execute EyeWitness, but you must first navigate to the folder where the Python script is located.
We will correct this with a custom script in a moment, but let's first test the application within Terminal with
the following two commands.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/EyeWitness/Python

108 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

./EyeWitness.py --single
~/Documents/EyeWitness/

-d

When finished, you should have a new file within your Documents/EyeWitness folder titled Report.html.
Double-clicking this file opens it within Firefox. You can submit a list of URLs with the following commands,
assuming you have a file on your Desktop called sites.txt, with one URL per line.
./EyeWitness.py -f ~/Desktop/sites.txt --web -d ~/Documents/EyeWitness/
The following image displays the first result from my "sites.txt" file which contained exactly the following data.
https://inteltechniques.com
https://unredactedmagazine.com

The resu
address,
it autom
moment
of a pre
articulat

erver IP
ys. First,
specific
evidence
need to

This utili
nterest. I
once co
d me to
quickly i
e similar
to photos in an album. The report was several hundred pages but was generated in only a few minutes.
Domains: HTTrack (httrack.com)
There are several ways to make an exact copy of a static website and this software will walk you through the
process. You may want to do this when you locate a target website and are concerned the site could be taken
down. Any time that you find any content that will be used in court, you should archive the entire site. This
application automates the process. The result is a locally stored copy in which you can navigate as if it were live.
This is beneficial in court when internet access is not appropriate, or a website has been taken offline. The
following command within a new Terminal session will download the software and configure it within your
operating system.

OSINT VM Applications 109

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

sudo apt update && sudo apt install httrack webhttrack -y
You can now type webhttrack at any Terminal prompt and the graphical version of the software will execute
within your default browser. Typing httrack will load the Terminal version. You should also have the
Domains Tool (domains.desktop) available in your Applications menu. When the application loads, you can
select either option. The Terminal version presents text prompts to enter your target data. The browser version
does the same thing, but it is point-and-click instead of text entry. Note that the browser version will likely
require you to "try again" upon launch and select the option to load a non-secure website. This is not a risk, but
it is an annoyance.
Clicking the "next" button in the browser version will bring you to the project screen. Give your project a title,
preferably the website name, and choose a location to save all of the data. Click next and then "add URL". Enter
the exact website that you want to archive. Do not enter any login or password. Click "next", then "finished",
and you are done. The application will begin extracting all public information from the site. This can take a
while, depending on the size of the site. When complete, you will have an exact copy in which you can navigate
and search offline. Archiving to an external drive creates a replica that can be held for future analysis. This
program only works on smaller static websites, and cannot archive large dynamic sites such as social networks.
HTTrack is a very old program, and was never intended to function within today's latest technology. However,
it still works surprisingly well on small business websites. It can also extract a surprising amount of content from
large sites such as Wikipedia. I once used this service to extract several gigabytes of scraped LinkedIn data from
a questionable website before it disappeared, which included profiles, names, email addresses, user IDs and
employment history. This tool should always be ready in your arsenal. The following image displays the dated
entry screen.

Domains: Wayback
Most readers are probably already aware of the power of the Internet Archive while searching for online content
which has since been removed. Browsing a target domain on the Wayback Machine website can be very fruitful,
but automating the collection of that data can be more beneficial. Install Waybackpy with the following
command.
pipx install waybackpy
Let's execute the script to conduct a few tasks, using pretendradio.org as a target. First, we will make a directory
in the Documents folder for data and then enter it.
mkdir ~/Documents/waybackpy
mkdir ~
cd ~
Next, let's generate all known URLs indexed by Internet Archive into a text file with the following.
waybackpy --url "https://pretendradio.org" --known_urls > 1.txt
110 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

This creates a text file in the current directory which displays every URL being monitored and archived by
Archive.org, but does not present the content of each page. This file will likely have many duplicates within it,
so let's remove them with the following.
sort -u -i 1.txt -o 2.txt
The file labeled 2.txt only contains one URL for each option instead of mostly redundant addresses.
If desired, the following would tell you the oldest version of the website they have collected. Replacing "oldest"
with "newest" would identify the opposite.
waybackpy --url "https://pretendradio.org" --oldest
The following result tells us the first copy they possess is from April 24, 2017.
https://web.archive.org/web/20170424221444/http://pretendradio.org:80/
Overall, this tool only provides information about Archive.org's collection of a domain, but not the actual
content of each URL. For that, we will rely on the next tool.
Domains: Waybackpack (https://github.com/jsvine/waybackpack)
This program will extract the data behind Archive.org's cached websites. Install with the following.
pipx install waybackpack
We can now execute the program and have it extract the HTML data behind every archive associated with a
URL. The following command will generate several folders within our target directory, each labeled as the date
of the Archive.org acquisition. Notice that there is a trailing "/" at the end of the URL in the command. For
some reason, this program will not work without it.
waybackpack https://pretendradio.org/ -d
~/Documents/waybackpy/pretendradio.org
Each folder should possess an HTML file which can be opened within Firefox. Consider the following two
examples. The first displays the website as it appeared the first time it was captured. The second displays the site
as it appeared many months later, possessing actual content.

Imagine you have a target URL which has hundreds of archives throughout the past decade. This is a quick way
to see annual changes to the site and document the evidence. Each of these is an archived home page of the
target website from a different date. Double-clicking them will load the pages within a web browser which

OSINT VM Applications 111

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

should display the target site similar to the way it previously appeared. However, a keyword search can also be
beneficial. You can use the embedded search function within the Files application which is presented after
successful completion of the script. The following image displays my search of these files for the word "prison".
The results identify files of interest.

,
y
,
d

b
p
b
t
https://github.com/owasp-amass/amass/releases/latest/download/amass_Linux_arm64.zip
https://github.com/owasp-amass/amass/releases/latest/download/amass_Linux_amd64.zip

However, I find this cumbersome if you want universal instructions which would apply to any architecture
(AMD vs ARM). Therefore, let's conduct the following.
cd ~/Downloads
ver=$(dpkg --print-architecture)
wget
amass/amass/releases/latest/download/amass_Linux_"$ver".zip
mkdir ~/Downloads/Programs/Amass
unzip amass_Linux_"$ver".zip -d ~/Downloads/Programs/Amass/
cd Programs/Amass/amass_Linux_"$ver"/
mv * ~/Downloads/Programs/Amass
rm -r ~/Downloads/Programs/Amass/amass_Linux_"$ver"/
rm '/home/osint/Downloads/amass_Linux_arm64.zip'
These commands navigated to our Downloads folder; stored the version of our processor (AMD vs ARM);
conducted a Wget command to download the appropriate version for our VM; made a new directory for the
program; unzipped the files in the compressed archive; moved the files to a standard location; deleted the
unnecessary file and folder. The following commands allow us to execute the software with the optimal
selections.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/Amass
./amass intel -o ~/Documents/cnn1.txt -active -ip -whois -d
This creates a report located in the Documents folder. In my test with my own website, it immediately identified
several other domains hosted on my shared server, a few of which were associated with me. The following image
displays results for domains related to cnn.com.

112 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Domains: Pho
This option doe
It creates a repo

target website.
.

cd ~/Downl
git clone
cd Photon
python3 -m
source Pho
sudo pip install -r requirements.txt
deactivate
We can now execute with the following commands.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/Photon
python3 photon.py -u

-l 3 -t 100

The results are quick and impressive. The "external" file lists outgoing hyperlinks from the target URL to other
websites; the "files" text file lists files stored within the URL, such as PDFs and other documents; and the
"internal" file lists URLs hyperlinked from the target to other pages on the same site. When targeting my own
website, Photon identified all of the xml configuration files for pfSense and all issues of UNREDACTED
Magazine in PDF. The following was extracted directly from the files.txt report generated by the program.
https://inteltechniques.com/issues/001.pdf
https://inteltechniques.com/issues/002.pdf
https://inteltechniques.com/issues/003.pdf
https://inteltechniques.com/issues/004.pdf
https://inteltechniques.com/issues/005.pdf
https://inteltechniques.com/issues/006.pdf
2022.FW4B-PIA-US-Netflix.xml
2-port-ProtonVPN-US-DNS-No-VPNPassword-admin1234.xml
2023/FW2B.xml
2022.FW6B-PIA-US-Netflix.xml
6-port-ProtonVPN-west-DNS-No-VPNPassword-admin1234.xml
Domains: Sublist3r (https://github.com/aboul3la/Sublist3r)
This program scans much faster than Amass, but will only find common subdomains. This may be sufficient
for most tasks. It creates a report located in the Documents folder. In my test, it found 808 subdomains of
cnn.com. Install with the following.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs
git clone
cd Sublist3r
OSINT VM Applications 113

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

python3 -m venv Sublist3rEnvironment
source Sublist3rEnvironment/bin/activate
sudo pip install -r requirements.txt
deactivate
We can now execute with the following.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/Sublist3r
python3 sublist3r.py -d
-o ~/Documents/Sublist3r-cnn.txt
Partial results follow.
alerts.cnn.com
dev.alerts.cnn.com
www.dev.alerts.cnn.com
qa.alerts.cnn.com
56m.qa.alerts.cnn.com
admin.qa.alerts.cnn.com
56m.admin.qa.alerts.cnn.com
ec2.admin.qa.alerts.cnn.com
ec2.qa.alerts.cnn.com
alertshub.cnn.com
admin.alertshub.cnn.com
dev.alertshub.cnn.com
www.dev.alertshub.cnn.com
We now have new targets to research.
Domains: TheHarvester (https://github.com/laramies/theHarvester)
This program searches a supplied domain with the intent of providing subdomains, hosts and, occasionally email
addresses associated to the target. It creates a report located in the Documents folder. During my search of
cnn.com, it located 72 hosts and 16 email addresses. Further investigation into these results may reveal new
sources of information. Install with the following.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs
git clone
cd theHarvester
python3 -m venv theHarvesterEnvironment
source theHarvesterEnvironment/bin/activate
sudo pip install -r requirements.txt
deactivate
We can now execute with the following.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/theHarvester
python3 theHarvester.py -d
-f ~/Documents/cnn.json -b
duckduckgo
We can open the generated JSON file within Firefox to see the data, as follows.

114 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Domains: Carbon14 (https://github.com/Lazza/Carbon14)
This application helped an investigation as I was writing this. I was investigating an anonymous blog, with the
intent of learning more about the age of the site. It was a brand-new WordPress installation, and every post had
the same recent date and time. It had obviously been created recently, but then received an import from an older
blog. I wanted to know more about the true dates of the original posts. This is the perfect scenario for Carbon14.
It searches for any images hosted within the page and analyzes the metadata for creation dates. A query of my
own site indicates that the static page was last modified on January 16, 2024, but one of the images was created
in 2022. If this were my target, I would now have suspicion that the original blog posts were from an earlier
date. These dates can be intentionally or unintentionally altered, so this is not a forensically sound method. It is
simply an additional piece to the puzzle which may warrant further investigation. I find that Carbon14 works
best on static websites and blogs. I have also had surprising success when targeting social network profiles.
Install with the following
cd ~/Downloads/Programs
git clone
cd Carbon14
python3 -m venv Carbon14Environment
source Carbon14Environment/bin/activate
sudo pip install -r requirements.txt
deactivate
Execute with the following.
cd ~/D
python
Below is

OSINT VM Applications 115

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Domains: Change Detection (github.com/dgtlmoon/changedetection.io)
In the chapter about domains, I explained several online services which would monitor a URL for changes.
These are beneficial, but there are some scenarios where they might be inappropriate. You might have a sensitive
URL which you do not want to share with an online service, or a site with very minor changes which is not
being picked up by the free services. This is where Change Detection can help. It is locally installed and available
only to you. The following configures the application.
pipx install changedetection.io
We can now test with the following entries into Terminal, copied and pasted all at once.
mkdir ~/Documents/ChangeDetection
changedetection.io -d ~/Documents/ChangeDetection -p 5000 &
sleep 3
firefox http://
The first command makes sure we have a directory created for results and the second command launches the
server and Firefox simultaneously. The following image displays an example. The first option was created for
my home page. I can click the "Recheck" button to fetch a new live copy. Clicking the "Diff" button shows me
any changes. The image below it identifies two paragraphs which were modified between visits. This tool
provides the same service as the online options, if not better, but gives you full control within your Linux
machine.

Domains: Archive Box (github.com/ArchiveBox/ArchiveBox)
I previously explained how we could use online services to document the current state of a website; see previous
versions through archived sources; and be notified of changes when they occur. In 2022, I began using Archive
Box as an all-in-one solution. We can install and initialize the application with the following, which you may
have already accomplished in Chapter Five.
pipx install archivebox
mkdir ~/Documents/archivebox
cd ~/Documents/archivebox
archivebox init

116 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Once installed, change into our directory; add our target website; launch the server; and open the database within
our browser. Note that you must enter the full URL, including "https://".
cd ~/Documents/archivebox
archivebox add 'https://notla.com'
archivebox server
The following image displays results as they are being fetched. Archive Box captured the target with SingleFile
through Chrome; generated a PDF and screenshot; performed a WGET of the live page; extracted the page
from Archive.org; fetched all HTML code; and downloaded any media files. This is an impressive tool.
Combined with the automated script in your Linux VM, this service should be used often. Knowing the manual
approach is important, but automated tools allow us to work faster and more efficiently.

Metadata: Exiftool (https://exiftool.org/)
Image metadata, also called Exif data, will be explained later in more detail. It can include the make, model, and
serial number of a camera or location data of the capture. Third-party applications to view this data are no longer
necessary because Debian has this feature embedded in the default image viewer. Simply open any image, click
the three horizonal lines, and select Properties. The Metadata and Details tabs display all available details such
as camera information, location, and dates. However, this does not help much in regard to bulk images. We can
easily install a Terminal-based utility which allows for automated export called Exiftool. The following command
in Terminal will complete the process.
sudo apt update && sudo apt install libimage-exiftool-perl -y
You can now view the metadata from a single image as follows.
exiftool evidence.jpg
If you had multiple images, you could analyze all of them at once and export your results into a spreadsheet.
Consider the following example where I possess a folder of images on my Desktop titled "Evidence". I want a
spreadsheet of all available Exif data in reference to these images. The following command in Terminal will
create a report on my Desktop titled Report.csv.
cd ~/Desktop/Evidence && exiftool * -csv > ~/Desktop/Report.csv

OSINT VM Applications 117

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

This command launches ExifTool (exiftool); reads all files in the current folder (*); specifies creation of a CSV
file (-csv); and saves the file output to the Desktop titled as Report.csv (> ~/Desktop/Report.csv). I do not use
this feature often, but it has saved me a lot of work when needed. I once possessed a folder of 200 images
retrieved from a directory on my target's blog. This command created a spreadsheet with all metadata from the
images, which identified GPS locations valuable to the investigation.
The following is a partial example of the type of valuable data you may find within digital images. In this example,
I identified the date, time, and exact location of the device when the image was captured.
GPS Altitude
GPS Date/Time
GPS Latitude
GPS Longitude

: 217 m Above Sea Level
: 2010:11:08 15:37:18Z
: 40 deg 27' 32.00" N
: 90 deg 40' 23.00" W

Metadata: Metagoofil (https://github.com/opsdisk/metagoofil)
Metagoofil is a Linux option designed to locate and download documents. It does not always work perfectly, as
you are at the mercy of search engines to provide the data. When Google decides to block Metagoofil, its
usefulness ceases until the software receives an update. Install with the following steps.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs
git clone
cd metagoofil
python3 -m venv metagoofilEnvironment
source metagoofilEnvironment/local/bin/activate
sudo pip install -r requirements.txt
deactivate
The following Terminal commands in your Linux VM switches to the proper directory (cd); launches Python 3
(python3); loads the script (metagoofil.py); sets the target domain (-d cisco.com); sets the file type as pdf (-t pdf);
and saves the output to the Desktop (-o ~/Desktop/). This could be repeated for different file types.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/metagoofil
python3 metagoofil.py -d
-t pdf -o ~/Desktop/
This automatically downloads any found documents. We could now analyze these documents with ExifTool as
mentioned previously with the following commands within Terminal. The following commands navigate you
and then creates a report.
cd ~/Desktop/ && exiftool * -csv > ~/Desktop/Report.csv
I always prefer to download and analyze document metadata within Linux. In my experience, this utility works
fairly well when NOT using a VPN, but Google may block your VPN connection. My protocol in regard to
document metadata collection and analysis is as follows.
•
•
•

If I already possess numerous documents on my computer, I create a metadata CSV spreadsheet using
ExifTool. I then analyze this document.
If my target website possesses few documents, I download them manually through Google or Bing
within a web browser.
If my target website possesses hundreds of documents, I use Metagoofil, but only download one file
type at a time. If my target were cisco.com, I would execute the following commands in Terminal.

118 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

python3 metagoofil.py -d
python3 metagoofil.py -d
python3 metagoofil.py -d
python3 metagoofil.py -d
python3 metagoofil.py -d
python3 metagoofil.py -d
python3 metagoofil.py -d

-t pdf -wo ~/Desktop/cisco/
-t doc -wo ~/Desktop/cisco/
-t xls -wo ~/Desktop/cisco/
-t ppt -wo ~/Desktop/cisco/
-t docx -wo ~/Desktop/cisco/
-t xlsx -wo ~/Desktop/cisco/
-t pptx -wo ~/Desktop/cisco/

Metadata: MediaInfo (https://mediaarea.net/en/MediaInfo)
This is a utility for displaying hidden metadata within a media file. The most common example is the metadata
within a video obtained directly from the original source. First, open Terminal and type the following to install
the application within the Activities menu of Debian.
sudo apt update && sudo apt install mediainfo-gui -y
You can now click on the MediaInfo icon in the Activities menu to launch the program. Click on the "File"
option in the menu and then open either a file or folder. The default view offers little data, so click on "View"
and then "Text" from the menu. This presents all metadata available within the file. In my test, I received the
(partial) output visible in the following image from a video sent to me via email directly from a mobile device.
It identified the make, model, and operating system version of the device, along with GPS information about
the location during capture. Note that this type of data is usually not available from videos downloaded from

Metadata: mat2 (https://0xacab.org/jvoisin/mat2)
While you may want to VIEW metadata within images with the previous command, it is just as likely you will
want to REMOVE data from your own media. Maybe you want to upload an image as part of a covert
investigation. That image could have metadata such as dates, times, locations, and camera details. This is where
MAT2 (Metadata Anonymisation Toolkit 2) can assist. First, we must install it with the following.
sudo apt update && sudo apt install mat2 -y
Next, we can issue a command to clean a file. Assume I have an image on my Desktop titled dirty.jpg. The
following command would change to the Desktop directory and create a new file called "dirty.cleaned.jpg".
cd ~/Desktop && mat2 dirty.jpg
Metadata: xeuledoc (https://github.com/Malfrats/xeuledoc)
This application extracts metadata hidden within Google Documents, including the documents owner's name,
email address, and Google identifiers. This is a great way to determine who is behind an online Google document
which is part of your investigation. The following commands install the program.
pipx install xeuledoc

OSINT VM Applications 119

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

We can now execute the application toward a Google document. Consider the spreadsheet located at the
following location.
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1KXksB1vj7fXPNS4OYL0idQne3HXVnamtUP1h0ut3xwk
This page provides a link to a third-party piracy website claiming to offer one of my books for download. There
is nothing within this spreadsheet which identifies the creator of this document. However, xeuledoc can assist.
The following command queries the tool with the document link.
xeuledoc
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1KXksB1vj7fXPNS4OYL0idQne3HXVnam
tUP1h0ut3xwk
The result appears in the following image.

We now have a name and email address to research.
Metadata: Sherloq (https://github.com/GuidoBartoli/sherloq)
Sherloq is a standalone application which can help identify modified areas of photographs. The advanced
capabilities to alter images within Photoshop can easily fool our eyes. Computers are more difficult to convince.
Let's install the application first, then discuss the usage. Conduct the following within Terminal. Note that ARMbased processors may not be able to use this program.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs
sudo apt install python3-testresources subversion -y
git clone https://github.com/GuidoBartoli/sherloq.git
cd sherloq/gui
python3 -m venv sherloqEnvironment
source sherloqEnvironment/bin/activate
sudo pip install -r requirements.txt
deactivate
You can now launch this application manually with the following command within Terminal.
python3 ~/Downloads/Programs/sherloq/gui/sherloq.py

120 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Sherloq replicates many of the online image metadata and manipulation detection methods which were explained
in my other books. The benefit here is the ability to conduct an examination offline. If you have a sensitive
photo, you may not want to upload it into one of the many online metadata websites. Instead, you may want to
keep it restricted to your local machine. Click the "Load Image" button and select a photo. There are numerous
options present within the left menu.
Consider the following image. The upper-right image displays the "Principal Component Analysis" which
highlights the lips of the subjects for potential digital manipulation. If you investigate online images often, I
encourage you to understand all of the options available within this software application. The author's website
at github.com/GuidoBartoli/sherloq should assist.

Framew
This prog
some effo
Linux V

s will take
e custom

cd ~/D
git cl
cd spi
python3 -m venv spiderfootEnvironment
source spiderfootEnvironment/bin/activate
sudo pip install -r requirements.txt
pip install pyopenssl --upgrade
deactivate
If we are inside the Spiderfoot directory (~/Downloads/Programs/spiderfoot), we can launch the Spiderfoot
service with the following command.
python3 ./sf.py -l
If executing manually, you would need to launch the service and then tell Firefox and connect to
http://127.0.0.1:5001. We can replicate both with the following.
python3 ./sf.py -l

http://

Let's take a look at the interface and conduct an example query. After launching the Spiderfoot program within
Firefox, click the "New Scan" option. Provide a name for your session (IntelTechniques) and a domain
(inteltechniques.com). Choose your desired "Use case" and click "Run scan". I chose "All" in order to test the
features, but this can be intrusive toward your target site. Choose the level of access appropriate for your
investigation. The scan will launch and may take a while to complete, possibly hours. The amount of data
acquired will be substantial, and I will only focus on a few areas of interest. The default screen displays the

OSINT VM Applications 121

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

current progress and a log file. The "Browse" button in the upper left allows you to start peering into the data
found about your target. Below are the sections of interest to my own site.
•
•
•
•
•

Account on external site (Four online profiles connected to my brand)
Human Name (Identification of my full name and three associates)
Leak site content (56 Pastebin files referencing my domain)
Similar domain (Two domains with similar spelling)
Web technology (Pages on my site which rely on PHP, and my version)

The "Graph" button displayed a detailed chart of connections from my domain to external sources. This
application scours a domain, IP address, or email address for hundreds of data points which may provide value.
Clicking the "Scans" button provides options to stop, re-run, or delete a scan result. It also provides a status
summary of each current scan, and you can execute numerous scans simultaneously.
Frameworks: Recon-ng (https://github.com/lanmaster53/recon-ng)
Recon-ng is a full-featured web reconnaissance framework written in Python. Complete with independent
modules, database interaction, built-in convenience functions, interactive help, and command completion,
Recon-ng provides a powerful environment in which OSINT research can be conducted quickly and thoroughly.
This utility provides automation to many of the redundant tasks that OSINT examiners find themselves
performing on a daily basis. I offer a warning before proceeding. This is a technically complicated portion of
this book. Please don't let that scare you off, we will approach each step slowly. First, we need to install Reconng into our OSINT Original virtual machine. Type the following into Terminal.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs
git clone
cd recon-ng
python3 -m venv recon-ngEnvironment
source recon-ngEnvironment/bin/activate
sudo pip install -r REQUIREMENTS
deactivate

-ng.git

This should install Recon-ng, and typing ./recon-ng from within this directory launches the application.
This screen will display the current version, and I am writing this based on version 5.1.2. The following
command would be used to update your version of Recon-ng.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/recon-ng
git pull

-ng.git

Recon-ng does not possess many online tutorials. The guides that I have found are mostly an index of commands
with little explanation. Instead of trying to summarize how the program functions, I will walk you through actual
usage and explain as we go. I will start with the basics and then conduct numerous actual searches. In lieu of
screen captures, I will include all text input and output in 10 pt Courier New font. Upon executing
Recon-ng, you will be notified that no modules are installed. This is normal, and we will add them as we need
them. At this prompt, let's begin with the help command. Typing help reveals the following commands and
explanations.
back
dashboard
db
exit
help
index

Exits the current context
Displays a summary of activity
Interfaces with the workspace's database
Exits the framework
Displays this menu
Creates a module index (dev only)

122 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

keys
marketplace
modules
options
pdb
script
shell
show
snapshots
spool
workspaces

Manages third party resource credentials
Interfaces with the module marketplace
Interfaces with installed modules
Manages the current context options
Starts a Python Debugger session (dev only)
Records and executes command scripts
Executes shell commands
Shows various framework items
Manages workspace snapshots
Spools output to a file
Manages workspaces

Typing marketplace search will reveal the current functions available. Think of the marketplace similar
to a list of utilities within Recon-ng, and each option as a "resource". Just like Bing is a website resource that we
can use through a web browser, "bing_domain_web" is a specific resource that we can use in Recon-ng. At any
time, you can type marketplace info into Recon-ng to receive details about a specific item. As an
example, typing marketplace info virustotal displays the following description.
path
| recon/netblocks-hosts/virustotal
name
| Virustotal domains extractor
author
| USSC (thanks @jevalenciap)
version
| 1.0
last_updated | 2019-06-24
description
| Harvests domains from the Virustotal by using the
report API.
required_keys | ['virustotal_api']
dependencies | []
files
| []
status
| not installed
This provides the detailed description, and whether the utility requires an API key or other dependencies. It also
confirms we have not installed the module. We will execute this option later in the chapter. For now, we must
set up our first investigation. Before we can conduct any research within this program, we must create a
workspace. A workspace is a container that will isolate your work from one investigation to another. Think of a
workspace as a case file. You may have a stack of cases on your desk, each with its own folder. All of your work
on a case stays within the associated folder. Workspaces are similar. You should create a new workspace for
each investigation. They can be deleted later or preserved for additional work. You can type workspaces
list at any time to see the currently used workspaces. For now, we will create a new workspace titled OSINT
by executing the command of workspaces create OSINT.
After creation, you will automatically begin using the new workspace. If you have created more than one
workspace, such as one titled OSINT2, you can switch to it by typing workspaces load OSINT2. You
might have a workspace for every target suspect or a single workspace for an entire case. Each situation will be
unique. Now that you have a space created, we can begin. Let's start with a very simple yet powerful query, using
the Profiler module. First, we must install the module with the following command within Recon-ng.
marketplace install profiler
The module is now installed, but is not loaded. The following loads the module.
modules load profiler

OSINT VM Applications 123

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Now that the module is loaded, we can add any input desired. Since this module queries usernames, we will add
our target of "inteltechniques" with the following command. Note that SOURCE is uppercase, which is required.
options set SOURCE inteltechniques
We should test our input with the following command.
input
The response should now be the following.
+-----------------+
| Module Inputs |
+-----------------+
| inteltechniques |
+-----------------+
Finally, we can launch the module with the following command.
run
This script should query the username of inteltechniques against numerous online services. It does not present
any results when complete, but did locate and store valuable data. To view the results, type the following.
show profiles
The results appear similar to the following.
----------------------------------------------------------------+
1|inteltechniques|Gravatar|
2|inteltechniques|reddit|
3|inteltechniques|Twitter|
In just a few seconds, we queried dozens of online services and immediately received only the three which
contained the presence of our target username. This demonstrates the ability to save a substantial amount of
time by using Recon-ng. If you were tasked to locate online profiles of ten suspects, this could be completed in
a few minutes. Let's repeat the process, but with another username, with the following commands.
options set SOURCE humanhacker
run
show profiles
The following result displays the additional online profiles collected during this second query. Recon-ng will
continue to store target data as you receive it. This is one of the more powerful features of the application.
1|inteltechniques|Gravatar|
2|inteltechniques|reddit|
3|inteltechniques|Twitter |
4|humanhacker|Blogspot|
5|humanhacker|Disqus|
6|humanhacker|Flipboard |
7|humanhacker|GitHub|
8|humanhacker|Instagram |

124 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

9|humanhacker|Kongregate|
10|humanhacker|Kik |
11|humanhacker|Medium|
12|humanhacker|Technet|
13|humanhacker|Minecraft|
14|humanhacker|Pornhub|
15|humanhacker|scratch|
16|humanhacker|reddit|
17|humanhacker|
18|humanhacker|Twitter
|
19|humanhacker|Xbox|

Let's conduct another example within a different module. First, we must leave our current module by typing
back. This returns us to our workspace. Next, install four additional modules with the following commands.
marketplace install bing_domain_web
marketplace install google_site_web
marketplace install brute_suffix
marketplace install pgp_search
We will use these in order and target the website cnn.com. First, we will load the bing_domain_web option with
the command of modules load bing_domain_web. Next, we will set our source with options set
SOURCE cnn.com and execute the script with run. This command queries the Bing search engine for hosts
connected to the domain cnn.com. The result identified over 70 unique hosts, including the following.
[*] [host]
[*] [host]
[*] [host]
[*] [host]
[*] [host] commercial.cnn.com (<blank>)
[*] [host]
We can replicate this type of search on Google to make sure we are not missing any hosts that could be valuable
by typing back, then modules load google_site_web, then options set SOURCE cnn.com,
and finally run. This notifies us 38 total (15 new) hosts found, which indicates that Bing found
more hosts than Google, and Google found 15 hosts that we did not have in our collection from Bing. Since
Recon-ng can parse out duplicates, we should have a list of unique hosts with a combined effort from both
Google and Bing. Typing show hosts will display all of them. Below is a small portion.
news.blogs.cnn.com
m.cnn.com
buzz.money.cnn.com
thechart.blogs.cnn.com
globalpublicsquare.blogs.cnn.com
tech.fortune.cnn.com
Next, let's type back to leave the current module and then modules load brute_suffix to load our
next demo. Since there is no domain set as our source for this module, we will add one with options set
SOURCE social-engineer.org. There are many top-level domains (TLDs) aside from .com and .org.
Executing run will scour the various TLDs such as .net, .tv, and others. After completion, typing show
domains will display our updated set of target addresses ready for further searching. In this example, I was
notified that additional domains were located, including the following.

OSINT VM Applications 125

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

social-engineer.be
social-engineer.ch
social-engineer.com
social-engineer.de

social-engineer.dev
social-engineer.info
social-engineer.me
social-engineer.us

These are all new leads that should be analyzed later. We could now repeat our previous module execution of
bing_domain_web and google_site_web to likely grow our list of hosts substantially. This is a good
time to pause and consider what is happening here. As we find data, Recon-ng stores it within our workspace.
Every time we conduct a new search, or repeat a previous search, all of the new data is appended. This prevents
us from documenting everything that we locate because Recon-ng is keeping good notes for us. This can allow
us to collect an amount of data otherwise impossible to manage manually. Let's move on to individual contacts.
Typing show contacts will display any contacts stored within the current workspace. You likely do not
have any, so let's add some. First, type back to make sure you are out of the previous module. Next, load
another module with modules load pgp_search. This will scan all of the stored domains that we have
located and search for any email addresses associated with public PGP keys within those domains. We have not
set a source for this module, but you likely already have some ready for you. In a previous example, you searched
social-engineer.org within other top-level domains and received numerous results. If you type input within
this module, you should see those same domains listed. This is because Recon-ng is constantly storing found
data and making it available for future use. If we type run, this list will be searched, but no results will be found.
Note that this list does not possess our target domain of social-engineer.org, and only the additional names
previously found. You may wish to remove these sources, and then add a fresh new source, with the following.
options unset SOURCE
options set SOURCE cnn.com
Typing run and striking enter executes the process, while submitting show contacts afterward displays
the results. The following is the partial output with new email addresses identified. Each of these addresses are
now stored in your workspace, ready for the next round of research.
| 2
| 3
| 4

| barsuk
| Tristan
| Paul

| |
| | Helmich
| P | Murphy

| barsuk@cnn.com
| tristan.helmich@cnn.com
| paul.p.murphy@cnn.com

Let's reflect on how this can be beneficial. Assume that you are investigating numerous websites. Recon-ng
provides dozens of utilities which automate queries and provides immediate information. Magnify this by tens
or hundreds of domains, profiles, or other target data, and you have an easy way to replicate several hours of
work. In another scenario, you are investigating a list of potential email addresses connected to a case. Entering
these into Recon-ng allows you to execute your searches across all accounts. The effort to check one address is
the same to check thousands. This impressive capability is only a small fraction of what can be done with this
application.
This seems like a good time to back away, create a report, and start a new set of actions. The following commands
will back out of our current module; install the reporting feature; instruct Recon-ng that we want to use the
reporting tool; mandate a graphical html (web) template be used; set the "Customer" as IntelTechniques; set the
"Creator" as M.Bazzell; and execute the process.
back
marketplace install html
modules load html
options set CUSTOMER IntelTechniques
options set CREATOR M.Bazzell
run
126 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Note the output after the final command. It identifies that the report is complete, and provides the storage
location. Since I am running Recon-ng from my OSINT virtual machine, the default location is ~/.reconng/workspaces/OSINT/results.html. Therefore, I can open the home folder on my desktop; double-click the
".recon-ng" folder; double-click the "workspaces" folder; double-click the "OSINT" folder; and then open the
"results" file. Please note you must have "Show Hidden Files" option enabled from within the preferences menu
of the Files application. Note that the Domains, Hosts, and Contacts sections are not expanded, but contain a
lot of information. At the bottom of this file, the "Created by", date, and time clearly identify these report details.
Hopefully this demonstration explained the usage of Recon-ng. Executing exit in the window closes
everything, but removes nothing. Before our next example, let's delete our previous work and start fresh. Note
that deleting a workspace removes all associated data and reports. Make sure you have exported your evidence
if needed. First, relaunch Recon-ng. The following commands display the current workspaces; delete the OSINT
workspace; and create a new workspace titled location.
workspaces list
workspaces remove OSINT
workspaces create location
This chapter explains only a small portion of the capabilities of Recon-ng. Please consider revisiting the modules
listed at the beginning and experiment with the execution of each. Overall, it would be very difficult to break
the application, and any errors received are harmless. You will receive best results by requesting API keys from
the services which require them. The "Info" screen of each Recon-ng module displays any requirements within
the "Required Keys" field. Many API keys are free and open new possibilities. Overall, an entire book could be
written about this application alone. The goal of this section was simply to familiarize you with the program and
demonstrate the power of automated queries.
If you would like more information about Recon-ng, please visit the official Github page at
https://github.com/lanmaster53/recon-ng. From there, you can join a dedicated group in order to participate
in discussions about errors, features, and overall usage. While Recon-ng has not been updated in some time, and
many believe the project has been abandoned, the tools still perform well for specific tasks.
Frameworks: Mr. Holmes (https://github.com/Lucksi/Mr.Holmes)
I started using this program in late 2023 and have found great value in it. Install with the following.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs
git clone
cd Mr.Holmes
sudo apt update
sudo chmod +x install.sh
sudo bash install.sh
Execute "1" when prompted to begin and "2" when prompted for auto-installation. This will configure
everything for you. When finished, you can execute the software with the following.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/Mr.Holmes && python3 MrHolmes.py
Upon the first execution, you will need to enter "Y" to accept the terms of the software, but should not be
reminded after that. You will see a menu similar to the following.
(1)SOCIAL-ACCOUNT-OSINT
(2)PHONE-NUMBER-OSINT
(3)DOMAIN/IP-OSINT

OSINT VM Applications 127

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

(4)CONFIGURATION
(5)DATABASE(GUI)
(6)UPDATE
(7)PORT-SCANNER
(8)E-MAIL
(9)DORKS-GENERATOR
(10)PEOPLE-OSINT
(11)ENCODING/DECODING
(12)PDF-GRAPH CONVERTER
(13)FILE-TRANSFER
(14)SESSION-OPTIONS
(15)EXIT
I chose the first option which prompted for a username. After confirming that I did not want to use a proxy, I
could choose to check this username or "scrape" it. The latter takes more time but may identify services skipped
with the other option. While testing this, I learned that someone is using my username on Chess.com, as follows.
[+]TRYING ON:
[v]USERNAME inteltechniques FOUND
[v]LINK: https://www.chess.com/member/inteltechniques
[I]TAGS:[Chess,Chess.com]
Next, I tested the phone number option, and was impressed. You must enter the full number including country
code, but not the "+" before it. The program then queries public sites and offers to reformat the number in
various ways to see if it is present within major search engines. It then exports a report into the
~/Downloads/Programs/Mr.Holmes folder. The following is only a partial result.
SCANNING EXECUTED ON: Date: 09/02/2024 10:13:04
INTERNATIONAL NUMBER: +1 618-462-8000
LOCAL NUMBER: 6184628000
COUNTRY PREFIX: +1
COUNTRY CODE: US
COUNTRY: United States
AREA/ZONE Alton, IL
CARRIER/ISP: AT&T
TIMEZONE: America/Chicago
NAME: Public Library
LOCATION: "Latitude": "30.8124247", "Longitude": "34.8594762"
The program then generated hundreds of search engine "Dorks" which may reveal more details, such as the
following, which could be expected within a browser.
GOOGLE-DORKS:
https://www.google.com/search?q=inurl:%226182166453%22
https://www.google.com/search?q=intext:
https://www.google.com/search?q=intext:
https://www.google.com/search?q=intext:
https://www.google.com/search?q=intext:
https://www.google.com/search?q=intext:
https://www.google.com/search?q=intext:
YANDEX-DORKS:
https://yandex.com/search/?text=6182166453
https://yandex.com/search/?text=

128 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

https://yandex.com/search/?text=
https://yandex.com/search/?text=
https://yandex.com/search/?text=
https://yandex.com/search/?text=
https://yandex.com/search/?text=
The actual list would have filled five pages. The email option was also beneficial. Overall, this program automates
a lot of the manual steps which I explain in OSINT Techniques, 10th Edition. I encourage you to explore all of
the options and become familiar with the layout. The automated scripts presented within the next chapter will
launch the program and open any reports when complete. If you want to maually access a report, navigate to
~/Downloads/Programs/Mr.Holmes/GUI/Reports. Also, never "click" on "OK" when the function is
complete, only press the Enter or Return key on the keyboard. For some reason, clicking "OK" kills the
application.
Frameworks: sn0int (https://github.com/kpcyrd/sn0int)
This is another framework which I started using in late 2023. At the time of this writing, it did not function
within ARM-based processors such as Apple's M-series, but that may be fixed by now. We can install with the
following, which should be copied and pasted all at once.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs
sudo apt install curl sq
curl -sSf
/etc/apt/trusted.gpg.d/apt-vulns-sexy.gpg
echo deb
/etc/apt/sources.list.d/apt-vulns-sexy.list
sudo apt update && sudo apt install sn0int
This program is very similar to Recon-ng. We can launch it with the following.
sn0int
You should be prompted to install the basic packages with the following command.
pkg quickstart
You are now ready to experiment with sn0int. Start by executing the following command.
help
This will display the main modules, which should appear similar to Recon-ng.
add
autonoscope
autoscope
delete
keyring
pkg
noscope
run
scope
select
stats

Add new entities to the database
Manage rules to remove entities from scope
Manage rules to automatically add entities to scope
Delete entities from the database
Manage saved credentials
Manage installed modules
Exclude entities from scope
Run the currently selected module
Include entities in the scope again
Select entities from the database
Show statistics about your current workspace

OSINT VM Applications 129

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

target
use
workspace

Preview targeted entities or narrow them down
Select a module
Switch to a different workspace

Let's create our case workspace with the following
workspace 2024-001
We can now add data. Let's start with adding a domain to the investigation.
add domain
You should be prompted to provide a domain, similar to the following.
inteltechniques.com
We have now added a piece of evidence to our case. The following lists all packages.
pkg list
The result should be similar to the following partial options.
kpcyrd/ctlogs 0.7.0: Query certificate transparency logs to discover subdomains
kpcyrd/dns-mx-domains 0.1.1: Discover mail server from MX records for domain
kpcyrd/dns-mx-emails 0.1.0: Discover mail server from MX records for emails
kpcyrd/dns-ns 0.1.0: Add a domains NS records to scope
kpcyrd/dns-ptr 0.2.0: Run reverse dns lookups
kpcyrd/exif 0.1.1: Extract exif data from images
kpcyrd/geoip 0.1.0: Run a geoip lookup for an ip address
kpcyrd/irc-monitor 0.3.0: Monitor an irc network for users
kpcyrd/keybase 0.2.0: Collect accounts and emails from keybase accounts
kpcyrd/keybase-domains 0.1.0: Find keybase proofs for domains
kpcyrd/keybase-profiles 0.1.0: Find keybase proofs for online accounts

Let's load the ctlogs option with the following.
use ctlogs
We can now execute the query as follows.
run
The result should be similar to the following.
"inteltechniques.com": Adding subdomain "www.inteltechniques.com"
"inteltechniques.com": Adding subdomain "blog.inteltechniques.com"
We have now added new evidence to our case which can be used for future queries. The overall function of the
sn0int modules works very similar to Recon-ng. This has only been one basic query. If you believe this
framework can be valuable to your investigations, and I believe it can, please visit https://sn0int.readthedocs.io
and become familiar with all of the commands.

130 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Frameworks: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/developers/internetarchive)
This utility may not technically be a "framework", but I felt it fit best within this category. This tool allows you
to explore and download large data sets with minimal effort. An example should help explain the benefits. Install
with the following.
pipx install internetarchive
Now consider the content located at https://archive.org/details/hackercons. This is a "collection" of hacker
conference videos which consists of almost 15,000 items. One of these is another "collection" located at
https://archive.org/details/notacon_2006. I am quoting collection because that is how the Internet Archive
identifies a set of data available within a group. The Notacon collection contains the 39 videos from that
conference in 2006. We could manually download them from the website, but that is tedious. If there were 1,000
videos, it would take way too long. Instead, we will acquire the content with our new Internet Archive utility.
We could execute ia download notacon_2006, which would download every file within the collection,
but that would download multiple versions of each video and all of the metadata associated with each entry.
Since each video possesses a MP4 version, we should use the following.
ia dow
-'
' -"
"
This launc
data (--sea
MP4 (--gl

to query
is not an
ottom).

Applicati
I previously mentioned multiple unique methods of capturing website evidence within your browser. However,
you may need a more robust solution for capturing your entire screen. This can be approached from two specific
avenues. First, you could record either a still or video capture of your entire computer from your host. In other
words, you could use the default capturing software within your Windows or Mac machine to record video or
save a screenshot of your Linux VM. I do not recommend this. Recording from your host displays evidence of
your other operating system. While it would likely never be an issue, it exposes you unnecessarily. Consider the
following.
You are a detective investigating a homicide. You find evidence online implicating your suspect. You are on a
Windows computer, but all of your investigation was conducted within a Linux VM. You launch recording
software on the Windows computer and record a video of your work. This video was submitted to the defense.
For a brief moment, the video captured a file on your Windows desktop titled Accounts.xlsx. It is a spreadsheet
containing all of your covert online accounts, has no connection to the investigation, and was not intended to
be exposed. The defense makes a motion to analyze this file, as they believe it could be associated with the

OSINT VM Applications 131

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

investigation. The judge approves, and you must share all of your covert accounts with the other side. Does this
sound far-fetched? It happened to a colleague of mine in 2014.
I have become more paranoid of digital mistakes than necessary, but I believe we should never take chances.
Therefore, I recommend that all of your screen captures be executed within your VM. Fortunately, Linux has
many options. First, let's consider the default Debian screenshot utilities. The following keyboard keys and key
combinations create high-resolution exact screenshots of your VM.
•
•
•

PrtSc: Save a screenshot of the entire screen to the "Pictures" directory.
Shift + PrtSc: Select and save a screenshot of a specific region.
Alt + PrtSc: Save a screenshot of the active window to the "Pictures" directory.

The PrtSc key on your keyboard should also launch the print screen dialogue menu. If you do not have a
keyboard capable of this, you can also search "screen" in the Activities menu to open the "Take a Screenshot"
utility. Within it, you can switch between a still capture and video recording, then select the desired area.
Whenever I need to record a video of all actions taken within an investigation, this is the utility I rely on. It is
native to the operating system and always works. If it does not work best for you, consider the next application
called Kazam.
Applications: Kazam (https://github.com/henrywoo/kazam)
This is a minimal tool for screen recording. It also includes screenshot support, but I find the native Debian
option easier and faster. Kazam is most suitable for getting the task done quickly without providing many
options. The following steps will install and execute a Kazam capture.
•

In Terminal, execute the following:

sudo apt update && sudo apt install kazam -y
•
•
•
•
•

Launch Kazam from the Applications menu (make a shortcut if desired).
Click "Capture" within the application.
After the countdown, your entire screen is being captured.
When finished, click the icon in the upper right and choose "Finish Recording".
Choose "Save for later"; click "Continue"; choose a location; and click "Save".

You now possess a high-resolution video of your entire session. This can be very beneficial in many scenarios.
I have used this to document a specific portion of my investigation when a simple still capture would not suffice.
It could also be used to explain a search technique through video, which can be easily replicated by the person
receiving a copy. I appreciate the simplicity of this application, and the lack of any branding or logos within the
videos. I have found it to be buggy within ARM-based versions of Debian, but others work well.
Applications: BleachBit (https://www.bleachbit.org/)
I explained BleachBit in previous chapters. Type the following into Terminal to install the application.
sudo apt update && sudo apt install bleachbit -y
Clicking the nine dots in the lower left will present two BleachBit applications. The second icon executes the
software with administrative privileges and is the option I choose. Upon first launch, click "Close" to accept
default configuration. Select every option except the "Free disk space" feature. Click "Preview" to see a report
of recommended cleaning. Click "Clean" to execute the process. I run this program within my primary OSINT
VM after every major update to keep it clean and minimal. I ran it at this point of the guide after testing several
applications and received the following result, removing 1.5 GB of unnecessary data.

132 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Applications: Google Earth Pro (google.com/earth)
Google Earth Pro is a standalone application that takes the Google Maps data to another level. With this
application, we have access to many mapping tools. These tools can import data from spreadsheets and help
you visualize the content. In order to maintain the scope of open source intelligence, I will focus on only a few
specific tools. First, we need to enter the following commands within Terminal to install the software. Note that
Google Earth Pro does not currently support ARM-based systems.
wget http://dl.google.com/dl/earth/client/current/google-earthstable_current_amd64.deb
sudo apt install -y ./google-earth-stable_current_amd64.deb
sudo rm google-earth-stable_current_amd64.deb
Within the application, the first step is to display your location of interest. This can be accomplished by typing
the address or GPS coordinates in the upper left search field. When you see your target location and have set
the zoom to an appropriate level, you are ready to start adding layers. By default, you will only see the satellite
imagery of the location. The menu on the left possesses options for adding new content to this view. The last
box in this menu is titled "Layers". Inside this menu are several data sets that can be enabled and disabled by
the checkbox next to each. I recommend disabling all layers and then enabling one at a time to analyze the data
that is added to your map view. The following details will explain the layers of interest.
•
•
•
•

Photos - Digital images uploaded through social networking sites
Roads - Text layer of road names
3D Building - Alternative 3D view of some locations
Gallery - User submitted content including YouTube videos

Another Google Earth feature available that is often overlooked is the Historical Imagery option. This can be
activated by selecting the "clock" icon in the upper menu bar of the application. This will open a slider menu
directly below the icon. This slider can be moved and the result will be various satellite images of the target
location taken at different times.
Usually, the quality of the images will decline as you navigate further back in time. This can be useful in
identifying changes in the target location such as building modifications, additional vehicles, and land changes.
Drug enforcement agents often use this tool to monitor suspected drug growth at a target location. While the
Google Earth program is not updated often, the imagery content within is pulled directly from the Google
archives. It is vital within our arsenal of tools and I find it more pleasant to navigate than the official Google
Maps website. This resource has assisted many of my investigations over the past decade by providing historic
satellite imagery which was unavailable from any other online source. Note that Google Earth Pro will not
currently install within Apple ARM-based virtual machines or hosts. Hopefully, Google will create an ARM
version in the near future.
Updates
Once you have your new VM created, be sure to apply all updates with the following commands. After all
updates are applied, you should reboot the VM.
sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade -y
Miscellaneous Repairs
We have installed a lot of software and should clean up a bit. The following attempts to fix any issues we cause
within all of our installations.

OSINT VM Applications 133

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

sudo apt update --fix-missing
sudo apt --fix-broken install
sudo apt autoremove -y
Troubleshooting
I do not expect everything presented here to work flawlessly for every reader. I wish it were that simple. You
may encounter issues. My best advice is to restart the process with which you are having the trouble, and follow
all instructions exactly as written. Even then, you may experience frustration. The following are some tips which
have helped members of my online video training.
•

•
•
•
•
•

When typing in Terminal, you can hit the tab key and it will suggest all the possible options that start
with the string you have typed so far. It will also autocomplete your command if only one option exists.
For example, if you are trying to navigate to your Downloads/Programs folder, you can just type "cd
~/Dow" [tab], then "Pro" [tab] to complete the command. Typing cd ~/D [tab][tab] would list all
folders starting with D.
Use the "up" arrow key to navigate through previous commands.
"Ctrl" + "C" kills any running process, and typing "ls" displays the directory contents.
You can copy and paste to/from Terminal, but only with right-click (not "Ctrl" + "V").
Keyboard arrows will move you through a Terminal command, but mouse clicks do not.
You can modify the size of your Dock icons in "Settings" > "Dock".

Hidden Files
By default, Debian hides system files which should not normally be manipulated. You may need to see these
within the Files application. The following steps allow you to see all files on the system, and the change is
persistent between reboots.
•
•
•
•

Open the "Files" program in either your Dock or Applications menu.
Click on the three horizontal lines in the upper right area.
Select "Show Hidden Files".
Close the "Files" program.

Large File Transfer
We have configured our VM to possess a shared folder. This is an avenue to transfer files from within the VM
to the host and vice versa. This can be used to copy evidence from within the VM to your host for preservation
to external media. I have experienced limitations with this method. If I have hundreds of large videos, I often
receive errors when I try to copy all of them to my host through the shared folder. This is much more prominent
in VirtualBox versus UTM. The best solution I have found is to transfer evidence directly to a USB drive within
the VM. If desired, you could choose this method and eliminate any shared folder on the VM.
When you insert a USB drive into your host computer, it is immediately read by your primary operating system.
Your running VM does not see the device. Within the VirtualBox menu, you can choose "Devices", then "USB",
and try to click on the USB drive, if found. The issue you may face is that your host has the drive locked and
will not allow the VM to take over. You can usually resolve this by ejecting the USB drive within your host. On
both Windows and Mac, you should see an eject icon next to the drive or by right-clicking the device. After
ejecting, attempt to load the USB device again through the VirtualBox menu. This may present another issue. If
your USB device is formatted specifically for Mac or Windows, it may not be readable by Linux. I suggest
specifying a USB device solely for use within this VM and formatting it in a way so that it can be read universally
by any operating system.

134 Chapter 10

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Insert the USB device into your computer while the VM is running.
Eject the device from your host OS if necessary.
In the VirtualBox VM window, click on "Devices", "USB", and the device name.
In Debian, launch the Activities menu.
Type "Disks" into the search field.
Click on the USB drive listed in the left column.
Click on any boxes within the "Volumes" section.
Click the minus (-) icon and "Delete" when prompted.
Repeat until there are no volumes present.
Click the "+" icon, click "Next", provide a name, choose "Fat", and click "Create".

This will create a USB drive on which files can be read and written within any file system. You cannot possess
files larger than 4 GB in size, but I have never had an issue with that during investigations. When you insert the
USB device into your computer, you can choose to allow your primary OS see it, or load it into your VM. I have
found this method to be much more reliable than transferring large files through the shared folder. You should
practice both techniques and pursue the most appropriate option for your investigations.
Summary
You should now have an understanding of the many benefits of a Linux OSINT VM. We have installed and
configured numerous Linux applications which are ready for use. The chances of every application mentioned
here installing without any issue is slim. Programs break, updates cause issues, and the countless variables on
your system can be problematic. When something fails, keep moving on to the other options. Next, let's
automate much of the work within these Terminal-based programs with custom bash scripts. I promise we are
close to locking our settings in for all future investigations.

OSINT VM Applications 135

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER ELEVEN
OSINT VM SCRIPTS

I believe this chapter presents the most valuable portion of this entire guide. Until now, we have executed all
terminal commands manually. We had to know all of the proper commands, switches, inputs, outputs, and
queries. In this chapter, we will automate all of this and only need to supply the target online data we are seeking
after clicking an icon. This is not a new revelation. In Buscador, David and I provided all applications preconfigured for use since 2018. Buscador included desktop shortcuts with icons to launch programs and scripts
to help execute specific queries. As previously stated, we should not rely on third parties to create and maintain
these VM configurations (even my own public resources). The goal here is to teach you how to replicate that
work and easily generate your own custom VM with pre-built scripts, and possess the ability to modify them as
needed. If conducting the following tutorials to your original VM, you will only need to take these steps once.
Each clone you create will maintain all your hard work, as explained later.
Some of this chapter may seem complicated at first. I promise everything becomes easier as you practice. This
will be a crash course in Linux bash scripts, but the lessons learned now will pay off in future usage. Chapter 14
automates this entire process which creates a 100% functioning OSINT VM within a few minutes. For now,
let's download my custom bash scripts into your new VM so we can open, view, and modify them, with the
following Terminal commands, which can be copied and executed all at once.
mkdir ~/Documents/scripts
cd ~/Documents/scripts
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/api.sh
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/domain.sh
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/framework.sh
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/image.sh
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/metadata.sh
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/update.sh
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/user.sh
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/video.sh
Important: If you downloaded the files but they all consist only of "401 Unauthorized" within them, then you
are probably trying to download outdated files. Always make sure you are operating from the latest revision of
this guide, which can be identified on the third page of this PDF and confirmed online at
https://inteltechniques.com/book1b.html. Any time we heavily modify or update these files, we will purge old
versions in order to prevent accidental download of outdated content. As long as you are executing the previous
commands from the latest version of this guide, you will always receive the most recent updates.
Your VM now possesses the bash scripts, but they cannot be executed yet. Execute the following to make
each script able to run as a program.
cd ~/Documents/scripts
chmod +x
chmod +x
chmod +x
chmod +x
chmod +x
chmod +x
chmod +x
chmod +x

136 Chapter 11

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

You can now execute a script as follows within Terminal (we will create shortcuts for these soon).
cd ~/Documents/scripts && ./video.sh
Let's take another look at the options in the video script which was presented in the previous chapter, as seen
below. Next, let's take a look at some actual text within the video.sh script. This will provide a good opportunity
to explain each element of the file and the impact on functions. After that, I will only demonstrate the functions
of the other scripts without explaining the code within them, but you can open any script to see the text. You
can now open the video.sh script within your text editor or simply follow along in the next few pages. We will
begin with the header of the file.

The following identifies itself as a bash script. This allows us to execute the file within Terminal.
#!/usr/bin/env bash
The following are headers which will not be executed because they have "##" before each line. This tells
Terminal to ignore the text, but it can still be seen within a text editor. This serves as a way to present information
about the file which has no function.
## Updated: December 1, 2024, specifically tweaked for Debian
## Please report any issues to errors@inteltechniques.com
## Copyright 2024 Michael Bazzell
## These instructions are provided 'as is' without warranty of any kind
## License information:
https://inteltechniques.com/data/osintvm/license.txt

OSINT VM Scripts 137

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

The following builds the menu which is presented upon launch. The two occurrences of "menu" provides an
identifier for the menu itself and then later designates that the menu functions begin. Zenity is the software we
will use to build the menu and present a graphical option; "--list" identifies the type of menu; "--column"
specifies only one column to display; each entry is presented in quotes; and the "--height" and "width" settings
make sure the items are visible in the menu.
menu=$(zenity --list --title "Video Tool" --column "" "Play Video"
"Convert Video" "Extract Frames-All" "Extract Frames-Seconds" "Extract
Audio" "Rotate Video" "Merge Videos" "Remove Redundant Frames" "YT-DLP
Best Quality" "YT-DLP 1080" "YT-DLP 720" "YT-DLP Comments, Subs, &
Info" "YT-DLP Audio-Pure" "YT-DLP Audio-MP3" "YT-DLP MP4 Conversion"
"Streamlink Stream" --height="800" --width="300")
case $menu in
The following is our first menu function and the script to play a video. The first line must match the same title
which was in the first menu. The presence of "file=$" is used to prompt the user for input. In this example, it
launches Zenity; prompts the user to select a file from a file manager; and then stores that file location for a
future function. The third line tells Terminal to execute "ffplay" and then supply the file which was previously
selected. The script then presents a dialogue to press enter to return to the menu and then executes the script
again for another function.
"Play Video")
file=$(zenity --file-selection --title "Video Tool")
ffplay "$file"
echo
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /home/osint/Documents/scripts/video.sh
The following is similar to the previous example, but has added a new feature. The second line prompts the user
to select a file as it did in the previous example, which stores the entire path of the file, such as
"/Home/osint/Documents/file.mp4". I now want to only capture the file name itself without the path, so I
added the "file2" option. That tells Terminal to remember only the file name at the end of the captured file path.
The script then makes sure that a folder called Videos exists within the Documents folder; launches FFmpeg to
open the path of the file originally selected; save the converted file as the selected file name (not path) with an
MP4 extension; opens the Videos folder on the Desktop; and continues the same end process as the previous
example.
"Convert Video")
file=$(zenity --file-selection --title "Video Tool")
file2=$(basename "$file")
mkdir ~/Documents/Videos/
ffmpeg -i "$file" ~/Documents/Videos/"$file2".mp4
open ~/Documents/Videos/
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /home/osint/Documents/scripts/video.sh

138 Chapter 11

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

The following function is quite different than the previous two examples. In those, we selected a local file from
our system. With this function, we want to provide a URL. It confirms our directory exists and then prompts
the user to supply a URL within a Zenity dialogue. It then launches YT-DLP and specifies the output format
and location. The downloaded file will be named similar to "BEST-Bob Ross.webm" and will be saved in the
Videos folder.
"YT-DLP Best Quality")
mkdir ~/Documents/Videos/
url=$(zenity --entry --title "Video Tool" --text "Enter Target URL")
yt-dlp -o ~/Documents/Videos/BEST-"%(title)s.%(ext)s" "$url" -restrict-filenames
open ~/Documents/Videos/
echo
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /home/osint/Documents/scripts/video.sh
The following is very similar to the previous option, but only downloads the data associated with a video, and
not the video itself. For this utility, the script navigates directly to the Videos folder (cd) so that all data is
preserved there.
"YT-DLP Comments, Subs, & Info")
mkdir ~/Documents/Videos/
cd ~/Documents/Videos/
url=$(zenity --entry --title "Video Tool" --text "Enter Target URL")
yt-dlp "$url" --write-comments --write-subs --sub-langs all --writedescription --skip-download
open ~/Documents/Videos/
echo
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /home/osint/Documents/scripts/video.sh
The following makes use of a timestamp. This ensures that the file which is generated possesses a unique name
which includes the current date and time. This prevents accidental overwriting of data in the event you capture
the same live stream twice. The second line tells Terminal to capture the current date and time and store it within
memory. The sixth line launches Streamlink; captures the URL previously entered; saves the best quality; and
saves the file as the current date and time, similar to "2024-01-01-12-04", in the Videos folder. This file can be
renamed later if desired.
"Streamlink Stream")
timestamp=$(date +%Y-%m-%d_%H_%M)
mkdir ~/Documents/Videos/
cd ~/Documents/Videos/
url=$(zenity --entry --title "Video Tool" --text "Enter Target URL")
streamlink "$url" best -r $timestamp
open ~/Documents/Videos/
echo
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"

OSINT VM Scripts 139

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

read data
exec /home/osint/Documents/scripts/video.sh
The following is "case" backwards and ends the script.
esac
You can now launch these scripts from within Terminal, but that is a pain. Instead, we will download shortcuts
to each script; apply an icon to each shortcut; and move the files to their proper location. Download each file
with the following commands.
cd ~/Documents/scripts
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/api.desktop
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/domain.desktop
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/framework.desktop
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/image.desktop
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/metadata.desktop
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/search.desktop
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/update.desktop
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/user.desktop
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/video.desktop
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/api.png
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/domain.png
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/framework.png
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/image.png
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/metadata.png
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/search.png
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/update.png
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/user.png
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/video.png
We must now move the .desktop shortcuts into a location where the operating system can see them to present
them within our applications menu.
cd ~/Documents/scripts
sudo mv *.desktop /usr/share/applications/
Let's take a look at one of these files, specifically video.desktop. The following identifies the name of the shortcut
(Video Tool); the location of the script (.sh); and the location of the icon (.png).
[Desktop Entry]
Type=Application
Name=Video Tool
Categories=Application;OSINT
Exec=/home/osint/Documents/scripts/video.sh
Icon=/home/osint/Documents/scripts/video.png
Terminal=true
You should now be able to see these script shortcuts within your applications menu. Sometimes, a reboot is
required. You can now launch any of these shortcuts to immediately see the script menu dialogue. However, I
prefer to place them within my Dock for easy access. The following Terminal commands remove all current
icons within the Dock; add our most vital OSINT tools to the Dock; and resize the icons to fit the desktop
better. You could tweak the size (32) to match your own preference, and omit any applications desired.
140 Chapter 11

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

gsettings set org.gnome.shell favorite-apps []
gsettings set org.gnome.shell favorite-apps "['firefox-esr.desktop',
'org.torproject.torbrowser-launcher.desktop',
'org.gnome.Nautilus.desktop', 'org.gnome.Terminal.desktop',
'update.desktop', 'search.desktop', 'video.desktop', 'user.desktop',
'image.desktop', 'domain.desktop', 'metadata.desktop',
'framework.desktop', 'api.desktop', 'google-earth-pro.desktop',
'kazam.desktop', 'org.gnome.Settings.desktop']"
gsettings set org.gnome.shell.extensions.dash-to-dock dash-max-iconsize 32
You can now launch these scripts from your Dock, which should appear similar to the image below, but vertical
on the left instead of horizontal at the bottom. Take some time to play with them and understand their functions.
Overall, they should replicate every example I have presented within the previous chapter, often in the same
order previously displayed. Whenever these files are updated, you will receive a notification to the email address
used for the purchase of this guide. You would then execute the previous steps to update the files on your VM.

While you can view any of these scripts at any time within a text editor, I will not waste pages here displaying all
of the code (which will change over time anyway). Instead, I will focus on each script and the functions of each
option. I will start with the Update Tool and work through the rest in order of appearance in the Dock. The
API Tool will be explained in the next chapter.
Update Tool
This may be the most vital custom script within the dock. There is an official Debian software updates
application within the Activities menu, but I never use it. It only updates system software, and would never
apply pending updates to most of our programs. Instead, we can apply all system and application updates with
one script, which you previously downloaded. Launch the "Updates" shortcut from your Dock or the Activities
menu and let it go to work. It will likely require your password and can take some time to finish. If you prefer
to manually update everything, copy and paste the code into Terminal. This can be beneficial when you want to
catch any errors which may be hidden from the script. The following displays the text within the script.
#!/usr/bin/env bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt upgrade -y
sudo apt update --fix-missing
sudo apt --fix-broken install
sudo apt autoremove -y
pipx upgrade-all
flatpak update
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/sherlock
git pull https://github.com/sherlock-project/sherlock.git
source SherlockEnvironment/bin/activate
sudo pip install -r requirements.txt 2>/dev/null
deactivate
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/blackbird
git pull https://github.com/p1ngul1n0/blackbird
source blackbirdEnvironment/bin/activate
sudo pip install -r requirements.txt 2>/dev/null

OSINT VM Scripts 141

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

deactivate
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/WhatsMyName-Python
git pull https://github.com/C3n7ral051nt4g3ncy/WhatsMyName-Python.git
source wmnpythonEnvironment/bin/activate
sudo pip install -r requirements.txt 2>/dev/null
deactivate
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/eyes
git pull https://github.com/N0rz3/Eyes.git
cd Eyes
source eyesEnvironment/bin/activate
sudo pip install -r requirements.txt 2>/dev/null
deactivate
cd ~/Downloads
wget -N
https://github.com/ripmeapp/ripme/releases/latest/download/ripme.jar
chmod +x ripme.jar
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/Osintgram
git pull https://github.com/Datalux/Osintgram.git
source OsintgramEnvironment/bin/activate
sudo pip install -r requirements.txt 2>/dev/null
deactivate
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/EyeWitness
git pull https://github.com/ChrisTruncer/EyeWitness.git
cd Python/setup
sudo ./setup.sh
cd ~/Downloads
ver=$(dpkg --print-architecture)
wget https://github.com/owaspamass/amass/releases/latest/download/amass_Linux_"$ver".zip
mkdir ~/Downloads/Programs/Amass
unzip amass_Linux_"$ver".zip -d ~/Downloads/Programs/Amass/
cd Programs/Amass/amass_Linux_"$ver"/
mv * ~/Downloads/Programs/Amass
rm -r ~/Downloads/Programs/Amass/amass_Linux_"$ver"/
rm '/home/osint/Downloads/amass_Linux_arm64.zip'
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/Photon
git pull https://github.com/s0md3v/Photon.git
source PhotonEnvironment/bin/activate
sudo pip install -r requirements.txt 2>/dev/null
deactivate
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/Sublist3r
git pull https://github.com/aboul3la/Sublist3r.git
source Sublist3rEnvironment/bin/activate
sudo pip install -r requirements.txt 2>/dev/null
deactivate
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/theHarvester
git pull https://github.com/laramies/theHarvester.git
source theHarvesterEnvironment/bin/activate
sudo pip install -r requirements.txt 2>/dev/null
142 Chapter 11

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

deactivate
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/Carbon14
git pull https://github.com/Lazza/Carbon14
source Carbon14Environment/bin/activate
sudo pip install -r requirements.txt 2>/dev/null
deactivate
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/metagoofil
git pull https://github.com/opsdisk/metagoofil.git
source metagoofilEnvironment/bin/activate
sudo pip install -r requirements.txt 2>/dev/null
deactivate
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/sherloq
git pull https://github.com/GuidoBartoli/sherloq.git
cd gui
source sherloqEnvironment/bin/activate
sudo pip install -r requirements.txt 2>/dev/null
deactivate
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/spiderfoot
git pull https://github.com/smicallef/spiderfoot.git
source spiderfootEnvironment/bin/activate
sudo pip install -r requirements.txt 2>/dev/null
deactivate
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/recon-ng
git pull https://github.com/lanmaster53/recon-ng.git
source recon-ngEnvironment/bin/activate
sudo pip install -r REQUIREMENTS 2>/dev/null
deactivate
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/Mr.Holmes
git pull https://github.com/Lucksi/Mr.Holmes
wget http://dl.google.com/dl/earth/client/current/google-earthstable_current_amd64.deb
sudo apt install -y ./google-earth-stable_current_amd64.deb
sudo rm google-earth-stable_current_amd64.deb
echo
read -rsp $'Press enter to continue. \n'
echo
Search Tool
This shortcut simply launches Firefox and navigates directly to the IntelTechniques online search tools. These
are updated often and ready to simplify many of your online queries. More information about these search
options is available later within this book. The following image displays the result upon launch.

OSINT VM Scripts 143

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Video Tool:
Play Video: This selection prompts you to select a file on your device and plays it.
Convert Video: This converts a file to MP4 and opens the storage location of the file.
Extract Frames-All: This selection extracts every frame of a video as a PNG file and then displays the storage
location of the new files.
Extract Frames-Seconds: This selection extracts one frame every second of a video as a PNG file and then
displays the storage location of the new files.
Extract Audio: This selection extracts the audio file of a video; converts it to MP3; and then displays the storage
location of the new file.
Rotate Video: This selection rotates a video counter-clockwise 90 degrees and then displays the storage location
of the new file.
Merge Videos: This selection prompts you for two videos; merges them together; and then displays the storage
location of the new file.
Remove Redundant Frames: This selection attempts to remove any frames identical to each previous frame and
then displays the storage location of the new file.
YT-DLP Best Quality: This selection downloads the best quality video from a URL and then displays the storage
location of the new file.
YT-DLP 1080: This selection downloads the best quality video from a URL, up to 1080p, and then displays the
storage location of the new file.

144 Chapter 11

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

YT-DLP 720: This selection downloads the best quality video from a URL, up to 720p and then displays the
storage location of the new file.
YT-DLP 480: This selection downloads the best quality video from a URL, up to 480p and then displays the
storage location of the new file.
YT-DLP Comments, Subs, & Info: Downloads comments, subtitles, and info.
YT-DLP Audio-Pure: This selection extracts the raw audio of a video from a URL480p and then displays the
storage location of the new file.
YT-DLP Audio-MP3: This selection extracts the audio of a video from a URL; converts to MP3; and then
displays the storage location of the new file.
YT-DLP MP4 Conversion: This selection downloads a video from a URL; converts it to MP4; and then displays
the storage location of the new file.
Streamlink Stream: This opens a live stream; records the content; and displays it.
User Tool
Username-Sherlock: This selection prompts you for a username; queries it through Sherlock; and then displays
the report.
Username-SocialScan: This selection prompts you for a username; queries it through SocialScan; and then
displays the report.
Username-Blackbird: This selection prompts you for a username; queries it through Blackbird; and then displays
the report.
Username-Maigret: This selection prompts you for a username; queries it through Maigret; and then displays
the report.
Username-WhatsMyName: This selection prompts you for a username; queries it through WhatsMyName; and
then displays the report.
Username-BDFR: This selection prompts you for a username; queries it through BDFR; and then displays the
report.
Username-H8Mail: This selection prompts you for a username; queries it through H8Mail; and then displays the
report.
Email-Holehe: This selection prompts you for an email address; queries it through Holehe; and then displays
the report.
Email-SocialScan: This selection prompts you for an email address; queries it through SocialScan; and then
displays the report.
Email-Eyes: This selection prompts you for an email address; queries it through Eyes; and then displays the
results.
Email-GHunt: This selection prompts you for an email address; queries it through GHunt; and then displays
the report.

OSINT VM Scripts 145

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Email-H8Mail: This selection prompts you for an email address; queries it through H8Mail; and then displays
the report.
Hash-NameThatHash: This selection prompts you for a password hash; queries it through NameThatHash; and
then displays the result.
Hash-SearchThatHash: This selection prompts you for a password hash; queries it through SearchThatHash;
and then displays the result.
Image Tool
Gallery-DL: This selection prompts you for a URL; executes Gallery-DL; and displays the results.
RipMe: This selection launches the RipMe application.
Instaloader: This selection prompts you for an Instagram username; executes Instaloader against it; and displays
the results folder.
Toutatis: This selection prompts you for an Instagram username; executes Toutatis against it; and displays the
results file.
OsintGram: This selection is unique in our scripts. It prompts you for an Instagram username; then prompts
you to select the type of data of interest; executes OsintGram against it; and displays the results folder.
Domain Tool
EyeWitness Single URL: This selection prompts you for a URL; executes EyeWitness; and displays the results
storage folder.
EyeWitness Multiple URL: This selection prompts you for a list of URLs; executes EyeWitness on each; and
displays the results storage folder.
HTTrack-Terminal: This selection launches HTTrack within Terminal.
HTTrack-Browser: This selection launches HTTrack within Firefox.
Waybackpy: This selection prompts you for a URL; executes Waybackpy; and displays the results file.
Waybackpack: This selection prompts you for a URL; executes Waybackpack; and displays the results storage
folder.
Amass: This selection prompts you for a URL; executes Amass; and displays the results file.
Photon: This selection prompts you for a URL; executes Photon; and displays the results storage folder.
Sublist3r: This selection prompts you for a URL; executes Sublist3r; and displays the results file.
TheHarvester: This selection prompts you for a URL; executes TheHarvester; and displays the results within
Firefox.
Carbon14: This selection prompts you for a URL; executes Carbon14; and displays the results file.

146 Chapter 11

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

ChangeDetection: This selection prompts you for a URL; executes the ChangeDetection server; launches
Firefox; and displays the frontend.
ArchiveBox: This selection prompts you for a URL; executes the ArchiveBox server; launches Firefox; and
displays the frontend.
Metadata Tool
Exiftool File: This option prompts you to select a file; executes Exiftool to generate the metadata associated
with the file; then displays a report of the result.
Exiftool Folder: This option prompts you to select a folder; executes Exiftool to generate the metadata
associated with all files within the folder; then displays a report of all results.
Metagoofil: This option prompts you for a domain; executes Metagoofil against the domain; acquires any
associated documents within the domain; and displays the folder containing the results. You could execute the
previous option to extract all metadata from the found files.
mat2: This option prompts you to select a file; removes all metadata within the file; and saves a clean copy
next to the original.
xeuledoc: This option prompts you for the entire URL of a Google document; executes xeuledoc against the
URL; and displays the results.
Launch Sherloq: This option launches Sherloq.
Launch Mediainfo: This option launches Mediainfo.
Framework Tool
Launch Spiderfoot: This option launches the Spiderfoot server and the frontend through Firefox.
Launch Recon-ng: This option launches Recon-ng via Terminal.
Configure Mr. Holmes: This option launches the Mr. Holmes installation script. This is needed if you use the
automated script presented later, or need to update the program.
Launch Mr. Holmes: This option launches Mr. Holmes via Terminal.
Launch sn0int: This option launches sn0int via Terminal.
Internet Archive Collection: This option prompts you for a collection name within the Internet Archive;
downloads all content within that collection into a new folder; then displays the content of the folder.
Internet Archive Collection Filetype: This option prompts you for a collection name within the Internet Archive;
prompts you for a file extension; downloads all content within that collection matching the file extension into a
new folder; then displays the content of the folder.
Summary
You should now possess updated custom scripts which replicate much of the manual process presented
throughout this guide. While these make it easy to conduct research using Linux applications, you should always
understand all processes executing within the background.

OSINT VM Scripts 147

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER TWELVE
OSINT VM APIs

An application programming interface (API) enables companies to offer their data and functionality to external
third-party developers and within their own products. This allows customers (you) to communicate directly with
a company's data without navigating to a web page, logging in, and clicking buttons. It also allows companies to
deliver fancy content without the user needing to understand how databases and other technology works. When
you are on Facebook and click a person's profile, Facebook is acquiring that data through a series of internal
APIs and servers. This is true for most online services which have a search function. Think of the API as the
protocol which delivers the text which gets turned into pretty pages in your browser. This is a very basic
explanation, but enough to get us to some demonstrations.
Everything within this chapter will require an API key, which is similar to a password issued only to you. You
will need to provide that key every time you request data from a service. At the end of this chapter, I will explain
a custom script which can be modified to include your own API keys. Afterward, you will only need to supply
the target data you are researching, and never enter the API key again. First, let's work through the process
manually. We will start with People Data Labs.
People Data Labs (peopledatalabs.com)
I am a bit hesitant to present this resource because it seems too good to be true. This "people data" collection
company offers 1,000 free queries of their premium data sets to anyone. We have seen other similar companies
offer the same type of deal, such as Full Contact and Pipl, only to convert to a paid model without any type of
trial. People Data Labs may be planning the same marketing strategy, but let's take advantage of the resource
while it is available. You must create a free trial account at the website under the option of "Get API Key". I
recommend providing an email address associated with a personal domain for best results. You want to appear
as legitimate as possible. Your new account will provide a unique API key for your usage within the "Dashboard"
of the page. Mine appeared similar to the following.
5c0ck097aa376bb7741a1022pl2222e3d45chs
Since this service does not provide a traditional search option, we must create URLs for our queries. This URL
can be entered into a web browser or script. We will keep things simple for now. The following URL submits a
query for "sean@peopledatalabs.com" in any browser.
https://api.peopledatalabs.com/v5/person/enrich?pretty=true&api_key=5c0
ck097aa376bb7741a1022pl2222e3d45chs&email=sean@peopledatalabs.com
The results are presented as text in JSON format. The following is a partial summary. The full result included
four pages of details. I found the following most beneficial.
"full_name": "sean thorne",
"birth_year": "1990",
"linkedin_url": "linkedin.com/in/seanthorne",
"facebook_url": "facebook.com/deseanthorne",
"twitter_url": "twitter.com/seanthorne5",
"work_email": "sean@peopledatalabs.com",
"mobile_phone": "+14155688415",
"email address": "sthorne@uoregon.edu",
"email address": "sean@hallspot.com",
"education": "university of oregon",
148 Chapter 12

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

While this is an obviously staged demo, the results are impressive. I have been able to convert a personal email
address of a target into a full resume with social network profiles and cellular telephone number. We can also
use that same API key to query by a telephone number. The following queries a U.S. number of 222-555-1212
with my test API key.
https://api.peopledatalabs.com/v5/person/enrich?pretty=true&api_key=5c0
ck097aa376bb7741a1022pl2222e3d45chs&phone=+12225551212
The results are once again impressive. As an example, I provided a private direct office number of a previous
government colleague. The full result would fill many pages, but I have provided a partial summary of the best
parts below. I replaced any sensitive details with "REDACTED".
"full_name": "emily REDACTED", "female",
"linkedin_url": "linkedin.com/in/REDACTED",
"linkedin_username": "REDACTED",
"linkedin_id": "REDACTED",
"facebook_url": "REDACTED",
"personal_emails": "REDACTED@charter.net"
"industry": "law enforcement",
"job_title": "police officer",
"job_last_updated": "2022-08-29",
"location_metro": "st. louis, missouri",
"location_street_address": "REDACTED drive",
"location_postal_code": "REDACTED",
"location_geo": "REDACTED",
"location_last_updated": "2022-08-31",
"company": "illinois law enforcement board",
"school": "southern illinois university",
Within seconds, I identified the name, gender, LinkedIn profile, Facebook profile, personal email, profession,
location, home address, secondary employment, and education details associated with my target telephone
number. I even know when she last updated these details. I cannot overstate the value of this free trial. We can
also query by social network profile, such as a X (Twitter), Facebook, or LinkedIn username. The following
URL structure should be used with your own API key.
X (Twitter):
https://api.peopledatalabs.com/v5/person/enrich?pretty=true&api_key=5
c0ck097aa376bb7741a1022pl2222e3d45chs&profile=www.twitter.com/inteltech
niques
Facebook:
https://api.peopledatalabs.com/v5/person/enrich?pretty=true&api_key=5
c0ck097aa376bb7741a1022pl2222e3d45chs&profile=www.facebook.com/inteltec
hniques
LinkedIn:
https://api.peopledatalabs.com/v5/person/enrich?pretty=true&api_key=5
c0ck097aa376bb7741a1022pl2222e3d45chs&profile=www.linkedin.com/inteltec
hniques
Let's take a look at the X (Twitter) result for my own name. It immediately identified the three locations which
have been present within my X (Twitter) profile over the past decade, as follows. I am not aware of any other
service which could replicate this data going back to 2009.

OSINT VM APIs 149

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

"st. louis, missouri, united states",
"washington, district of columbia, united states",
"new york, new york, united states"
I submitted a query for a Facebook target (facebook.com/zuck) and received the following partial result.
"full_name": "mark zuckerberg",
"birth_year": "1984",
"linkedin_url": "linkedin.com/in/mark-zuckerberg",
"facebook_url": "facebook.com/zuck",
"mobile_phone": "+16506447386",
"emails": "mzuckerb@fas.harvard.edu",
This is powerful data, especially considering a social network profile was the starting point. All of these queries
can be completed within your web browser, but I hope you will consider the script which I will explain
momentarily. Let's move on to reverse caller ID options.
Twilio (twilio.com)
I previously explained my usage of the Twilio Lookup service in other books as my favorite telephone number
query option. However, it has one annoyance. Every time I want to search a number, I must log in to Twilio;
confirm my 2FA; navigate to the Lookup option; and receive my results embedded into their web portal. That
is not extremely difficult, but it does slow me down. That is why I only rely on their API for my everyday queries.
Assuming my Twilio Account SID was 11111; my Twilio token was 22222; and my target U.S. number was 202555-1212, the following command copied and pasted into Terminal would conduct my query.
curl -X GET 'https://lookups.twilio.com/v1/PhoneNumbers/+12025551212?
Type=caller-name&Type=carrier' \
-u 11111:22222 | python3 -mjson.tool
There is a lot to unpack here. Let's first understand where we get the information required. Once you have a
Twilio trial established, the home page of your portal should display your "Account SID" and "Auth Token".
The Auth Token is the same as an API key for our purposes. Next, let's work through that command, which is
actually two lines, but prints as four for the book formatting.
curl: This is our command which will download data from a URL.
-X: This specifies a request method for communication with the server.
GET: This is the method we want to use (GET).
'https://lookups.twilio.com/v1/PhoneNumbers/: The URL.
+12025551212: This is our target telephone number.
?Type=caller-name&Type=carrier': This requests name and carrier.
\: This inserts a new line without executing just yet.
-u 11111:22222: This is our Twilio Account SID and Auth Token.
| python3 -mjson.tool: This displays the data in an easier format to read.
The following is a redacted result when I searched one of my Google Voice numbers which has been leaked
throughout various services.
"caller_name": "MICHAEL BAZZELL",
"caller_type": "CONSUMER",
"country_code": "US",
"carrier": {"mobile_country_code": "311", mobile_network_code":
"910","name": "Google (Grand Central) - Level3","type": "voip",
150 Chapter 12

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

I find this impressive. Not only did Twilio identify the name of the VOIP account owner, it also identified the
carrier (Google). I use this lookup tool every day. Twilio also offers additional Lookup services through thirdparty databases, but I no longer recommend them. These each withdraw an additional small fee from your trial
balance, and some require a verified or "upgraded" account to function. I rarely receive any valuable data which
was not already provided from the Twilio Lookup API.
Telnyx (https://refer.telnyx.com/refer/zrfmo)
If I could only search two telephone number services, this would be my second pick after Twilio. I found this
service in late 2020 and I am impressed. The URL above offers a trial account with $10.00 in free queries.
However, they are extremely scrutinous of new accounts. They will likely ask you how you will be using their
service, and I encourage you to consider my Twilio registration tactics within the VoIP sections of my mobile
or desktop guides. Once you do obtain a trial, it could last several years with minimal usage. Unfortunately, there
is no way to submit a single URL as a query within a web browser. You must submit a request within Terminal,
similar to Twilio, which includes several pieces of data. The following is the submission structure.
curl -X GET \
--header "Content-Type: application/json" \
--header "Accept: application/json" \
--header "Authorization: Bearer XXXX" \
"https://api.telnyx.com/v2/number_lookup/+12025551212?type=carrie
r&type=caller-name"
You could do this manually, replacing "XXXX" with your Telnyx API key (visible within your portal) and
"2025551212" with your target number, but that is complicated. Instead, consider using my custom script, as
explained at the end of this chapter. The following displays the redacted results of querying my Google Voice
number through Telnyx.
"country_code": "US",
"national_format": "(618) xxx-xxxx",
"phone_number": "+1618xxxxxxx",
"fraud": null,
"carrier": {
"mobile_country_code": "",
"mobile_network_code": "",
"name": "Level 3/1",
"type": "fixed line",
"error_code": null,
"normalized_carrier": ""
"caller_name": "caller_name": Michael Bazzell,
"nnid_override": null,
"portability": {
"lrn": "618xxxXXXX",
"ported_status": "",
"ported_date": "",
"ocn": "6115",
"line_type": "fixed line",
"spid": "",
"spid_carrier_name": "LEVEL 3 COMMUNICATIONS
"spid_carrier_type": "",
"city": "BELLEVILLE",
"state": "Illinois"
"valid_number": true,

OSINT VM APIs 151

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CID Name (cidname.com)
Similar to Twilio and Telnyx, you must create a free trial account in order to use this service. You must provide
an email address and telephone number, and I have used temporary addresses and Google Voice to bypass this
restriction. Navigate to this website and register for a free account. Upon completion, you should receive an
email with an API license key that is valid for approximately 100 free successful searches. You will not be charged
for empty results. If you do not receive the API key via email, log in to your account and retrieve it from the
portal. You are now ready to submit requests for caller ID information. To do this, you must formulate an API
request in your browser which includes your authentication key and target number to search, as follows.
https://dip.cidname.com/2025551212/XX&output=raw&reply=none
This queries the domain (cidname.com), our authentication key (XX) and our target number (2025551212). I
recommend saving the address of your first query as a bookmark or favorite if you plan to use this through a
browser instead of our automated script presented in a moment. I currently only recommend CID Name if you
are unable to create a Twilio or Telnyx account, or if you simply want another service to verify the confidence
in a previous result. A search of my Google Voice number simply revealed "Michael Bazzell".
Caller ID Summary
Before reverse caller ID lookups, this information would have required a subpoena. In one recent scenario, a
cellular telephone number searched on one of these services revealed the name "Jennifer S" in the result. During
an interview with this subject, she disclosed that "Jennifer S" is how she identifies her account on the telephone
bill that she shares with other family members. She was unaware that this data was sent to the receiving number.
On many searches, the full name will be present. This should explain why you may be noticing a caller's name
on your caller ID display when he or she is calling from a cellular number. There are many caller ID options
available on the internet. Most services offer a free trial, even if it is not advertised. Adding a few dollars to each
service may provide more queries than you will ever need. Take advantage of the free trials to determine which
services work best in your investigations. Overall, reverse caller ID services can tell us more about a target
telephone number than the standard people search engines. In many cases, you can immediately obtain data that
would have required a subpoena just a few years prior. Always utilize all of the services in order to gauge the
confidence in the results. If this is overkill for your needs, there are other web-based search engines that are
easier to use.
Breach Directory (breachdirectory.org)
This service allows query of email address, username, password, domain, or hash value against popular known
data breaches. I dedicate an entire guide with multiple chapters toward breach data, but let's focus only on
publicly available content within this API here. First, you will need to obtain a free API key from Beach
Directory's Rapid API repository located online at https://rapidapi.com/rohan-patra/api/breachdirectory.
Once you have that, you would replace "XXXXX" in the following examples with your own key. The results
for each are using the test data within each query. After the examples, I will offer some OSINT considerations
and further investigation.
Breach Directory Email Search (Identifies Partial Passwords and Full Password Hashes):
wget --quiet \
--method GET \
--header 'X-RapidAPI-Key: XXXXX' \
--header 'X-RapidAPI-Host: breachdirectory.p.rapidapi.com' \
--output-document \
'https://breachdirectory.p.rapidapi.com/?func=auto&term=123@gmail.com'

152 Chapter 12

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Breach Directory Email Result:
"success": true,
"has_password": false,
"sources": "Ledger.com"
"has_password": true,
"password": "bart****",
"sha1": "4a161083c434dd9aa89c0ba91ec37143a47662fd",
"hash": "jMgujSG0GO4Gtu3gnM2KIfuVMphiLznm",
"sources":
"MyHeritage.com",
"Paxful.com"
"has_password": true,
"password": "pala*****",
"sha1": "2234e9ff8c40dc43cd2ab13c4fc7efca12baf0bb",
"hash": "sUi6A0IvcpETYOOJnFCAWOmVLI1ifjnz7Q==",
"sources":
"MyFitnessPal.com",
"Dropbox.com",
"Collection 1",
"Myspace.com"
Breach Directory Username Search (Identifies Partial Passwords and Full Password Hashes):
"Username")
echo "Username: "
read data
wget --quiet \
--method GET \
--header 'X-RapidAPI-Key: XXXXX' \
--header 'X-RapidAPI-Host: breachdirectory.p.rapidapi.com' \
--output-document \
'https://breachdirectory.p.rapidapi.com/?func=auto&term=badguy143'
Breach Directory Username Result:
"success": true,
"found": 2,
"has_password": true,
"password": "pala*****",
"sha1": "2234e9ff8c40dc43cd2ab13c4fc7efca12baf0bb",
"hash": "sUi6A0IvcpETYOOJnFCAWOmVLI1ifjnz7Q==",
"sources": "MyFitnessPal.com"
"has_password": true,
"password": "p0ba**",
"sha1": "f0b261eb28eb14fb9a493c9857eb4d107a1ad0a9",
"hash": "zSR\/X0xA4lioFowltKCVw+nEIo1yOg==",
"sources": "Collection 1"
Breach Directory Password Search (Identifies Number of Identical Passwords Found):
wget --quiet \

OSINT VM APIs 153

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

--method GET \
--header 'X-RapidAPI-Key: XXXXX' \
--header 'X-RapidAPI-Host: breachdirectory.p.rapidapi.com' \
--output-document \
'https://breachdirectory.p.rapidapi.com/?func=password&term=password1'
Breach Directory Password Result:
"found": 587
Breach Directory Domain Search:
wget --quiet \
--method GET \
--header 'X-RapidAPI-Key: XXXXX' \
--header 'X-RapidAPI-Host: breachdirectory.p.rapidapi.com' \
--output-document \
'https://breachdirectory.p.rapidapi.com/?func=domain&term=cnn.com'
Breach Directory Domain Result:
(This option was not working at the time of writing, but is expected to return.)
Breach Directory Hash Search:
wget --quiet \
--method GET \
--header 'X-RapidAPI-Key: XXXXX' \
--header 'X-RapidAPI-Host: breachdirectory.p.rapidapi.com' \
--output-document \
'https://breachdirectory.p.rapidapi.com/?func=dehash&term=482C811DA5D5B
4BC6D497FFA98491E38'
Breach Directory Hash Result:
"found": true
"password": password123
Let's dig deeper into these results. In the first example with an email address, you saw the following.
"password": "pala*****",
"sha1": "2234e9ff8c40dc43cd2ab13c4fc7efca12baf0bb",
This service masks the password, but includes a SHA1 hash of it. This is a good opportunity to expose the entire
password. If you were to enter an identified hash of "2234e9ff8c40dc43cd2ab13c4fc7efca12baf0bb" into the
hash tool which was added to your VM during the previous chapters, the result would display the full unredacted
password. If we were to enter that password into the "Password" option above, the service would tell us the
total number of accounts which include that compromised password. For obvious reasons, I will not display all
of that here. We also see the "sources" of this data. We now know that our target possessed accounts at Myspace,
MyHeritage, and others.

154 Chapter 12

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Historical Whois Information
People who currently hide their identity behind "whoisguard" protections may not have always done so. If you
want to dive deeper, an API can disclose details unavailable anywhere else. I present options for two services,
one of which offers a free trial.
WhoisXMLAPI (whois.whoisxmlapi.com)
In order to use this service, you must first sign up for a free account and confirm your email address. Sign in to
the new account and click your profile in the upper-right corner. Select the "My Products" option and make
note of your API key. Mine was similar to "at_0vPfsSUdf1ZpiCxc5". You should now have 500 credits toward
historical domain registration queries. The command is as follows.
curl 'https://whoishistory.whoisxmlapi.com/api/v1?apiKey=at_0vPfsSUdf1ZpiCxc5
&domainName=inteltechniques.com&mode=purchase' | python3 -mjson.tool
You could also access the URL directly within a browser at the following.
https://whoishistory.whoisxmlapi.com/api/v1?apiKey=at_0vPfsSUdf1ZpiCxc5
&domainName=inteltechniques.com&mode=purchase
This command queries the service; identifies the API key to be charged; provides the domain name to query
(inteltechniques.com); and outputs the data in JSON format for easy reading. When conducted against my site,
I received several pages worth of details. Most were notifications that I use a whois masking service, and that
my true details were unavailable. However, the following was of most interest. In 2013, I did not immediately
pay for the whois protection, and WhoisXMLAPI grabbed the following copy of my registration details.
"registrantContact": {
"name": "Michael Bazzell",
"street": "1700 E Broadway",
"city": "Alton",
"state": "Illinois",
"postalCode": "62002",
"email": "info@inteltechniques.com",
"telephone": "16184628253",
Fortunately, that is not a sensitive physical address, the email does not forward to me, and the telephone number
is not mine. However, you would have uncovered the true owner of my site if I were doing something bad. This
service provides free credits to numerous additional domain-related services, but I find them to be no more
valuable than the free web-based options previously discussed. The historical API is the only option I access.
Whoxy (whoxy.com)
Whoxy allows a free demo at https://www.whoxy.com/whois-history/demo.php, but you will be rate-limited
if it detects abuse. They do not offer a free trial of their API, but the fees are minimal. The current price is $2.00
for 400 queries. The following is the URL structure.
https://api.whoxy.com/?key=XXXX&history=inteltechniques.com | python3 mjson.tool
The following response is very similar to the previous service.

OSINT VM APIs 155

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

"registrant_contact": {
"full_name": "Michael Bazzell",
"mailing_address": "1700 E Broadway",
"city_name": "Alton",
"state_name": "Illinois",
"zip_code": "62002",
"country_name": "United States",
"email_address": "info@inteltechniques.com",
"phone_number": "16184626666"
RapidAPI Telephone Search (rapidapi.com)
Since the original publication of this guide, several readers have expressed frustration at the difficulties obtaining
free trial accounts from Twilio or Telnyx for telephone number lookups. I can relate. I have had my own issues
with both companies, but currently possess funded accounts which are vital to my investigations. If you are
unable (or unwilling) to acquire these services, there are still other options which may be almost as valuable.
RapidAPI offers numerous API connections, many of which query caller ID databases.
The first step is to create an account at rapidapi.com. I was able to provide a burner email address and was not
required to enter any payment information. I selected the free "Basic" plan. Next, we must subscribe to some
beneficial API services through the site. I navigated to the following links; clicked the "Subscribe to Test" button
at each; and chose the free tier for each. Once you have subscribed to any service, make note of your "XRapidAPI-Key" visible within the testing area. You will need that to replicate my queries.
https://rapidapi.com/trestle-solutions-inc-trestle-solutions-inc-default/api/reverse-phone-api
https://rapidapi.com/trestle-solutions-inc-trestle-solutions-inc-default/api/smart-cnam-api
https://rapidapi.com/DataCrawler/api/eyecon
https://rapidapi.com/DataCrawler/api/phone-number-caller-id-lookup
https://rapidapi.com/DataCrawler/api/viewcaller
https://rapidapi.com/DataCrawler/api/truecaller4
Once you are subscribed to the free tier of an API service, you can formulate queries within Terminal to access
the data. The following Terminal commands execute queries at each of the previous six services in the same
order. Make sure to replace "2025551212" with your target telephone number and "XXX" with your own
RapidAPI key. While all of these are configured for numbers within North America, many of these services
offer queries through other countries. When present, change the "Code" from "1" (North America), to your
targeted country code. Some services present a two-character "Country Code" within the command, such as
"US", which can be modified. All of these services restrict your queries. Some restrict to 3 free lookups each
month while others allow up to 100 (per free RapidAPI account).
curl --request GET --url 'https://reverse-phoneapi.p.rapidapi.com/3.1/phone?phone=2025551212' --header 'X-RapidAPIHost: reverse-phone-api.p.rapidapi.com'
--header 'X-RapidAPI-Key:
XXX' | python3 -mjson.tool
curl --request GET --url 'https://smart-cnamapi.p.rapidapi.com/3.1/cnam?phone=2025551212' --header 'X-RapidAPIHost: smart-cnam-api.p.rapidapi.com' --header 'X-RapidAPI-Key: XXX' |
python3 -mjson.tool
curl --request GET --url
'https://eyecon.p.rapidapi.com/api/v1/search?code=1&number=2025551212'

156 Chapter 12

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

--header 'X-RapidAPI-Host: eyecon.p.rapidapi.com' --header 'X-RapidAPIKey: XXX' | python3 -mjson.tool
curl --request GET --url 'https://phone-number-caller-idlookup.p.rapidapi.com/api/v1/search?code=1&number=2025551212' --header
'X-RapidAPI-Host: phone-number-caller-id-lookup.p.rapidapi.com' -header 'X-RapidAPI-Key: XXX' | python3 -mjson.tool
curl --request GET --url
'https://viewcaller.p.rapidapi.com/api/v1/search?code=1&number=20255512
12' --header 'X-RapidAPI-Host: viewcaller.p.rapidapi.com' --header 'XRapidAPI-Key: XXX' | python3 -mjson.tool
curl --request GET --url
'https://truecaller4.p.rapidapi.com/api/v1/getDetails?phone=2025551212&
countryCode=US' --header 'X-RapidAPI-Host: truecaller4.p.rapidapi.com'
--header 'X-RapidAPI-Key: XXX' | python3 -mjson.tool
The results will vary from each provider. The following is a redacted example from the first option. I queried a
Google Voice number associated with my name.
"carrier": "Google (Grand Central) - Level3 - SVR",
"is_prepaid": false,
"is_commercial": false,
"belongs_to": {"name": "Michael John Bazzell",
"gender": "M",
"type": "Person",
"current_addresses": [
"location_type": "Address",
"street_line_1": "[REDACTED PREVIOUS ADDRESS]",
"city": "[REDACTED]",
"postal_code": ""[REDACTED]",
"state_code": "CA",
"country_code": "US",
"is_active": false,
"delivery_point": "SingleUnit",
"historical_addresses": "[REDACTED PREVIOUS ADDRESS]",
I have added these search options to the API script which you may have previously downloaded. If you are
using an older version of the script, which was created before adding this new section, it can be updated with
the following Terminal commands within your OSINT VM. Make sure to modify the API keys within the script,
as explained next.
cd ~/Documents/scripts
curl -O https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/api.sh
chmod +x api.sh
If any of these services are no longer functioning, search through RapidAPI for a replacement. There are
hundreds of additional OSINT-related APIs to choose from. Querying "OSINT", "Caller ID", "Telephone",
and "Email" should get you started. Once you find an option of interest, change the drop-down menu in the
right portion of the "playground" to "Shell" > "cURL" and copy the command presented. You can then modify
this as needed to execute within Terminal or place within your script. I will also update this section and the
corresponding script as I find new useful services.

OSINT VM APIs 157

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

API Script
You may feel overwhelmed with these options. I can relate. For many years, I stored bookmarks of all URLs
and APIs within my browser, then modified the content of each URL with my new target telephone number or
other data. This always felt sloppy and often wasted credits. In 2022, I finally created my own search script which
can be executed from within our Linux OSINT VM. As long as you followed the steps in the previous chapter,
you should already possess the API script in your VM, along with a shortcut within either your Activities menu
or the Dock.
You can launch the API Tool script, but it will not function yet. Instead, locate the api.sh file within your
Documents/scripts folder and open it within your text editor. You must provide your own API keys issued by
any services which you wish to search. Replace any instance of "XXX" within the script with your own API
keys, as previously explained. The following is a sample for the first two entries, displaying placeholder text of
"XXX" for each API key which needs to be entered. Some entries, such as Twilio, require an account identifier,
and those are represented with "YYY".
$opt1 )
data=$(zenity --entry --title "PDL Email" --text "Email Address")
mkdir ~/Documents/API/
cd ~/Documents/API/
curl
'https://api.peopledatalabs.com/v5/person/enrich?pretty=true&api_key=XX
XX&email='$data'' > $data-PDL.txt
open ~/Documents/API/
exit;;
$opt2 )
data=$(zenity --entry --title "PDL Phone" --text "Phone Number")
mkdir ~/Documents/API/
cd ~/Documents/API/
curl
'https://api.peopledatalabs.com/v5/person/enrich?pretty=true&api_key=XX
XX&phone='$data'' > $data-PDL.txt
open ~/Documents/API/
exit;;
Once you have added your own API keys, you can execute the script, which is labeled as "API Tool". Select the
service you desire, then enter the target data when prompted. The results will be saved to a text file which will
be placed in the "API" folder within your "Documents" folder. The folder should open upon completion. As a
final reminder, you must replace each occurrence of "XXX" and "YYY" within my script with your actual license
keys or credentials if you want to use this technique. There are unlimited API services out there which provide
valuable data unavailable within any web browser. When you find the next amazing API, hopefully you now
have the ability to add it to your custom scripts.

158 Chapter 12

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER THIRTEEN
OSINT VM MAINTENANCE
Once you have your custom OSINT Linux VM created and configured, you must maintain it. This includes
applying frequent updates, shrinking to avoid data bloat, and proper clones or exports. I will assume that you
have applied all of the previous chapters and now possess at least two VMs within your VM client software.
One should be titled "Debian Stock" which only contains a pure Debian install, and the other should be titled
"OSINT VM" which possess all of the configuration up to this point in the guide.
Updates
I prefer to launch the "OSINT VM" machine weekly and execute the Updates Tool script from the Dock. This
applies all system and application updates. I then close this VM so it is ready to be shrunk and cloned for the
next investigation. I launch the "Debian Stock" VM once monthly and then open Terminal to execute "sudo
apt update && sudo apt upgrade" to keep it updated. This keeps my stock VM current in the
event I want to rebuild my OSINT VM or make a new copy for another task. Once all of my VMs are updated,
I can shrink, clone, and export them however desired for my investigations.
I present the next several pages of tutorials for each VM client in order of UTM, VirtualBox, and then VMWare
Workstation Pro. Within each set, I explain the proper steps for shrinking, cloning, and then exporting your
new OSINT VM. Much of this content will be redundant to the techniques within previous chapters, but these
will all apply directly to our OSINT VM instead of other operating systems. While your OSINT VM is shut
down, consider the following.
UTM OSINT VM Shrinking
The hard drive space of your UTM Debian OSINT VM will keep growing unnecessarily. When you apply
updates within the VM, all of the original data is somewhat preserved, even deleted content. Fortunately, UTM
makes the shrinking process easy. While your OSINT VM is shut down, select it within the main UTM window.
Go to the Settings for that VM and select the VirtIO drive of your operating system within the left menu. Click
the "Reclaim Space" button, confirm the option, and click "Save" when complete. You will see the size decrease
if free space was available. I do this after every update to my OSINT VM.
UTM OSINT VM Clones
While your OSINT VM is shut down and the VM window is closed, you will see options within the main UTM
application for the selected VM in the upper-right. Let's focus on the "Clone selected VM" option, which appears
similar to an icon with two documents. Clicking this presents an option to make a full clone. This allows us to
preserve our original OSINT VM and make copies whenever we want to conduct an investigation. I selected
my "OSINT VM" machine; clicked the icon; confirmed the operation; right-clicked the new clone; selected
"Edit"; renamed it to "OSINT VM 2024.02.01"; and clicked "Save". The result can be seen in the image below.

OSINT VM Maintenance 159

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

UTM OSINT VM Exports
The "Share Selected VM" option allows us to export an entire VM within a ".utm" file for easy archiving or
sharing. The dialogue will prompt you to choose the export location. You can now provide this file as part of
the discovery process, or save it off-site as a backup of your Stock Debian and OSINT VM machines. I selected
my "OSINT VM" machine; clicked the Share button; selected my Downloads folder; and clicked "Save".
VirtualBox OSINT VM Shrinking
The hard drive space of your VirtualBox OSINT VM also keeps growing unnecessarily. When you make changes
within the VM, all of the data is somewhat preserved, even outdated and deleted content. Unfortunately,
VirtualBox does not make the shrinking process as easy as UTM for macOS. To replicate, we will take a few
steps within the OSINT VM. First, apply any pending updates; remove any undesired files; and empty the trash.
Then, execute the following within Terminal.
dd if=/dev/zero of=zerofillfile bs=1M
This procedure technically filled your VM completely with blank space, which may not sound ideal. With the
VM turned off, open Terminal within the Linux host (or Command Prompt within a Windows host) and
navigate to the folder containing the VM file you want to shrink. For me, this was the following.
cd ~/VirtualBox\ VMs/OSINT\ VM/
You must then execute a Terminal command which compacts the "vdi" file within the VM folder. For me, the
command was the following.
VBoxManage modifymedium disk OSINT\ VM.vdi --compact
You will see the size decrease if free space was available.
VirtualBox OSINT VM Clones
Once you have your OSINT VM configured and ready for use, you should clone it and work from the copy.
This way, the original VM stays uncontaminated. Within the VirtualBox client, while the VM is shut down, rightclick on the OSINT VM; select "Clone"; provide a name such as "OSINT VM 2024.02.01"; click "Next"; and
click "Clone". You now have two identical VMs, each in their own data folders. If you were to work within the
cloned copy during your investigation and do damage, you still have the original OSINT VM in a perfect state.
VirtualBox OSINT VM Exports
You can preserve a specific state of a VM within VirtualBox by exporting the entire session. You can now
provide this file as part of the discovery process, or save it off-site as a backup of your Stock Debian and OSINT
VM machines. You have two options. I selected my "OSINT VM" machine; right-clicked on the OSINT VM
while it was shut down; and selected "Show in File Manager". I then copied this folder to an external drive. This
does not require any export or creation of a new file. You could also export the entire VM into a single file.
While the VM was shut down, I selected "File" > "Export Appliance"; selected my OSINT VM; and clicked
"Next", "Next", then "Export". This created a new file within my Documents folder which can later be imported
into any instance of VirtualBox.
VMWare Workstation Pro Shrinking
The hard drive space of your VMWare Workstation Pro OSINT VM also keeps growing unnecessarily. When
you make changes within the VM, all of the data is somewhat preserved, even outdated and deleted content.

160 Chapter 13

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Surprisingly, VMWare makes the shrinking option within their software quite easy. While the VM is shut down,
select it within the VMWare Workstation Pro menu and click "VM" in the upper menu, then "Settings". Select
the hard disk option in the left and click the "Compact Disk" button to the right. This will shrink the VM and
you will see the size decrease if free space was available. I do this after every update to my OSINT VM.
VMWare Workstation Pro Clones
Once you have your OSINT VM configured and ready for use, you should clone it and work from the copy.
This way, the original VM stays uncontaminated. Within the VMWare client, while the VM is shut down, rightclick on the OSINT VM; select "Manage" then "Clone"; click "Next" three times; provide a name such as
"OSINT VM 2024.02.01"; click "Next"; and click "Finish". You now have two identical VMs, each in their own
data folders. If you were to work within the cloned copy during your investigation and do any damage, you still
have the original OSINT VM in a perfect state.
VMWare Workstation Pro Exports
You can preserve a specific state of a VM within VMWare Workstation Pro by making a copy of the entire VM
folder while a VM is shut down. Right-click the desired VM within VMWare Workstation Pro and select "Open
VM Directory". Copy this folder to any other directory. You can now provide this VM as part of the discovery
process, or save it off-site as a backup of your VMs.
Desktop Environments
In an earlier chapter, we installed Debian and selected Gnome as our desktop environment. This is always my
preference, but it may not be yours. It appears very similar to Ubuntu and Pop!_OS, and has a very clean (and
minimal) feel. Even if you did not select additional desktop environments during the initial installation, you can
always add them later through Terminal with the following.
Cinnamon: sudo apt install task-cinnamon-desktop -y
KDE (Plasma): sudo apt install task-kde-desktop -y (press Enter twice during installation)
LXDE: sudo apt install task-lxde-desktop -y
LXQt: sudo apt install task-lxqt-desktop -y
MATE: sudo apt install task-mate-desktop -y
After installation, log out, and then click your username. Before entering your password, click the settings icon
in the lower right area. It will present a new menu of options. You can select any desktop environment, then
continue the login process. Unless you change any selection, Debian will always default to the last chosen option.
I should state again that I prefer Gnome for our purposes, and all tutorials within this guide have been specifically
tweaked for that desktop. I do not install any of these additional options. There is no harm in experimenting
with the alternative desktop environments. You may find one which works better for you than me. Some mimic
Microsoft Windows more than traditional Unix-style desktops, and vice-versa. Your ultimate OSINT VM
should fit best to your needs.
Summary
Hopefully, you now have three Linux VMs in pristine condition. One is your stock Debian instance which can
always be used to clone when trying new things or rebuilding a VM. The OSINT VM contains all of your
configurations which should never be used for investigations. The third is a clone of the OSINT VM which is
ready for an active investigation. Keep your originals clean and only use them for updates. Make clones of it for
each investigation, but be sure to shrink them before cloning. Also, make sure you have a safe backup copy
stored outside your primary device. Most importantly, understand the steps you have taken. Expect problems!
However, most of the time, a future update will fix things which currently do not work. When something is not
functioning properly, move on to the next tool.

OSINT VM Maintenance 161

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER FOURTEEN
OSINT VM AUTOMATED BUILD

While this guide has provided the steps to build your own OSINT VM, you may still feel overwhelmed with the
effort. Therefore, the following command might be the most valuable text within this book for some readers.
wget https://uvm:317@inteltechniques.com/osintvm/install.sh && chmod +x
install.sh && ./install.sh
This command downloads a custom script called install.sh; makes the file executable; and then launches it. This
script includes every Linux configuration, installation, download, and customization mentioned throughout this
book, beginning at "Debian Customization" in Chapter Eight. After you build your Debian VM by manually
conducting the steps previously explained, create a new clone of your Debian Stock VM and launch this
command from within Terminal. You will be prompted to enter your password and confirm a dialogue, but the
rest happens behind the scenes. After completion, you possess the same VM which was built during this entire
book. Note that Firefox and Tor Browser will launch and close on their own during this process.
You may feel frustrated with me. You may wonder why I did not start the book with this script. While I rely on
this single script often, it is cheating. Running a single command and achieving a complete VM is convenient
and time-saving, but it also eliminates any need to understand the processes. I believe the education received
while manually building an OSINT VM is more valuable than the final product itself. However, this automated
script simplifies the process when we need to quickly create another OSINT VM. It also allows me to apply
updates as needed from my end. You could launch this script a year after reading this book and immediately
apply all updates and changes which have occurred since publication.
An ideal scenario would be that you are already familiar with the VM creation and configuration process, but
you do not have an updated OSINT VM from which to clone. You have a Debian Stock VM, but no OSINT
applications. Entering this command within the Terminal of a cloned VM should build your OSINT VM in
about 15 minutes.
If you look at the script after download, which should be available within your "Home" folder inside your
Debian install, you will see that it appears very similar to the commands entered throughout this book. This new
script is simply executing each line as we did manually. While it can be a valuable time saver, you also risk missing
any errors which occur during execution. I encourage you to ignore this script until you have confidence in your
ability to create your virtual machine manually. I find it more satisfying to use a VM which I created myself
instead of one generated by an automated script, but I want you to have options. If this script should fail on
your VM, revert to the manual methods in order to identify the issue.
I hope I have sparked your interest for proper OSINT investigative environments and Linux applications.

162 Chapter 14

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER FIFTEEN
ANDROID VIRTUALIZATION

For several years, online researchers have been navigating through various social networking websites for
information about individuals. Whether it was older sites such as Friendster and Myspace, or current networks
such as X (Twitter) and Facebook, we have always flocked to our web browsers to begin extracting data. Times
have changed. Today, an entire generation of social network users rarely touch a traditional computer. They
operate completely from a cellular telephone or tablet. Many of the networks through which individuals engage
will only operate on a mobile device. Services such as Snapchat, Tinder, and TikTok do not allow a user to
access content from a traditional web browser. As this shift occurs, investigators must transition with it. Our
preparation is not complete until we have disposable Android environments in place.
This chapter will focus on the huge amount of information available through mobile platforms that is not
accessible through a web browser. I will explain a method of emulating a portable device within a traditional
computer. Before we dive into the nuts and bolts of making things work, we should discuss why this is the way
to go. In my investigations, documentation is my primary reason for launching a simulated mobile device within
my computer operating system. If I conducted my investigation on an actual smartphone, documenting my
findings can be difficult. Mobile screen captures only cover a small amount of visible content. Extracting any
captured images can be a hassle. Referencing my findings within a final report can become very tedious. When
using Android emulation within my traditional computer, I can easily create numerous screen captures, record
a video of my entire investigation, and paste my results directly into the report.
Privacy and security are also important reasons to consider emulation versus directly investigating from a
portable device. I have seen many law enforcement investigators conduct a search or use an app directly from
their personal or work phones. This opens that device to scrutiny and discovery. An attorney could rightfully
request a copy of the investigator's phone in order to conduct an independent forensic analysis. That would
make most people nervous. Additionally, if I encounter malicious software or a virus from my portable device,
it could affect all future investigations using that hardware. Emulation will remedy both of these situations.
The idea of Android emulation (or virtualization) is to recreate the mobile operating experience within an
application on your computer. This application will execute in the same manner that your web browser, word
processor, or email client would open. It will have the exact same appearance as if you were staring at a telephone
or tablet. Any actions that you take within this emulated device will not affect anything else on your computer.
Think of it as an encapsulated box, and nothing comes in or gets out, very similar to our Linux VM previously
explained. A great feature of emulation is that you can create unlimited virtual devices. You could have one for
every investigation in order to prevent any contamination.
Some readers will question why I chose to explain Android emulation instead of iPhone. The most obvious
reason is the number of options. I will explain software solutions for recreating the Android environment on
your computer. An iPhone simulator will only function on Apple computers and has very limited features. The
Android techniques will work on any major operating system. Additionally, we can create Android virtual
machines that possess all original functionality. An iPhone simulator will not connect to most applications and
features, and provides almost no value to the OSINT investigator.
The following pages differ greatly from previous editions of this book. Even if you have previous Android
machines functioning for your investigations, please read through this chapter. I believe you will find alternative
ways of Android virtualization which could benefit your investigations. Also, the software used throughout this
chapter will display different wording within various operating systems. The menus and windows referenced
here were all tested on macOS, and will have slight variations on Windows and Linux hosts. Use the overall
methods to your advantage instead of scouring for an exact replica of my configuration. By the time you read
this, new versions of all applications will display slight modifications from my examples.

Android Virtualization 163

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

The previous editions of this book focused heavily on Genymotion and VirtualBox for Android virtualization.
These cross-platform applications allowed us to easily create virtual Android environments which appeared as
magical mobile devices on our screens. I no longer recommend Genymotion or VirtualBox as our best
options. I have several reasons, as outlined in the following.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Genymotion requires a user account in order to access your Android virtual machine. This requires an
email address and includes tracking of your activity.
Genymotion has limited their free option for personal use. Relying on their software during professional
investigations may violate their terms of service.
Genymotion continues to make the free version difficult to locate and download.
Genymotion relies on VirtualBox for all virtualization. This introduces additional layers of complexity,
troubleshooting, and limitations.
VirtualBox does not currently support Apple M1 or later processors, and runs poorly on Apple Intel
machines. This prevents Genymotion from running on newer Apple hardware.
Both Genymotion and VirtualBox only support x86 virtual machines, which prevents native ARM
virtualization for those with machines which support ARM builds.
Both options are inferior to native Android virtualization.
Many mobile applications specifically block Genymotion, VirtualBox, or other x86 builds.

Instead, we will build our Android devices without the need for an account through Genymotion or Google.
We can stay fairly anonymous and rely on cross-platform software provided by the creator of Android.
Android Studio (developer.android.com/studio)
This software was created and is maintained by Google, the maker of Android. It is designed for Android
developers who need to create and test mobile applications within a desktop environment before applying them
to actual mobile devices. While this software has way more features than we need as online investigators, I
believe it has the best Android virtualization option. It can be installed with the following commands (assuming
macOS users have Brew installed and Windows users configured Chocolatey, as previously explained).
•
•

•

Linux: sudo snap install android-studio
macOS: brew install --cask android-studio
Windows: choco install androidstudio

Once you have it installed, you must launch and configure the applications. This will appear slightly different on
each operating system and within each major software revision. However, the following steps which I took on
my macOS OSINT machine should assist.
•
•
•
•
•

Launch Android Studio.
Do not import any settings but allow any default downloads.
Choose "Don't Send" for analytics, then click "Next" in the Welcome Wizard.
Choose the "Standard" option and click "Next".
Select your desired appearance, click "Next", accept both agreements, and click "Finish".

Android Studio will download numerous items, which may take some time. If you receive any download errors,
choose the "Retry" option. Once everything has been successfully downloaded, click "Finish". This should
launch the new application window, and the following should be performed.
•
•
•

Click "New Project", then "Next" to confirm "Empty Activity".
Provide a name for your application (I chose "OSINT"), and click "Finish".
Allow all additional default downloads and click "Finish".

164 Chapter 15

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

The application will navigate to the main developer panel, and you should see several downloads continue in
the lower right. Allow everything to complete before proceeding. You should then see a vertical bar on the right
titled "Device Manager". Clicking this should present a virtual device, which may be titled similar to "Pixel_3a".
This will likely contain the latest version of Android, but we should also explore other options. Click the "Create
device" button, as seen in Figure 15.01. This allows you to select from many virtual Android options. I chose to
add a Pixel 6 Pro to my available devices, and selected the most recent API level, which can also be seen in
Figure 15.01.

Figure 15.01: The Android Studio Device Manager.
Before we launch our first device, we should consider an important adjustment. Since Android Studio is targeted
toward developers, virtual Android devices launch within the developer portal. I prefer my devices to launch
within their own window, so I make the following configuration change in the "Preferences" or "Settings" menu
within Android Studio.
•
•

Click on "Tools" then "Emulator".
Disable "Launch in a tool window" and click "OK".

Now choose your desired device and click the arrow button to launch. You should see a device similar to that
in Figure 15.02 (left). You are now running a virtual version of Android within your desktop environment. Next,
let's configure the device for future OSINT usage.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Remove any desired applications from the home screen by clicking, holding, and dragging up.
Launch the Chrome browser and deny any features.
Search for F-Droid and visit the F-Droid site.
Click "Download F-Droid" and confirm request.
When finished, click the "Open" option and then "Settings" when prompted.
Enable "Allow from this source" and click "Install" then "Open". Allow notifications.
Within F-Droid, search for "Aurora Store" and select it.
Click "Install" then "Settings"; enable "Allow from this source"; and click "Install".
Click the circle "Home" button within the floating sidebar.

You should now see two additional applications within your home screen. Let's open Aurora Store and make
the following configuration changes.
•
•
•
•
•

When prompted, select the Terms of Service box and click "Accept".
Click "Next" four times to navigate through the settings.
Click "Grant" next to each option and "Allow" when prompted.
Enable any access menu and use the back button until all options show "Granted".
Click "Finish" then "Anonymous".
Android Virtualization 165

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Aurora Store should now connect you to their proxy for the Google Play Store. You should be able to download
any applications as you would on any other device. If you are on a VPN, you may be blocked from this
connection. During my own configuration, I had to connect to a dedicated VPN IP address to complete the
connection. Once you are within Aurora, install an application. I searched "Facebook"; chose the first option;
clicked "Install"; then confirmed my choice. I can now open the Facebook mobile application within a secure
virtual environment from my desktop computer.
Let's digest these steps. You installed F-Droid which is an open-source package installer for Android. It allowed
us to install Aurora Store which is an anonymous replacement for the Google Play Store. Through Aurora Store,
you installed Facebook to ensure the ability to add apps. You authorized all applications to install additional
apps on your device, which should only be a one-time requirement. You can now launch Aurora Store and install
practically any app desired. During this writing, I installed the following apps and moved them to my home
screen, as visible in Figure 15.02 (right).
Facebook
TikTok

Messenger
TextNow

WhatsApp
Truecaller

Instagram
Bumble

X (Twitter)
Telegram

Snapchat
YouTube

Kik
Tinder

Figure 15.02: Virtual device screens within Android Studio.
Navigating these screens is identical to a physical device. However, controlling them from a mouse and keyboard
may take some practice. You can click the circle on the floating bar to return to your home screen at any time.
The square button allows you to browse through open apps and swipe them up to close them. The left arrow

166 Chapter 15

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

takes you back one step within an app. Always click and hold an app before moving it, and dragging the screen
right or left navigates between home spaces.
Since we are working with a virtual device on a computer screen, there are a few nuances which should be
discussed. By default, internet access is gained through your host computer. If you ever find that applications
seem to stop communicating, check and be sure that "Wi-Fi" is enabled. I have experienced unexplained internet
outages which were corrected by re-enabling Wi-Fi under "Settings". The easiest way to turn the device off is to
click the power button on the top of the floating bar. Go ahead and turn the device off so we can explore cloning
options. Once the screen is black, click the "X" in the floating bar and return to the Android Studio application.
Click the three dots next to your device, as seen in Figure 15.01. Click "Duplicate" and call the device "OSINT
Primary". Click "Finish" and launch the device. You can now make any changes to this virtual Android device
without impacting your original OSINT copy. You can create a new Android device for every investigation, as
explained within Chapter Two about virtual machines. Once you have a device with all desired apps, you can
clone it without the need to replicate your work. You can also delete devices from within this menu. Clicking
"Show on disk" allows you to locate the machine on your drive and archive the folder for later use.
Relaunch a device and click the three horizontal dots at the bottom of the floating bar. This opens the extended
controls for your Android device. The Location tab allows you set a location which will be announced to any
application which wants to know it. This allows you to spoof your location to apps which only provide nearby
content, such as dating apps. Figure 15.03 (left) displays this menu while Figure 15.03 (right) shows the Maps
app as it confirmed my spoofed location.

Figure 15.03 Location settings and confirmation.
Once you have your Android device configured exactly as desired, you can make a clone via the Android Studio
application. While powered down, select your device from the Device Manager; click the three dots to expand
the menu, and choose "Duplicate". You can also delete any unneeded devices on this screen.

Android Virtualization 167

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Finally, once you have your desired Android virtual machine configured, you may want to launch it without the
need to open Android Studio; select the device; execute the environment, power-on the operating system, and
close the main application. Fortunately, we can do all of this within Terminal, and launch ONLY the Android
devices without any other clutter. The following commands are based on my macOS M1 OSINT host, but it
should be easy to modify the paths and executable names using the overall lessons from Chapter Six. The
following switch to the Android Studio directory and list all configured Android machines.
•
•

cd ~/Library/Android/sdk/emulator/
./emulator -list-avds

The result appears similar to the following.
Pixel_6_Pro_API_33

We can now launch that machine with the following quick-boot command, which will also save any changes.
•

./emulator -avd Pixel_6_Pro_API_33

The following will cold-boot the machine as if it were fully rebooted from an off state, and save changes.
•

./emulator -avd Pixel_6_Pro_API_33 -no-snapshot-load

We can modify this command to launch the machine, but not save any changes, with the following command.
•

./emulator -avd Pixel_6_Pro_API_33 -no-snapshot-save

Finally, the following command will launch the device as it was on first boot, erasing all custom data.
•

./emulator -avd Pixel_6_Pro_API_33 -wipe-data

What do I do? I created a script with these desired options and devices. However, I mostly execute machines
with "./emulator -avd Pixel_6_Pro_API_33". This preserves my current state and loads the quickest.
When I want to erase a machine and start over, I can do so without the GUI interface, or researching any
commands. The text from my script is located at the following URL on my website.
https://inteltechniques.com/data/osintbook11/android.txt
Use the lessons from Chapter Eleven to make this script executable within Linux. Launching this script presents
the following, and will only work if you also created a Pixel 6 Pro with API 33.
1) List Devices
2) Launch Pixel 6 (Quick-Changes Saved)
3) Launch Pixel 6 (Quick-Changes Not Saved)
4) Launch Pixel 6 (Cold-Changes Saved)
5) Launch and Wipe Pixel 6
Selection:

After you have your desired location configured and you have confirmed accuracy, you can start to put this
feature to work. The following tutorials explain how I use various mobile applications within my OSINT
investigations, especially location-aware applications. This could never be a complete documentation. Any time
you encounter a target using a service which possesses a mobile application, you should consider installing that
app to see what further details you can obtain about the target's profile.

168 Chapter 15

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Facebook/Messenger/Instagram: The Facebook app on Android will appear similar to a compressed view
of a standard profile page. The benefit of the mobile app is the ability to check into places. After launching the
app and logging in for the first time, allow Facebook to access your location (which is spoofed). When you click
the "Check In" option, Facebook will present businesses near your current spoofed location. If you choose a
location, and create a post on your timeline, Facebook will verify that you were there. I have used this when I
needed to portray that I was somewhere I was not. This method can help you establish credibility within your
pseudo profile. I also once helped a victim confuse her ex-husband with this technique. I posted from her
Facebook account leaving my spoofed location enabled. After wasting his time going to random places trying
to find her, he began doubting the information that he uncovered about her whereabouts.
WhatsApp: WhatsApp Messenger is an instant messaging app for smartphones that operates under a
subscription business model. In addition to text messaging, WhatsApp can be used to send images, videos, and
audio media messages to other users. Locations can also be shared through the use of integrated mapping
features. You will need to create an account and provide a telephone number for verification. This number can
be a cellular, landline, or VOIP number. After you have an account, you can communicate directly with any
target using the service. I have found that several of my targets refuse to converse over traditional text messaging,
but freely text over WhatsApp. If you conduct any covert operations, you should have this set up ahead of time.
X (Twitter): The first time that you use X (Twitter) within your Android environment, you might be asked if
you want to share your location. While I usually discourage this type of activity, sharing your spoofed location
can have many benefits. Similar to Facebook, you can make yourself appear to be somewhere which you are
not. You may want to confuse your target. If you know that he or she will be monitoring your social networks
using the techniques in later chapters, this method should throw them off and be misleading.
Snapchat: Much of the content within Snapchat is only visible within a mobile environment. Having access to
the mobile app is vital. If you simply want to search public posts, we will tackle that via a traditional browser
later in the book.
TikTok: While I will explain investigation techniques for this network much later in the book, having the mobile
app ready is important. The TikTok website does not currently allow native keyword search, but the mobile app
does. Preparation now will provide great benefit later.
TextNow: If you conduct online investigations and communicate with a suspect, it is very possible that you
may be asked to send or receive a standard SMS text message. Since your virtual device does not possess a
cellular connection, and it is not assigned a telephone number, there are no native opportunities for this activity.
However, you can install TextNow, which allows you to send and receive SMS text messages. With this setup,
you can conduct all of your communications through the virtual device, and preserve the evidence within a
single archive.
Truecaller: A later chapter explains reverse caller ID services and how they can identify subscriber information
associated with telephone numbers. There are several additional services that only support mobile use. Truecaller
is a powerful service which allows search of unlimited cellular and landline numbers in order to identify the
owners. Other options include Mr. Number and Showcaller.
Tinder: This dating app relies on your location in order to recommend people in your area that want to "hook
up". It can use your Facebook account associated with your device or a VOIP telephone number for the login
credentials. The preferences menu will allow you to specify the gender, age range, and distance of the targeted
individuals. Most people use this to identify members of their sexual preference within one mile of their current
location. The users can then chat within the app. I have used this to identify whether a target was at home or
another location. During one investigation, I set my GPS in my Android emulator to my target's residence. I
then searched for men his age within one mile and confirmed he was at home. If I did not get his profile as a
result, I could change my GPS to his work address or favorite bar. When I received his profile in the results, I
knew that he was near the spoofed location. I could do all of this from anywhere in the world.

Android Virtualization 169

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Contact Exploitation: Many applications allow (and encourage) you to locate your friends' profiles within the
service by their email address or telephone number. This is one of the most reliable ways which apps can keep
you within their ecosystem. As investigators, we can use this to our advantage. Apps such as CashApp allow you
to enter your friends' telephone numbers and it will display their complete profile. You could replicate this with
any online target. Sometimes, the only way I can identify a telephone number's owner is to search it via mobile
applications. I have found that adding my unknown target's cellular telephone number to the Android phone's
address book will often obtain the following information relative to the target.
•
•
•
•

Associated Facebook accounts (name) from the "Find Friends" feature.
Google Play purchases and reviews (interests) from the Google Play Store.
Associated X (Twitter) accounts (name) from the "Find Friends" feature.
WhatsApp usernames and numbers (contact) registered to the cell number.

Basically, entering a target's phone numbers and email addresses into your address book on an Android emulator
forces many apps to believe that you are friends with the person. It overrides many authority protocols that
would oth
les. Figure
15.04 disp
ations and
added a c
the "Find
Friends" o

Let's cons
loaded the
Signal app, it wanted me to register a telephone number. I chose a Google Voice number and configured the
app. I then added my target's cellular number into my Android contact list and asked Signal to search for friends.
Signal immediately confirmed that my target was active on Signal. This alone is valuable in regard to behavior,
but not very helpful to establish identity. If I launch a new window to send a message to the number, even if I
do not send the data, I may see a name associated with the account. This would need to be a deliberate act by
the target, but this behavior is common.
Secure Communications Apps: If you plan to communicate directly with targets of your investigation, you
should be familiar with the popular secure communication preferences. Asking a suspect of a sex trafficking
investigation to text you via cellular telephone number will not be well received. If you possess a secure Proton
Mail email address or Wire encrypted communications username, your request may be honored. Possessing
these apps within your Android environment allows you to contain the evidence within a VM and protect your
host machine. You could also possess multiple accounts through these providers and log in only after cloning
your machine, as explained later.
There are many other beneficial apps. Now that you have an idea of how to integrate mobile applications into
your investigations, you can apply the same techniques to the next future wave of popular apps. Many social
network apps have no association with location. This content can still have value to an investigation. Some apps,
such as Kik, only function within a portable device. You cannot load a web browser on a traditional computer
and participate with these networks. However, you can access them from within your Android virtual machine.
The goal within this chapter is simply preparation. While we have not yet discussed specific investigation
methods within these services, having a virtual Android device ready now will ease the explanations later.

170 Chapter 15

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Genymotion (genymotion.com)
I previously mentioned that Android devices created directly within Android Studio are preferred over those
provided through third parties. I stand by those statements, but I also respect readers who may prefer other
options. Genymotion may have undesired issues in regard to privacy and licensing, but the product can also be
beneficial to those who have issues with the previous example. Many readers report that Genymotion Android
VMs load faster, feel smoother, and seem more intuitive on Windows machines, but I have yet to experience
that. This application-based Android solution is extremely easy to use. It works with Windows, macOS, and
Linux operating systems, but not devices with newer Apple processors.
First, you must create a free account online at genymotion.com. This can be all alias information, and the login
will be required in order to fully use the application. After you have created the account and successfully logged
in to the site, navigate to genymotion.com/download and click on the "Download Genymotion Personal
Edition" link. This presents the standard download page for Windows, Mac, and Linux. If prompted, choose
the version without VirtualBox, as you should already have that program installed. Executing the download and
accepting all default installation options will install all of the required files. When the setup process has
completed, you will have a new icon on your desktop titled Genymotion. This entire process should occur on
your HOST operating system, and not within a virtual machine.
Execute this application and note that an Android virtual machine may already be pre-installed and ready for
launch. Instead of accepting this default option, consider creating your own machine in order to learn the process
for future investigations. I recommend deleting this machine by clicking the menu icon to the right of the device
and choosing "Delete". Perform the following instructions in order to create your first custom Android devices.
•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

In the left menu, expand the "Android API" menu and select the highest number. My option was 10.0
at the time of this writing. On the right, choose the device. I chose "Google Pixel XL" since I have a
high-resolution screen, and then clicked "Add custom device". You may want to choose a device with
a smaller screen for your hardware.
Rename this device similar to Android 10.0 Original. Change the "Android Version" to the highest
option and click "Install". This will download and configure the device for immediate use, and can take
several minutes.
Launch the new device by double-clicking the new machine present in the Genymotion software. The
machine will load in a new window which should appear similar to the screen of an Android telephone.
Click "OK" to any feature notifications. Figure 15.05 (left) displays the default view of my home screen.
Navigate within the Android emulator by single-clicking on icons and using the "Back" icon in the
lower left that appears similar to a left facing arrow.
Consider the following customizations to improve the look and feel of the device. Figure 15.05 (right)
displays the view of the home screen after these configurations.
Drag any app icons up and drop them in the "Remove" option.
Click and hold the bottom of the screen and drag up to view installed applications.
Drag the Settings icon to your home screen and open the app.
Choose "Display", then "Sleep", and select "30 Minutes".
Choose "Security", then "Screen Lock", and choose "None".
Press and hold the main window, select "Wallpaper", and change if desired.
Shut down the device and open VirtualBox.
Similar to the VM settings, change the Video Memory to the maximum.
Change the Memory size to half of the system resources.
Relaunch your device from within the Genymotion application.

Android Virtualization 171

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Figure 15.05: A default Android screen (left) and the custom version free of clutter (right).
You should now have a functioning replica of a standard Android device. However, you are missing several
features. The biggest void is the absence of key applications such as Google Play and Gmail. Without core
Google services, you cannot download apps to your device as part of your investigation tools. This has been the
biggest hurdle with emulation. Consequently, there is finally an official fix, and an alternative option for advanced
users. First, let's try the easy way by using the Genymotion built-in Google features.
•
•
•

While inside our virtual Android device, click the "Open GAPPS" icon in the upper right corner. Accept
the agreement and allow Google Apps to install. Select the option to restart the devices.
Your browser should open to https://opengapps.org/?source=genymotion. Select "ARM64", the
version of the device that you created (10.0.0), and "Stock". Click the red download option in the lower
right and save the large file to your Desktop. Do NOT open the downloaded zip file.
Drag and drop the downloaded zip file into your running Android device. Accept any warnings. You
may receive errors. When complete, close and restart the device.

You should now have the Google Play Store in your applications menu. Launching it should prompt you to
connect to an existing or new Google account. Consider using an anonymous account that is not used for
anything else. I do not recommend creating a new account from within this virtual machine because Google will
likely demand a cellular telephone number for verification. I prefer to create Google accounts from a traditional
computer before connecting to the virtual Android device. After syncing with an active Google account on your
new device, you should now be able to enter the Google Play Store. You should also now see all core Google
services in your applications menu.
You can now install any apps within the Play Store. If any apps refuse to install because of an incompatible
device, you could replicate the F-Droid and Aurora Store technique explained in the previous tutorial. The
addition of Google Play will allow you to natively install Android applications as if you were holding a real
telephone or tablet. Launch Google Play and you will be able to search, install, and execute most apps to your
new virtual device. After you install a new program, click on the applications menu. Click and hold the new app
and you will be able to drag it to your home screen. Figure 15.06 (left) displays the screen of my default
investigation emulator. Next, you should understand the features embedded into the Genymotion software.
When you launch an Android virtual machine, you will see a column on the right side of the window and a row
of icons horizontally on the bottom. The bottom icons are part of the emulated Android system. Clicking the
first icon will navigate you backward one screen from your current location. If you are within an app, this would
take you back one step each time that you press it. The second icon represents the "Home" option and will
always return you to the home screen. The third button is the "Recent Apps" option and it will load a view of

172 Chapter 15

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

recently opened applications. The icons on the right of the emulator are features of Genymotion and allow you
to control aspects of the Android machine from outside of the emulator. These replicate the features discussed
with Android Studio. Note that many options are not available in the free version, but I have never found that
to be a hindrance to my investigations. Genymotion is quite clear that if you plan on making money by designing
an app through their product, you should pay for a license. Non-commercial usage allows unlimited use of the
free personal version.
The GPS option within Genymotion is the most beneficial feature of their toolset. Clicking this icon and clicking
the Off/On switch will execute the location spoofing service. You can either supply the exact coordinates
directly or click on the "Map" button to select a location via an interactive Google map. Figure 15.06 (middle)
displays the default GPS menu in the disabled state. Figure 15.06 (right) displays coordinates entered. I
recommend changing the altitude, accuracy, and bearing settings to "0". Close this window and you will see a
green check mark in the GPS button to confirm that your location settings are enabled.

Figure 15.06: An Android screen with apps (left), disabled GPS menu (middle) and spoofed GPS (right).
Virtual Device Cloning
Similar to the tutorials for cloning Linux virtual machines, we can apply the same process toward our new
Genymotion Android VM. You should consider a new Android virtual device every time to research a target.
The following instructions will clone the exact state of any virtual Android device within VirtualBox, including
devices created within Genymotion.
•
•
•

Create and customize an Android virtual device as desired. Configure all apps that you want present in
all cloned copies. Optionally, execute the app "Secure Eraser" to eliminate unnecessary hard drive space.
Shut down the machine completely.
Open VirtualBox from your Applications folder (Mac) or Start menu (Windows). Right-click the
machine that you want to duplicate and select "Clone". Figure 15.07 displays this program with a rightclick menu option from an active machine.
Provide a name for your new machine. This could be "Investigation Original Copy" or "2021-1234".
Choose the options of "Full Clone" and "Current Machine State" and click the "Clone" button.
VirtualBox will create an exact duplicate of the chosen machine in the default folder for VirtualBox
machines. You can identify this folder by right-clicking your new machine and choosing "Show in
Finder" (Mac) or "Show in Explorer" (Windows).

Android Virtualization 173

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

You can now use this cloned device to conduct your investigation. Any changes made within it will have no
impact on the original device. In fact, I titled my original investigation device "Android Original 9.0", as seen in
Figure 15.07. This way, I know to only open it to apply updates, and never for active investigations. Every time
I need to use a device to research a target, I quickly clone the original and keep all of my cases isolated.

Figure 15.07: A VirtualBox menu with a clone option in the menu.
Virtual Device Export
You may be asked to provide all digital evidence from your investigation as a matter of discovery. This could
happen to a forensic examiner hired in a civil case or law enforcement prosecuting a criminal case. This is the
precise reason that I create a new virtual device for all my investigations. Not only is it a clean and fair
environment, it is easy to archive and distribute when complete. The following instructions will generate a large
single file that contains the entire virtual operating system and apps from your investigation.
•
•
•
•

Open VirtualBox in the same manner as previously mentioned.
Select the target virtual device, click on "File" in the menu bar, and select "Export Appliance". Select
the device again and provide the save location and name of the file.
Click "Export" and allow the process to complete. The final result will consist of a single file that can
be archived to DVD or flash media.
This file can be imported into VirtualBox by choosing the "Import Appliance" option in the File menu.
This would allow another investigator to view the exact investigation environment as you.

Android within Android Studio and Genymotion are not your only options. Third-party applications such as
BlueStacks (bluestacks.com) and Andy (andyroid.net) offer the same basic functionality with added overhead
and requirements. After installation, most of these programs work the same way as VirtualBox. In fact, most of
them rely on VirtualBox on the back end. I choose Android Studio over these because it is the most native
way to present Android. It is also quite fast.
I encourage you to experiment with all of the options, and choose any that work best for you. I always keep a
version of Android Studio and Genymotion available and updated at all times. At the time of this writing, my
Android Studio machine seemed more responsive and functional, but my Genymotion devices were more
isolated. Only you can decide the best path for your investigations, but I encourage you to explore both options.
Overall, I believe the future of OSINT collection will become more focused on mobile apps that have no website
search option. In order to conduct thorough online investigations, mobile environment emulation is required. I
highly recommend practicing these techniques with non-essential apps and data. This will better prepare you for
an actual investigation with proper evidence control. Expect frustration as apps block access from within virtual
devices due to fraud. However, the occasional investigation success through virtual Android environments
justifies all of the headaches encountered along the way.

174 Chapter 15

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER SIXTEEN
CUSTOM SEARCH TOOLS

From 2010 through 2019, I offered a set of public free interactive online investigations tools. In June of 2019, I
was forced to remove these tools due to abuse and legal demands. They returned to my website in 2022, exactly
three years later. In the previous edition of this book, I offered an offline version of these tools which could be
self-hosted and immune from vague takedown requests. This chapter revisits these tools and offers several
enhancements. The goal of this chapter is to help you create and maintain your own custom search tools which
can automate queries for any investigation. First, let's talk about why this is so important.
I assumed my search tools would be around as long as I maintained my site. I learned the hard way that nothing
lasts forever. We can no longer rely on third-party tools, a theme which I have overly-emphasized throughout
this entire book. Any online search tool outside of your control could disappear any day. While mine have
returned, they could go away again at any time.
That is not the worst possible outcome. We never truly know what information various online search tools are
storing about our searches and activity. Many aggregated search sites possess numerous tracking cookies and
practically all "link collections" force embedded analytics capturing data about every visitor. Creating and hosting
your own tools eliminate these issues. We still must query sensitive data to a final repository of information, but
let's eliminate the middle-man. All of the tools presented in this chapter, and referenced throughout the book,
do not need to be placed online within a website. You can store them on your computer and launch them
without fear of questionable connections. Let's get started.
First, download a copy of all search tool templates used within the entire book. This can be found at
https://inteltechniques.com/data/osintbook11/tools.zip. Unzip this archive to a destination of your
choice. If using the Linux, Mac, or Windows OSINT builds which were previously explained, you should already
have the necessary files on your Desktop. I always suggest saving them to the Desktop for easy access. However,
anywhere should suffice. Be sure to extract all of the files within the zip file.
This collection reveals a folder titled "Tools" consisting of multiple files within it. Technically, you have
everything you need to replicate my public search tools locally on your own machine. However, it is up to you
to modify these as needed. You will eventually want to remove dead sources, add new features, and modify the
structures due to changes at third-party websites. I will use my Email Tool as a demonstration. Figure 16.01
displays the current view of the Email tool. As you can see, there are several individual search options and a
"Submit All" feature at the bottom. Inserting an email address into any of these fields will query that address
through the designated option, or the final field executes a search through all of them.
Let's pick apart one of these queries from within the code. By default, double-clicking on any of the files within
the search tool folder opens the selected option within your default web browser. This is required for any of
them to function. In order to edit the files, we must open them within an HTML editing tool or any text
processing application. If you are on a Mac, that could be TextEdit, Windows users have Notepad, and Linux
users have Text Edit. All work fine for our needs. Lately, I prefer VSCodium (vscodium.com), which is a crossplatform free text editor.
If you open the file titled email.search.html within a text editor ("File" > "Open"), you will see the code which
makes this document function within a web browser. The following explains each section. Complete
understanding of each term is not required to use and modify your own tools, but these pages may serve as a
reference if you ever want to make substantial changes.

Custom Search Tools 175

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

<!DOCTYPE html><html>

This informs a web browser that this is a web page, even if offline, and begins the page.
<style>
ul {list-style-type: none;margin: 0;padding: 0;width: 200px;background-color: #f1f1f1;}
li a {display: block;color: #000;padding: 8px 16px;text-decoration: none;}
li a:hover {background-color: #555;color: white;}
li a.active {background-color: #303942;color: white;}
li a.grey {background-color: #cdcdcd;color: black;}
li a.blue {background-color: #b4c8da;color: black;}
table td, table td * {vertical-align: top;}</style>

This sets the style requirements such as colors and sizes of the content within the page. You can experiment
with these settings without risking the function of the tools.
<head>

This informs your browser that the "head" or "header" portion of the page begins now.
<title>Email Search Tool</title>

This represents the title of the page, visible in the browser tab.
</head>

This discloses the end of the "head" or "header" section.
<body>

This informs your browser that the "body" portion of the page begins now.
<table width="1000" border="0"><td width="200"><td width="800">

This creates a table within our content and sets the overall width with no border. It then specifies the width of
the columns. The data in between identifies the menu items visible on the left of the page, which are considered
the first column within the table.
<script type="text/javascript">

This identifies the following text as a JavaScript command.
function doPopAll(PopAll)…

This provides instruction to the browser which allows our tools to populate given data to the remaining fields.
It is required for the next option.
<form onsubmit="doPopAll…

This section creates the "Populate All" button which populates the given data throughout the remaining tools.
Function doSearch01(Search01)

This tells the page we want it to "do" something, and the task is called Search01.

176 Chapter 16

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

{window.open('http://google.com/search?q="' + Search01 + '"', 'Search01window');}

This instructs the page to build a URL, add a piece of data, and open the result in a tab.
</script>

This identifies the end of each script.
<form onsubmit="doSearch01(this.Search01.value); return false;">

This creates a form to generate the URL, looking for a specific value.
<input type="text" name="Search01" "id="Search01" size="30" placeholder="Email Address"/>

This creates a form input identified as Search01 with "Email Address" populated in the field.
<input type="submit" style="width:120px" value="Google" /><br /></form>

This creates the Submit button with specific text inside, inserts a new line, and closes the form.
</table></body></html>

This identifies the end of the "table", "body", and "HTML" sections, and closes the page.
This only represents the first search option within this tool, but it is quite powerful. This collects a target email
address and queries Google to identify any websites containing this address within the contents. This technique
will be explained in more detail later in the Email chapter.
This also demonstrates the need for a search tool versus simply visiting the search site. If you go to whoxy.com,
you must navigate through the main page; change the drop-down menu to an email search; type in the target
email address; solve the Captcha; and then wait for the results. Instead, we can navigate straight to our results
with the following URL, replacing the test address with our target's email.
https://www.whoxy.com/search.php?email=test@test.com
You may be wondering where this URL came from. It is not advertised on the site, and is not an official option
within the API (which is now a paid service, but this URL is free). That is our next tutorial. Navigate to
whoxy.com within Firefox and allow the page to load. Conduct the following steps to identify the exact URL
which submits a query to return data about your target.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Right-click on the page and choose "Inspect Element".
Click the "Network" tab in the new window at the bottom of the page.
Change the top website search menu to "Email Address".
Type an email address into this field and execute the search.
Scroll through the new text in the Inspector window at the bottom of the page.
Click on the result displaying "search.php" in the "File" column.
Copy the URL in the window to the right under "Headers" as seen in Figure 16.03.

Custom Search Tools 177

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Figure 16.01: The Email Addresses Tool.

Figure 16.02: A result from the Whoxy website.

Figure 16.03: The static URL from a query as seen in Inspector.
178 Chapter 16

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

With this method, we can identify the URL structures for our tool. Our tool presents a line of code which
included the URL required for the search as follows.
{window.open('https://www.whoxy.com/search.php?email=' + Search22, 'Search22window');}

This line instructs the tool to open a new browser window; navigate to the Whoxy website followed by whatever
text was entered into the search tool; and define that new window (or tab) with a unique name in order to
prevent another search within our tool from overwriting the page. This results in our tool opening a new tab
with our desired results (https://www.whoxy.com/search.php?email=test@test.com). Let's look at another
search option within this same tool with a slightly different structure.
The Dehashed search option is unique in that it requires quotation marks surrounding the input. In other words,
you must enter "test@email.com" and not simply test@email.com. This requires us to add an additional
character after the target input has been provided. Below is the example for this query. Note that double quotes
(") are inside single quotes ('), which appears quite messy in print. Always rely on the digital files to play with the
actual content.
{window.open('https://dehashed.com/search?query="' + Search05 + '"', 'Search05window');}

This line instructs the tool to open a new browser window, navigate to the website
https://dehashed.com/search?query=", followed by whatever text was entered into the search tool, plus another
quotation mark (a single quote, double quote, and another single quote), and define that new window (or tab)
with a unique name in order to prevent another search within our tool from overwriting the page. The lesson
here is that you can add as many parameters as necessary by using the plus (+) character. You will see many
examples of this within the files that you have downloaded. Remember, every search tool presented in this book
is included in digital format. You only need to modify the options as things change over time.
Let's assume Dehashed made a change to their search, which appears in the tool as follows.
{window.open('https://dehashed.com/search?query="' + Search05 + '"', 'Search05window');}

This is because the URL structure of the search is as follows:
https://dehashed.com/search?query="test@email.com"
Assume that Dehashed changed the search structure on their site to the following:
https://dehashed.com/?query="test@email.com"&trial
Your new line within the tool would need to be manipulated as follows:
{window.open('https://dehashed.com/?query="' + Search05 + '"&trial', 'Search05window');}

Next, let's assume that you found a brand-new search service which was not included in the downloadable search
tools. You will need to modify the tools to include this new option. Again, we will use the email tool as an
example. Open the "Email.html" file within a text editor. Look through the text and notice that each search
script possesses an identifier similar to "Search01", "Search02", "Search03", etc. These must each be unique in
order to function. You will notice that the final option (after the Submit All feature) is "Search25". We now
know that our next option should be "Search26". Assume that you found a website at emailleaks.com (which is
no longer working) and you want to add it to the tools. A query of an email address presents a URL as follows.
https://emailleaks.com/ajax.php?query=test@email.com

Custom Search Tools 179

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

You would next copy the "Search24" script and paste it at the end of the tool (before the Submit All feature).
You can then edit the script, which should look like the following, using "Search26" and our new URL.
<script type="text/javascript">
function doSearch26(Search26)
{window.open('https://emailleaks.com/ajax.php?query=' + Search26, 'Search26window');}
</script>
<form onsubmit="doSearch26(this.Search26.value); return false;">
<input type="text" name="Search26" "id="Search26" size="30" placeholder="Email Address"/>
<input type="submit" style="width:120px" value="Email Leaks" /><br /></form>

All we changed within this copy and paste job was the target URL, the Search26 identifiers, and the descriptor.
You can place this section anywhere within the tools, as it does not need to be at the end. Note it is titled
Search26, so any new options added would need to start with Search27. These numbers do not need to be
sequential throughout the tool, but they must be unique.
Submit All
Many of the online search tools offer a "Submit All" button at the bottom of the options. This executes each of
the queries referenced above the button and can be a huge time saver. If you open one of the search tools with
this option in a text editor, you will see the code for this at the bottom. It appears very similar to the other search
options, but there are multiple "window.open" elements such as those listed below.
Window.open('https://haveibeenpwned.com/unifiedsearch/' + all, 'Search01window');
window.open('https://dehashed.com/search?query=' + all, 'Search05window');

In most of the tools, I have simply replicated the individual search options within one single "Submit All"
feature. If you modify a search tool within the code next to the manual search, you should also update it under
the final option to execute all queries. If you feel overwhelmed with all of this, do not panic. None of this is
required at this point. Your own custom offline search tools are already configured and functioning. If a
specific desired tool stops functioning, you can use this chapter to change your scripts.
You may have noticed that there are several files within the Tools folder. Launching any of these opens that
specific tool, such as "Email.html", but a menu exists within each of the pages in order to navigate within the
tool to the desired page. The file titled "index.html" is the "Main menu", and might be appropriate to set as your
browser's home page. Clicking on the desired search option within the left side of the menu opens that specific
tool. As an example, clicking on "X (Twitter)" presents numerous X (Twitter) search options. These will each
be explained at the end of each corresponding chapter.
Simplified Modification
I am sure some readers are frustrated at the technology presented here. Some may look at this code and cite
numerous ways it could be made better. I agree this is amateur hour, as I am not a strong HTML coder. Other
readers may be confused at all of this. For those, there are two options which simplify things. First, ignore this
entire chapter and simply use the free tools without any modification. Some options will break eventually as sites
come and go, but that should not impact the other fields. Second, don't worry too much about adding new
features. Instead, simply replace any searches that stop functioning. If Dehashed shuts down tomorrow, simply
wait for a replacement. When that happens, modify only the URL and name, leaving the structure as-is.
You have a strong start with the current tools template. Very minimal modifications as things break will keep
you in good shape. Any major updates which I perform to my own set of tools will be offered on my site for
download. Check the "Updates" section at the following page.
https://inteltechniques.com/osintbook11
180 Chapter 16

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Populate All
You may have noticed that most of the tools have an option to populate all of the fields from a single entry.
This is beneficial as it prevents us from copying and pasting target data within multiple fields. This code, which
was presented earlier, tells your browser to populate anything you place into the first field within every field on
that page which has an ID of "Search" plus any numbers. In other words, it would populate both examples on
the previous page because they have id="Search25" and id="Search26". Test this within the Email search tool.
Make sure each "id" field is unique, as no two can be the same on one page.
When I need to search a specific target, I do not copy the data into each search field and press the corresponding
button for each service. I place the input directly into the "Populate All" option and then execute any individual
searches desired. Alternatively, I place my target data into the "Submit All" option and let it go. If using Firefox,
this will fail on the first attempt. This is because you have pop-ups blocked by default, and Firefox is trying to
protect you from multiple new pages loading automatically. The following steps will prevent this.
•
•
•
•
•

Open the Email.html search tool included in your downloaded offline search tools.
Place any email address in the last option and press the Submit All button.
A new tab will open, but close it.
Back in the Email search tool, you should see an options banner at the top.
Click the Preferences button and click the first option to "Allow pop-ups for file".

This will prevent your pop-up blocker from blocking that specific page. You would need to repeat the process
for each of the other tools, such as X (Twitter), Facebook, etc., which can be quite a burden. If desired, you can
disable the pop-up blocker completely, but that carries risks. You may visit a malicious website which begins
loading new tabs. I do not see this as much as in years past, but the threat does still exist. If conducting your
research within a VM, I do not see a huge risk in disabling this blocker. If you do, all of the tools will function
without specific modifications to the blocker. Make this decision carefully.
•
•
•

Click the Firefox menu in the upper right and choose Settings.
Click on Privacy & Security and scroll to Permissions.
If desired, uncheck the "Block pop-up windows" option.

While I would never do this on my primary browser used for personal activity on my main computer, I have
disabled the pop-up blocker within my OSINT Original VM (and therefore all clones). It simply saves me
headaches when trying to use automated tools. If only using the single queries within the tool, your pop-up
blocker will not interfere. I highly recommend that you become familiar with these search tools before you rely
on them. Experience how the URLs are formed, and understand how to modify them if needed. Each of these
tools will be explained in the following chapters as we learn all of the functions.
License & Warranty
These tools are released to you for free. Full details of allowances and restrictions can be found in the
"License.txt" file and "License" link within the tools download. The tools are provided "as is", without warranty
of any kind. Please follow my blog for any updates. Ultimately, it is your responsibility to update your tools as
desired as things change after publication. The torch has been passed.
Easy Access
Regardless of where you save your set of tools, I highly recommend that you create a bookmark within your
browser for easy access. I prefer them to be within my bookmarks toolbar so that they are always one click away.
Navigate to your search tools. If using the Linux, Mac, or Windows OSINT machines, they are in the Tools
folder on your desktop. Double-click the file titled "Search.html" and it should open within your default browser,

Custom Search Tools 181

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

preferably Firefox. If the page opens in Chrome or another browser, open Firefox and use the file menu to
select "Open File" and browse to the "Search.html" file. After the page loads, create a bookmark. In Linux and
Windows, press "Ctrl" + "D" ("command" + "D" on Mac). When prompted, provide a name of "Tools" and
save the page in the folder titled "Bookmarks Toolbar". You should now see a new bookmark in your browser's
toolbar titled "Tools". If your Bookmarks Toolbar is not visible, click on "View", then "Toolbars", then "View
Bookmarks Toolbar". You can now click this new button within your toolbar at any time and immediately load
the Search Engines tool. Clicking through the other options in the left menu of that page should present all
other search tool pages. I use this shortcut to launch my tools daily.
Online Version
As previously explained, I offer an updated live copy of all tools at https://inteltechniques.com/tools/.
These tools are visually similar to my overall website theme, but the code powering them is identical to the
strategy you have seen here and the offline files previously downloaded. As resources change, I will apply all
modifications to my copy online, but I cannot modify your current offline set.
Some may still not be convinced they should maintain their own search tools and should just rely on my version
on the website. The live tools could disappear at any time due to another takedown demand. Also, you cannot
modify my live online version as you can your own copy. Finally, you must rely on my site being available during
your investigations. The offline version is available on your desktop at any time.
Please use these responsibly. I am optimistic that we can keep this valuable resource for our daily investigations
for years to come. Figure 16.05 displays an example of the updated online tools.

Figure 16.05: The online IntelTechniques search tools.

182 Chapter 16

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

SECTION II

OSINT RESOURCES & TECHNIQUES
Some may consider this section to be the "guts" of the book. It contains the OSINT tips, tricks, and techniques
which I have taught over the past twenty years. Each chapter was rewritten and confirmed accurate in December
2024. All outdated content was removed, many techniques were updated, and numerous new resources were
added. The first four editions of this book only consisted of this section. Only recently have I adopted the
preceding preparation section and the methodology topics toward the end. OSINT seems to have become a
much more complex industry over the years. It is exciting to watch the community grow and I am honored to
play an extremely small role.
This section is split into several chapters, and each explains a common type of target investigation. I have isolated
specific topics such as email addresses, usernames, social networks, and telephone numbers. Each chapter
provides every valuable resource and technique which I have found beneficial toward my own investigations.
No book could ever include every possible resource, as many tools become redundant after a superior version
has been identified. I do my best to limit the "noise" and simply present the most robust options for each
scenario. This section should serve as a reference when you encounter a specific need within your own
investigations.
Covert Accounts
Before proceeding with any of the investigation methods here, it is important to discuss covert accounts, also
referred to by some as "Sock Puppets". Covert accounts are online profiles which are not associated with your
true identity. Many social networks, such as Facebook and Instagram, now require you to be logged in to an
account before any queries can be conducted. Using your true personal account could reveal your identity as an
investigator to the target. Covert accounts on all of the social networks mentioned here are free and can be
completed using fictitious information. However, some networks will make this task more difficult than others.
Google, Facebook, X (Twitter), Instagram, and Yahoo are known to make you jump through hoops before you
are granted access. We begin this chapter discussing ways around this.
Email: It is vital that you possess a "clean" email address for your covert accounts. Every social network requires
an email address as a part of account registration, and you should never use an already established personal
address. Later chapters explain methods for researching the owners behind email addresses, and those
techniques can be applied to you and your own accounts. Therefore, consider starting fresh with a brand-new
email account dedicated toward use for covert profiles.
The choice of email provider is key here. I do not recommend GMX, Proton Mail, Yahoo, Gmail, MSN, or any
other extremely popular providers. These are heavily used by spammers and scammers, and are therefore more
scrutinized than smaller providers. My preference is to create a free email account at Fastmail
(https://ref.fm/u14547153). This established mail provider is unique in two ways. First, they are one of the only
remaining providers which do not require a pre-existing email address in order to obtain a new address. This
means that there will be no connection from your new covert account to any personal accounts. Second, they
are fairly "off-radar" from big services such as Facebook, and are not scrutinized for malicious activity.
Fastmail will provide anyone unlimited free accounts on a 30-day trial. I suggest choosing an email address that
ends in fastmail.us instead of fastmail.com, as that domain is less used than their official address. This is a choice
during account creation. Once you have your new email address activated, you are ready to create covert profiles.
Note that the free trial terminates your access to this email account in 30 days, so this may not be best for longterm investigations. Personally, I possess a paid account which allows me 600 permanent alias email addresses.

Section II 183

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

Facebook: This is the most difficult in terms of new account creation. They will require you to provide
a cellular telephone number where a verification text can be sent and confirmed. Providing VOIP
numbers such as a Google Voice account will not work anymore. I have found it best to turn off any
VPN, Tor Browser, or other IP address masking service and connect from a residential, business, or
cellular internet connection. Clear out all of your internet cache and log out of any accounts. During
account creation, provide the email address that you created previously. In most situations, you should
bypass the requirement to provide a cellular number. If this method fails, there is something about your
computer or connection that is making Facebook unhappy. Persistence will always equal success
eventually. I find public library Wi-Fi our best internet option during account creation. Facebook is
tracking your IP address and browser fingerprint, so if you fail to create a new account, you will need
to start over from a fresh browser and network connection. Instagram is similar to (and owned by)
Facebook. Expect the same scrutiny.
X (Twitter): Many of the X (Twitter) techniques presented later will also require an account. Even
some third-party solutions will mandate that you be logged in to X (Twitter) when using them. I highly
recommend possessing a covert account before proceeding. As long as you provide a legitimate email
address from a residential or business internet connection, you should have no issues. You may get
away with using a VPN to create an account, but not always.
Google/Gmail/Voice: While Google has become more aggressive at refusing suspicious account
registrations, they are still very achievable. As with the previous methods, Google will likely block any
new accounts that are created over Tor or a VPN. Providing your Fastmail address as an alternative
form of contact during the account creation process usually satisfies their need to validate your request.
I have also found that they seem more accommodating during account creation if you are connected
through a Chrome browser versus a privacy-customized Firefox browser (Google owns Chrome).
Network: I always prefer to conduct online investigations behind a VPN, but this can be tricky.
Creating accounts through a VPN often alerts the service of your suspicious behavior. Creating accounts
from public Wi-Fi, such as a local library or coffee shop, are typically less scrutinized. A day after
creation from open Wi-Fi, I attempt to access while behind a VPN. I then consistently select the same
VPN company and general location upon every usage of the profile. This builds a pattern of my network
and location, which helps maintain access to the account.
Phone Number: The moment any service finds your new account to be suspicious, it will prompt you
for a valid telephone number. Landlines and VOIP numbers are blocked, and they will demand a true
cellular number. Today, I keep a supply of Mint Mobile eSIM activations, which can be purchased for
$0.99 from Amazon. Each activation includes a telephone number with a one-week free trial. I activate
the SIM card through an old Android phone, select a phone number, and use that number to open
accounts across all of the major networks. As soon as the account is active, I change the telephone
number to a VOIP option and secure the account with two-factor authentication (2FA).
2FA: Once I have an account created, I immediately activate any two-factor authentication options.
These are secondary security settings which require a text message or software token (Authy) in order
to access the account. Typically, this behavior tells the service that you are a real person behind the
account, and not an automated bot using the profile for malicious reasons.
Activity: After the account is created and secured, it is important to remain active. If you create a new
account and allow it to sit dormant for months, it is likely to be suspended the moment you log back in
to the account. If you access the account weekly, it is less likely to be blocked.

You may assume that you can use your personal social network accounts to search for information. While this
is possible, it is risky. Some services may never indicate to the target that your specific profile was used for
searching. Others, such as Facebook, will eventually notify the target that you have an interest in him, usually in
the form of friend recommendations. On any service, you are always one accidental click away from sending a
friend request from your real account to the suspect. For these reasons, I never use a personal social network
profile during any investigation. I maintain multiple covert accounts. The topic of undercover operations quickly
exceeds the scope of this book. For our purposes, we simply need to be logged in to valid accounts in order to
pacify the social networks. I will assume that you now have some accounts created. Let's dig into online search.

184 Section II

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Profile Content
Possession of an empty profile on a social network may suffice for your investigations. However, lack of personal
details might appear suspicious to both the provider and your target. Facebook is well known for suspending
accounts which do not contain personal information, and your targets may conduct their own OSINT research
into your publicly available details after you begin the hunt. For most scenarios, I believe you should populate a
minimum amount of fake details into your covert profiles. You should never provide anything which may be
associated with your true identity, such as interests, occupation, or location. Because of this, I rely heavily on
randomly-generated and AI-produced content. The resources below have helped me within my own profile
creation. Consider your own needs and employer policies before proceeding with your accounts.
Images: You may want a headshot within your profile which adds a layer of authenticity to your new covert
account. This can also eliminate scrutiny from Facebook and X (Twitter) when their algorithms suspect your
profile to be fraudulent. I recommend This Person Does Not Exist (thispersondoesnotexist.com). This site
generates a very realistic image of a "person", which is entirely generated by computers. The image you see is
not a real person and should not be visible anywhere else online. Refreshing the page generates a new image. If
you find this helpful, I encourage you to generate numerous images for future use in the event the site disappears.
Name and Background: It may be easy to create your own alias name, but could you quickly generate a maiden
name, birthday, birthplace, zodiac sign, username, password, religion, and political view? This is where services
such as ElfQrin (elfqrin.com/fakeid.php) and Fake Name Generator (fakenamegenerator.com) can be
beneficial. The example below was created instantly with these services.
•
•

•

Resume: If you want to add another layer of realism to your new online identity, you might consider
posting a resume online. If your target begins investigating your profile and finds the resume, you may
appear to be a real person.
Physical Space: You might consider This Rental Does Not Exist (thisrentaldoesnotexist.com). It
uses the same artificial intelligence technology as This Person Does Not Exist to generate fake interior
views of a home. These artificial images are intended to emulate a rental home or Air BNB profile, but
they could be used if you ever need to post pictures of your "home".
Timeline and Friends: Joining innocuous pop culture and hobby groups on Facebook is low-risk
tactic for adding friends and content to your profile as Facebook automatically associates you with other
members of those groups. This provides a near endless supply of potential friends and timeline content.
First name
Middle name
Last name
Mother's Maiden name
Birthday
Birthplace
Zodiacal sign
User name
Password
Address
Car

Hair color
Black (BLK)
Eyes color
Brown (BRO)
Height 166 cm / 5 ft 5 in
Weight 56 Kg / 123 pounds
Shoe Size
7.5
Blood Type
B+
Religion Jehovah's Witnesses

Ella
Theresa
Bowman
Sutton
November, 07 1998 (Age: 23 years)
Walnut Creek, CA, USA
Scorpio
boe431
f2b4qawha
101 Maryland Ave Ne, Washington, DC 20002
Wrangler

Political side
Independent
Favorite Color Purple
Favorite Comfort Food Chocolate
Favorite Cereal Raisin Bran
Favorite Season Spring
Favorite Animal Elephant
Lucky Number 2

Section II 185

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
SEARCH ENGINES

The first stop for many researchers will be a popular search engine. The two big players in the United States are
Google and Bing. This chapter will go into great detail about the advanced ways to use both and others. Most
of these techniques can apply to any search engine, but many examples will be specific for these two. Much of
this chapter is unchanged from the 10th edition.
Google (google.com)
There are entire books dedicated to Google searching and Google hacking. Most of these focus on penetration
testing and securing computer networks. These are full of great information, but are often overkill for the
investigator looking for quick personal information. A few simple rules can help locate more accurate data. No
book in existence will replace practicing these techniques in a live web browser. In recent years, Google removed
the number of search results from the default display. Selecting "Tools" on the filters bar will add that metric
back to the interface. You cannot break anything. Play around and get familiar with the advanced options.
Quotation Marks
Placing a target name inside of quotation marks will make a huge difference in a quick first look for information.
If I conducted a search for my name without quotes, the result is 147,000 pages that include the words "Michael"
and "Bazzell". These pages do not necessarily have these words right next to each other. The word "Michael"
could be next to another person's name, while "Bazzell" could be next to yet another person's name. These
results can provide inaccurate information. They may include a reference to "Michael Santo" and "Barry Bazzell",
but not my name. Since technically the words "Michael" and "Bazzell" appear on the page, you are stuck with
the result in your list. In order to prevent this, you should always use quotes around the name of your target.
Searching for the term "Michael Bazzell", including the quotes, reduces the search results to 31,800.
Each of these pages will contain the words "Michael" and "Bazzell" right next to each other. While Google and
other search engines have technology in place to search related names, this is not always perfect, and does not
apply to searches with quotes. For example, the search for "Michael Bazzell", without quotes, located pages that
reference Mike Bazzell (instead of Michael). This same search with quotes did not locate these results. Placing
quotes around any search terms tells Google to search exactly what you tell it to search. If your target's name is
"Michael", you may want to consider an additional search for "Mike". If a quoted search returns nothing, or few
results, you should remove the quotes and search again.
When your quoted search, such as "Michael Bazzell", returns too many results, you should add to your search.
When I add the term "FBI" after my name, the results reduce from 31,800 to 12,000. These results all contain
pages that have the words "Michael" and "Bazzell" next to each other, and include the term "FBI" somewhere
on the page. While all of these results may not be about me, the majority will be and can be easily digested.
Adding the occupation, residence city, general interest, or college of the target may help eliminate unrelated
results. This search technique can be vital when searching email addresses or usernames. When searching the
email address of "michael@inteltechniques.com", without quotes, I receive 14,200 results. When I search
"michael@inteltechniques.com" with quotes, I receive only 7 results that actually contain that email address
(which does not reach my inbox).
Search Operators
Most search engines allow the use of commands within the search field. These commands are not actually part
of the search terms and are referred to as operators. There are two parts to most operator searches, and each
are separated by a colon. To the left of the colon is the type of operator, such as "site" (website) or "ext" (file

186 Chapter 17

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

extension). To the right is the rule for the operator, such as the target domain or file type. The following will
explain each operator and the most appropriate uses.
Site Operator
Google, and other search engines, allow the use of operators within the search string. An operator is text that is
added to the search, which performs a function. My favorite operator is the "site:" function. This operator
provides two benefits to the search results. First, it will only provide results of pages located on a specific domain.
Second, it will provide all of the results containing the search terms on that domain. I will use my name again
for a demonstration. I conducted a search of "Michael Bazzell" on Google. One of the results is a link to the
website forbes.com. This search result is one of multiple pages on that domain that includes a reference to me.
However, this search only displayed one of the many pages on that domain that possessed my name within
them. If you want to view every page on a specific domain that includes your target of interest, the site operator
is required. Next, I conducted the following exact search.
site:forbes.com "Michael Bazzell"
The result was all eight pages on forbes.com that include my name within the content. This technique can be
applied to any domain. This includes social networks, blogs, and any other website that is indexed by search
engines.
Another simple way to use this technique is to locate every page that is part of a specific domain. A search query
of site:inteltechniques.com displays all 628 pages that are publicly available on my personal website. This can be
a great way to review all the content of a target's personal website without attempting to navigate the actual site.
It is very easy to miss content by clicking around within a website. With this technique, you should see all of the
pages in a format that is easy to digest. Also, some of the pages on a website that the author may consider
"private" may actually be public if he or she ever linked to them from a public page. Once Google has indexed
the page, we can view the content using the "site" operator.
Real World Application: While conducting private background checks, I consistently use the site operator. A
search such as "site:https://www.amazon.com/product-reviews" and the target name in quotes can reveal
interesting information. A previous background check of an applicant that signed an affidavit declaring no
previous drug or alcohol dependencies produced some damaging results. The search provided user submitted
reviews that he had left on Amazon in reference to books that he had purchased that assisted him with his
continual addiction to controlled substances. Again, this result may have appeared somewhere in the numerous
general search results of the target; however, the site operator directed me exactly where I needed to look.
File Type Operator
Another operator that works with both Google and Bing is the file type filter. It allows you to filter any search
results by a single file type extension. While Google allows this operator to be shortened to "ext", Bing does
not. Therefore, I will use the original "filetype" operator in my search examples. Consider the following search
attempting to locate PowerPoint presentation files associated with the company Cisco.
"Cisco" "PowerPoint"
The result is over 10,000,000 websites that include the words Cisco and PowerPoint in the content. However,
these are not all actual PowerPoint documents. The following search refines our example for accuracy.
"Cisco" filetype:ppt

Search Engines 187

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

The result is 15,200 Microsoft PowerPoint presentations that contain Cisco within the content. This search only
located the older PowerPoint format of PPT, but not newer files that may have the PPTX extension. Therefore,
the following two searches would be more thorough.
"Cisco" filetype:ppt
"Cisco" filetype:pptx
The second search provided an additional 12,700 files. This brings our total to over 27,000 PowerPoint files,
which is overwhelming. I will begin to further filter my results in order to focus on the most relevant content
for my research. The following search will display only newer PowerPoint files that contain the exact phrase
Cisco Confidential within the content of the slides.
"Cisco Confidential" filetype:pptx
The result is exactly 1,080 PowerPoint files of interest. There are many uses for this technique. A search of
filetype:doc "resume" "target name" often provides resumes created by the target which can include cellular
telephone numbers, personal addresses, work history, education information, references, and other personal
information that would never be intentionally posted to the internet. The "filetype" operator can identify any
file by the file type within any website. This can be combined with the "site" operator to find all files of any type
on a single domain. By conducting the following searches, I was able to find several documents stored on the
website irongeek.com.
site:irongeek.com filetype:pdf
site:irongeek.com filetype:ppt
site:irongeek.com filetype:pptx
If you do not receive any results for a filetype query, adding a keyword may increase the number results versus
a query which only contains operators. Previously, Google and Bing indexed media files by type, such as MP3,
MP4, AVI, and others. Due to abuse of pirated content, this no longer works well. I have found the following
extensions to be indexed and provide valuable results.
7Z: Compressed File
BMP: Bitmap Image
DOC: Microsoft Word
DOCX: Microsoft Word
DWF: Autodesk
GIF: Animated Image
HTM: Web Page
HTML: Web Page
JPG: Image

JPEG: Image
KML: Google Earth
KMZ: Google Earth
ODP: OpenOffice Presentataion
ODS: OpenOffice Spreadsheet
ODT: OpenOffice Text
PDF: Adobe Acrobat
PNG: Image
PPT: Microsoft PowerPoint

PPTX: Microsoft PowerPoint
RAR: Compressed File
RTF: Rich Text Format
TXT: Text File
XLS: Microsoft Excel
XLSX: Microsoft Excel
ZIP: Compressed File

Hyphen (-)
The search operators mentioned previously are filters to include specific data. Instead, you may want to exclude
some content from appearing within results. The hyphen (-) tells most search engines and social networks to
exclude the text immediately following from any results. It is important to never include a space between the
hyphen and filtered text. The following searches were conducted on my own name with the addition of excluded
text. Following each search is the number of results returned by Google.
"Michael Bazzell" 31,800
"Michael Bazzell" -police 28,000
"Michael Bazzell" -police -FBI 22,100
"Michael Bazzell" -police -FBI -osint 6,010

188 Chapter 17

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

"Michael Bazzell" -police -FBI -osint -books 4,320
"Michael Bazzell" -police -FBI -osint -books -open -source 604
"Michael Bazzell" -police -FBI -osint -books -open -source -"mr. robot" 92
The final search eliminated results which included any of the restricted words. The pages that were remaining
referenced other people with my name. My goal in search filters is to dwindle the total results to a manageable
amount. When you are overwhelmed with search results, slowly add exclusions to make an impact on the amount
of data to analyze.
InURL Operator
We can also specify operators that will focus only on the data within the URL or address of the website.
Previously, the operators discussed applied to the content within the web page. My favorite search using this
technique is to find File Transfer Protocol (FTP) servers that allow anonymous connections. The following
search would identify any FTP servers that possess PDF files that contain the term OSINT within the file.
inurl:ftp -inurl(http|https) filetype:pdf "osint"
The following will dissect how and why this search worked.
inurl:ftp - Instructs Google to only display addresses that contain "ftp" in the URL.
-inurl(http|https) - Instructs Google to ignore any addresses that contain either http or https in the URL. The
separator is the pipe symbol (|) located above the backslash key. It tells Google "OR". This would make sure
that we excluded any standard web pages.
filetype:pdf - Instructs Google to only display PDF documents.
"osint" - Instructs Google to mandate that the exact term osint is within the content of results.
Obviously, this operator could also be used to locate standard web pages, documents, and files. The following
search displays only blog posts from inteltechniques.com that exist within a folder titled "blog" (WordPress).
inurl:blog site:inteltechniques.com
InTitle Operator
Similar to InURL, the "InTitle" operator will filter web pages by details other than the actual content of the
page. This filter will only present web pages that have specific content within the title of the page. Practically
every web page on the internet has an official title for the page. This is often included within the source code of
the page and may not appear anywhere within the content. Most webmasters carefully create a title that will be
best indexed by search engines. If you conduct a search for "osint video training" on Google, you will receive
2,760 results. However, the following search will filter those to 5. These only include web pages that had the
search terms within the limited space of a page title.
intitle:"osint video training"
Note that the use of quotation marks prevents the query from searching "video training" within websites titled
"osint". The quotes force the search of pages specifically titled "osint video training". You can add "all" to this
search to force all listed words to appear in any order. The following would find any sites that have the words
osint, video, and training within the title, regardless of the order.
allintitle:training osint video

Search Engines 189

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

An interesting way to use this search technique is while searching for online folders. We often focus on finding
websites or files of interest, but we tend to ignore the presence of online folders full of content related to our
search. As an example, I conducted the following search on Google.
intitle:index.of OSINT
The results contain online folders that usually do not have typical website files within the folders. The first three
results of this search identified the following publicly available online data folders. Each possess dozens of
documents and other files related to our search term of OSINT. One provides a folder structure that allows
access to an entire web server of content. Notice that none of these results points to a specific page, but all open
a folder view of the data present.
http://cyberwar.nl/d/
http://bitsavers.trailing-edge.com/pdf/
http://conference.hitb.org/hitbsecconf2013kul/materials/
OR Operator
You may have search terms that are not definitive. You may have a target that has a unique last name that is
often misspelled. The "OR" (uppercase) operator returns pages that have just A, just B, or both A and B.
Consider the following examples which include the number of results each.
"Michael Bazzell" OSINT 61,200
"Mike Bazzell" OSINT 1,390
"Michael Bazzell" OR "Mike Bazzell" OSINT 18,600
"Michael Bazell" OR "Mike Bazell" OSINT 1,160
"Michael Bazzel" OR "Mike Bazzel" OSINT 582
Asterisk Operator (*)
The asterisk (*) represents one or more words to Google and is considered a wild card. Google treats the * as a
placeholder for a word or words within a search string. For example, "osint * training" tells Google to find pages
containing a phrase that starts with "osint" followed by one or more words, followed by "training". Phrases that
fit this search include: "osint video training" and "osint live classroom training".
Range Operator (..)
The "Range Operator" tells Google to search between two identifiers. These could be sequential numbers or
years. As an example, OSINT Training 2015..2018 would result in pages that include the terms OSINT and
training, and also include any number between 2015 and 2018. I have used this to filter results for online news
articles that include a commenting system where readers can express their views. The following search identifies
websites that contain information about Bonnie Woodward, a missing person, and between 1 and 999 comments
within the page.
"bonnie woodward" "1..999 comments"
Related Operator
This option has been proven to be very useful over the past year. It collects a domain, and attempts to provide
online content related to that address. As an example, I conducted a search on Google with the following syntax.
related:inteltechniques.com

190 Chapter 17

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

The results included no references to that domain, but did associate it with my other websites, my X (Twitter)
page, my Black Hat courses, and my book on Amazon. In my investigations, this has translated a person's
personal website into several social networks and friends' websites.
Google Search Tools
There is a text bar at the top of every Google search result page. This allows for searching the current search
terms within other Google services such as Images, Maps, Shopping, Videos, and others. The last option on this
bar is the "Tools" link. Clicking this link will present a new row of options directly below. This provides new
filters to help you focus only on the desired results. The filters will vary for each type of Google search. Figure
9.01 displays the standard search tools with the time menu expanded.
The "Any time" drop-down menu will allow you to choose the time range of visible search results. The default
is set to "Any time" which will not filter any results. Selecting "Past hour" will only display results that have been
indexed within the hour. The other options for day, week, month, and year work the same way. The last option
is "Custom range". This will present a pop-up window that will allow you to specify the exact range of dates that
you want searched. This can be helpful when you want to analyze online content posted within a known time.
Real World Application: Whenever I was assigned a missing person case, I immediately searched the internet.
By the time the case is assigned, many media websites had reported on the incident and social networks were
full of sympathetic comments toward the family. In order to avoid this traffic, I set the search tools to only show
results up to the date of disappearance. I could then focus on the online content posted about the victim before
the disappearance was public. This often led to more relevant suspect leads.

Figure 17.01: A Google Search Tools menu.
Dated Results
Google can be very sporadic when it comes to supplying date information within search results. Sometimes you
will see the date that a search result was added to the Google index and sometimes you will not. This can be
frustrating when you desire this information in order to identify relevant results. There is a fairly unknown
technique that will force Google to always show you the date of each search result.
When you modify the "Any Time" option under the Search Tools menu, you will always see a date next to each
result. If you are only searching for recent information, this solves the issue. However, if you are conducting a
standard search without a specific date reference, the dates next to each result are missing. To remedy this, you

Search Engines 191

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

can conduct a specific search that includes any results indexed between January 1, 1 BC and "today". The
appropriate way to do this is to add "&tbs=cdr:1,cd_min:1/1/0" at the end of any standard Google search.
Figure 17.02 displays the results of a search for the term "Michael Bazzell". The exact URL of the search was as
follows.
https://www.google.com/search?q="michael+bazzell"
Notice that the result does not include a date next to the item. Figure 17.03 displays the results of this same
search with the specific data added at the end. The exact URL of this search was the following address.
https://www.google.com/search?q="michael+bazzell"&tbs=cdr:1,cd_min:1/1/0
Notice that the result now has the date when the content was first indexed by Google. You can also now sort
these results by date in order to locate the most recent information. The search tools menu also offers an "All
results" menu that will allow you to choose to see "all results" or "Verbatim". The All Results will conduct a
standard Google search. The Verbatim option searches exactly what you typed. One benefit of the Verbatim
option is that Google will often present more results than the standard search. It digs a little deeper and gives
additional results based on the exact terms you provided.

Figure 17.02: Google results without date injection.

Google Programmable Search Engines (programmablesearchengine.google.com)
Now that you are ready to unleash the power of Google, you may want to consider creating your own custom
search engines, which Google has rebranded to Programmable Search Engines. Google allows you to specify
the exact type of searches that you want to conduct, and then create an individual search engine just for your
needs. Many specialty websites that claim to search only social network content are simply using a custom engine

192 Chapter 17

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

from Google. For our first example, we will create a basic custom search engine that only searches two specific
websites.
After you log in to a Google account, navigate to the website listed above. If you have never created an engine,
you will be prompted to create your first. Enter the first website that you want to search. In my example, I will
search inteltechniques.com. As you enter any website to search, Google will automatically create another field
to enter an additional website. The second website that I will search is inteltechniques.net. Provide a name for
your custom engine and select "Create". You now have a custom search engine. You can either embed this
search engine into a website or view the public URL to access it from within any web browser.
This basic functionality can be quite powerful. It is the method behind my custom Pastebin search engine
discussed in a later chapter. In that example, I created a custom search engine that scoured dozens of specific
websites in order to retrieve complete information about specific topics. This is only the first layer of a Google
custom search engine. Google offers an additional element to its custom engines. This new layer, labeled
Refinements, allows you to specify multiple actions within one custom search engine. The best way to explain
this is to offer two unique examples.
For the first example, I wanted to create a custom search engine that allowed us to search several social networks.
Additionally, we will isolate the results from each network across several tabs at the top of our search results.
The first step will be to create a new custom search engine by navigating to "All search engines" and clicking
"Add". Instead of specifying the two websites mentioned earlier, we will identify the websites to be searched as
the following.
Facebook.com
LinkedIn.com

X.com
YouTube.com

Instagram.com
TikTok.com

While this is not a complete list of active social networks, it represents the most popular social networks at the
time of this writing. At this point, our custom search engine would search only these websites and provide all
results integrated into one search result page. We now want to add refinements that will allow us to isolate the
results from each social network.
After you have added these websites, provided a name, and created your engine, select "Customize" in order to
view the configuration of this custom search engine. On the left menu, click on "Search Features" and then in
the main panel select "All Search Features settings". Selecting this should present a list of your engines. Select
your test engine and click "Search features". This will present a new option at the top of the page labeled
"Refinements". Click the "add" button to add a new refinement for each of the websites in this example. You
should create these in the same order that you want them to appear within the search results. For this
demonstration, I created the following refinements in order, accepting the default options.
Facebook
LinkedIn

Twitter
YouTube

Instagram
TikTok

When each refinement is created, you will have two options of how the search will be refined. The first option
of "Search within sites with this refinement" will force Google to remain within the search request and not
disclose other sites. The option of "Change priority of sites with this refinement" will place emphasis on
matching rules, but will also reach outside of the rule if minimal results are present. I recommend using the first
option. Scroll down to "Attach sites", select the corresponding filter, and then "Save" for each website.
You should now have a custom search engine that will not only search several specific social network websites,
but it should also allow you to isolate the results for each network. Navigate back to "Setup" in the left menu
and select the Public URL link to see the exact address of your new engine. Go to that address and you should
see a very plain search engine. You can now search any term or terms that you want and receive results for only
the social networks that you specified. Additionally, you can choose to view all of the results combined or only

Search Engines 193

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

the results of a specific network. Figure 17.04 displays the results when I searched the term "osint". In this
example, I have selected the Twitter refinement in order to only display results from twitter.com.

Figu

rch.

You can now bookmark this new search engine that you created and visit it whenever you have a target to search.
You can take your custom search engines to another level by adding refinements that are not website specific.
In the next example, we will make a search engine that will search the entire internet and allow us to filter by file
type.
Create a new custom search engine and title it "Documents". Add only "google.com" as the website to be
searched. We do not actually want to search google.com, but a website is required to get to the edit panel.
Complete the captcha, click on "Create", and select "Customize". In the "Search Features" portion, enable the
"Search the entire web" toggle. Delete google.com from the sites to be searched. You now basically have a
custom search engine that will search everything. It will essentially do the same thing as Google's home page.
You can now add refinements to filter your search results. Select "All Search Features settings" button at the
top and add a new refinement. Title the new refinement "PDF"; change the default setting to " Change priority
of sites with this refinement"; expand the "Advanced" menu, and enter the following in the "Rewrite query
words" field.
ext:pdf
This will create a refinement that will allow you to isolate only PDF documents within any search that you
conduct. Save this setting and create a new refinement. Title it DOC; change the default search setting; and place
the following in the "Rewrite query words" field.
ext:doc OR ext:docx
This will create a new tab during your search results that will allow you to isolate Microsoft Word documents.
By entering both the doc and docx formats, you will be sure to get older and newer documents. The word "OR"
tells Google to search either format. Repeat this process for each of the following document types with the
following language for each type.
XLS (Excel Spreadsheets) - ext:xls OR ext:xlsx OR ext:csv
PPT (PowerPoint Files) - ext:ppt OR ext:pptx
TXT (Text Docs) - ext:txt OR ext:rtf
WPD (Word Perfect Docs) - ext:wpd
ODT (OpenOffice Docs) - ext:odt OR ext:ods OR ext:odp
ZIP (Compressed Files) - ext:zip OR ext:rar OR ext:7z
Figure 17.05 displays the results of a search for the term osint within this new engine. The All tab is selected
which reveals 717,000 results. Clicking the PowerPoint presentations option (PPT) reveals 45 files which contain
the term. There are endless possibilities with this technique. You could make an engine that isolated images with
extensions such as jpg, jpeg, png, bmp, gif, etc. You could also replicate all of this into a custom engine that only
searched a specific website. If you were monitoring threats against your company, you could isolate only these
files that appear on one or more of your company's domains.

194 Chapter 17

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Figure 17.05: A Documents File Type Google Custom Search.
Google Alerts (google.com/alerts)
When you have exhausted the search options on search engines looking for a target, you will want to know if
new content is posted. Checking Google results every week on the same target to see if anything new is out
there will get mundane. Utilizing Google Alerts will put Google to work on locating new information. While
logged in to any Google service, such as Gmail, create a new Google Alert and specify the search term, delivery
options, and email address to which to send the alert. In one of my alerts, Google will send an email daily as it
finds new websites that mention "Open Source Intelligence Techniques" anywhere in the site. Another one of
my alerts is for my personal website. I now receive an email when another site mentions or links to my website.
Parents can use this to be notified if their child is mentioned in a website or blog. Investigators that are
continuously seeking information about a target will find this beneficial.
Real World Application: A police detective was assigned a runaway case where a 15-year-old had decided to
leave home and stay with friends at an unknown location. After several extensive internet searches, a Google
Alert was set up using the runaway's name and city of residence. Within three days, one of the alerts was for a
blog identifying the runaway and where she was currently staying. Within 30 minutes, the unhappy child was
back home.
Bing (bing.com)
Google is not the only great search engine. While Google is the overwhelming choice of search engines used
today, other sites should not be ignored, especially when having trouble locating any information on a subject.
Bing is Microsoft's competition to Google and provides a great search experience. In 2009, Yahoo search
(yahoo.com) began using the Bing search engine to produce search results. This makes a Yahoo search redundant
if a Bing search has already been conducted. The same tactics described previously, and in the numerous Google
books, can be applied to any search engine. The site operator and the use of quotes both work with Bing exactly
as they do with Google. Bing also introduced time filtered searching that will allow you to only show results
from the last 24 hours, week, month, year, or custom range. At the time of this writing Bing is including a set of
"Generated using AI" results which are seldom pertinent in my experience. There are a couple of additional
operators that are important that only apply to Bing. Bing offers an option that will list every website to which
a target website links, and is the only search engine that offers this service.
Bing LinkFromDomain
I conducted a search on Bing of "LinkFromDomain:inteltechniques.com". Note that there are no spaces in the
entire search string and you should omit the quotation marks. This operator creates a result that includes every
website to which I have a link, located on any of the pages within my website. This can be useful to an
investigator. When a target's website is discovered, this site can be large and contain hundreds of pages, blog
entries, etc. While clicking through all of these is possible, sometimes links are hidden and cannot be seen by
visually looking at the pages. This operator allows Bing to quickly pull links out of the actual code of the website.
Bing Contains
Earlier, I discussed searching for files with specific file extensions on Google. The "filetype" and "ext" operators
that were explained both work on Bing the same way. However, Bing offers one more option to the mix. The
"contains" operator allows you to expand the parameters of the file type search. As an example, a Bing search

Search Engines 195

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

of "filetype:ppt site:cisco.com" returns 13,200 results. These include PowerPoint files stored on the domain of
cisco.com. However, these results do not necessarily include links on the cisco.com website to PowerPoint files
stored on other websites. A search on Bing for "contains:ppt site:cisco.com" returns 36,200 results. These
include PowerPoint files that are linked from pages on the domain of cisco.com, even if they are stored on other
domains. This could include a page on cisco.com that links to a PowerPoint file on hp.com. In most cases, this
search eliminates the need to conduct a filetype search, but both should be attempted.
Google Images (images.google.com)
Google Images scours the web for graphical images based on a search term. Google obtains these images based
on keywords for the image. These keywords are taken from the filename of the image, the link text pointing to
the image, and text adjacent to the image. This is never a complete listing of all images associated with a subject,
and will almost always find images completely unrelated to a target. In the case of common names, one should
enclose the name in quotes and follow it with the city where the subject resides, place of employment, home
town, or personal interests. This will help filter the results to those more likely to be related to the subject. When
results are displayed, clicking the "Tools" button will present five new filter menus and an advanced search
button. This menu will allow you to filter results to only include images of a specific size, color, time range,
image type, or license type. The most beneficial feature of Google Images is the reverse image search option.
This will be explained in great detail later in the book.
Bing Images (bing.com/images)
Similar to Google, Bing offers an excellent image search. Both sites autoload more images as you get toward the
end of the current results. This eliminates the need to continue to load an additional page, and leads to faster
browsing. Bing also offers the advanced options available on Google, and adds the ability to filter only files with
a specified layout such as square or wide. Bing provides a "filter" option in the far right of results that provides
extended functionality. The People tab offers restriction for images of "Just faces" and "Head & shoulders". It
also provides suggested filters with every image search. Clicking image search links may provide additional
photographs of the specific target based on the listed criteria. This intelligence can lead to additional searches
of previously unknown affiliations.
International Search Engines
Search engines based in the U.S. are not the primary search sites for all countries. Visiting search sites outside
of the U.S. can provide results that will not appear on Google or Bing. In Russia, Yandex is the chosen search
engine. Yandex offers an English version at yandex.com. These results are often similar to Google's; however,
they are usually prioritized differently. In the past, I have found unique intelligence from this site when Google
let me down. In China, most people use Baidu. It does not offer an English version; however, the site is still
usable. Striking the "enter" key on the keyboard after typing a search will conduct the search without the ability
to understand the Chinese text. New results not visible on Google or Bing may be rare, but an occasional look
on these sites is warranted.
Yandex (yandex.com)
In a previous edition of this book, I only made a brief reference to Yandex and quickly moved on. In the past
few years, I have discovered many advanced features of Yandex which justify an expanded section. Visually, the
Yandex home page and search results pages do not possess additional search operators. These options are only
available by issuing a direct command within your search. While this can be more cumbersome than a Google
search, the results can include much new data. Some of these searches can be overkill for daily use, but those
who conduct brand reputation monitoring or extensive background checks may take advantage of this.
Exact terms: Similar to Google and Bing, quotation marks will search for exact terms. Searching "Michael
Bazzell" inside of quotes would search those terms, and would avoid "Mike" or "Bazel".

196 Chapter 17

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Missing word: You can search an exact phrase without knowing every word of the phrase. A search for "Open
Source * Techniques" inside of quotation marks will identify any results that include that phrase with any word
where the asterisk (*) is located. This identified not only results with the title of this book, but also results for
"Open Source Development Techniques" and "Open Source Responsive Techniques". This search can be very
useful for identifying a person's middle name. "Michael * Bazzell" produced some interesting results.
Words within the same sentence: The ampersand (&) is used in this query to indicate that you want to search
for multiple terms. "Hedgehog & Flamingo", without the quotation marks, would identify any websites that
contained both of those words within one sentence. If you want the results to only include sentences that have
the two words near each other, you can search "Hedgehog /2 Flamingo". This will identify websites that have a
sentence that includes the words Hedgehog and Flamingo within two words of each other.
Words within the same website: Similar to the previous method, this search identifies the searched terms
within an entire website. "Hedgehog && Flamingo", without quotation marks, would identify pages that have
both those words within the same page, but not necessarily the same sentence. You can also control the search
to only include results that have those two words within a set number of sentences from each other. A search
of "Hedgehog && /3 Flamingo", without the quotation marks, would identify websites that have those two
words within three sentences of each other.
Include a specific word: In Google and Bing, you would place quotation marks around a word to identify
pages that contain that word in them. In Yandex, this is gained with a plus sign (+). Michael +Bazzell would
mandate that the page has the word Bazzell, but not necessarily Michael.
Search any word: In Google and Bing, you can use "OR" within a search to obtain results on any of the terms
searched. In Yandex, this is achieved with the pipe symbol (|). This is found above the backslash (\) on your
keyboard. A search of "+Bazzell Michael|Mike|M", without quotation marks, would return results for Michael
Bazzell, Mike Bazzell, and M Bazzell.
Exclude a word: Google and Bing allow you to use a hyphen (-) to exclude a word in a search. Yandex does
not technically support this, but it seems to work fine. The official Yandex operator is the tilde (~). A typical
search would look like "Michael Bazzell ~ Mike", without the quotation marks. This would identify websites
that contained Michael Bazzell, but not Mike Bazzell. Using only one tilde will exclude only results where the
unwanted term is in the same sentence as the keyword. I prefer to stick with the hyphen (-) until it no longer
works.
Multiple identical words: This is a technique that I have needed several times in the past before I learned of
Yandex's options. You may want to search for websites that contain a specific word more than once. An example
might be if you are searching for someone that has two identical words in his or her full name. "Carina Abad
Abad" would fit in this scenario. You could use quotation marks to identify the majority of the results, but you
would filter out anything that was not exact such as Abad,Abad, Abad-Abad, or AbadAbad. This is where the
exclamation point (!) comes in. A search of "!Carina !Abad !Abad", without quotation marks, would identify any
results that included those three words regardless of spacing or punctuation.
Date specific searches: While Google provides a menu to filter your searches by date, Yandex's time period
filter has no custom range option. You must specify the date range within the search using operators. The
following queries should explain the options.
date:20111201..20111231 OSINT - Websites mentioning OSINT between December 1-31, 2011
date:2011* OSINT - Websites mentioning OSINT in the year 2011
date:201112* OSINT - Websites mentioning OSINT in December of 2011
date:>20111201 OSINT - Websites mentioning OSINT after December 1, 2011

Search Engines 197

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Standard operators: Most of the operators explained earlier for Google and Bing should also work in Yandex.
The commands for Site, Domain, Inurl, and Intitle should work the same way. Yandex maintains a list of
operators at https://yandex.com/support/search/query-language/search-operators.html. All Yandex operators
work together and multiple operators can be used to form very specific searches. Figure 17.06 displays the results
for a search of any websites from 2013 with the phrase Michael Bazzell and the word OSINT while excluding
the word Mike.

There are hundreds of additional international search engines. Of those, most are extremely specialized and do
not offer great general search. The following have been most beneficial to my international investigations, in
order of usefulness. I have included a direct search URL, which could be useful for your custom search tools.
Baidu http://www.baidu.com/s?wd=osint
Sogou https://www.sogou.com/web?query=osint
So https://www.so.com/s?q=osint
Mail.ru https://go.mail.ru/search?q=osint
Goo https://search.goo.ne.jp/web.jsp?MT=osint
Daum https://search.daum.net/search?w=tot&q=osint
Parseek http://parseek.com/Search/?q=osint
Naver https://search.naver.com/search.naver?query=osint
Coccoc https://coccoc.com/search?query=osint
Seznam https://search.seznam.cz/?q=osint
Rediff https://www.rediff.com/search/osint
I Search From (isearchfrom.com)
If you want to search Google within a version specified for another country, this site simplifies the process.
Choose the country and language, and the tool will do the rest. While testing this service, I entered Japan as my
country, English as my language, an iPad as my device, and OSINT as my search term. I was presented a
google.co.jp search page in tablet view. Many results were similar to the U.S. version, but all were in a unique
order. I find this useful when searching for international targets when I do not want bias toward a U.S. user.
The "News" tab of foreign searches is often catered toward that geographical audience. This can display
emphasis on news articles which would otherwise be buried in a typical Google result page.
Web Archives
Occasionally, you will try to access a site and the information you are looking for is no longer there. Maybe
something was removed, amended, or maybe the whole page was permanently removed. Web archives, or
"caches", can remedy this. I believe that these historical copies of websites are one of the most vital resources
when conducting any type of online research. This section will explain the current options in order from most
effective to least.

198 Chapter 17

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Google Cache (google.com)
Google recently removed the option to pull up cached pages directly from search results. The "Cached" option
in the drop down menu is no longer present. Google has also clearly stated that they will no longer be supporting
the "cache:" search operator. Currently we can regain some access to Google cache results by appending the
target page to the specific Google URL of "https://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:". For
example, https://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:phonelosers.org displays a cached copy of
phonelosers.org. This version was taken four days prior to the current date, and displays information different
from the current version. Google may eventually remove access to indexed pages altogether and I find myself
more often relying on other search engines for access to cached versions of a target page.
Bing Cache (bing.com)
Unlike Google, Bing offers a cached view of many websites directly in their search results. Searching for a
domain name, such as phonelosers.org, will present many results. The first result should link to the actual
website. Directly next to the website name is a small green down arrow. Clicking it will present the option of
"Cached". Clicking this link will display a previous version of the target website as collected by Bing. Figure
17.07 (first image) displays their menu option.
Yandex Cache (yandex.com)
The Russian search engine Yandex was already explained, but it is important to note now that it also possesses
a cache option. If Yandex has a cached copy of a page, clicking on the three vertical dots next to a search result
will show an option of "Saved copy". Figure 17.07 (second image) displays their cache menu option. Selecting
the Saved copy option opens a new tab displaying the most recent Yandex archive of the page. The top banner
displays the date and time of capture, the original website address, and a search option to highlight selected
keywords within the result. Another benefit of the Yandex cache is that the results are sometimes older than
those on Google or Bing. While this may sound counterintuitive, an older cache can be very helpful in an
investigation.
The Wayback Machine (web.archive.org)
The Wayback Machine will provide a much more extensive list of options for viewing a website historically.
Searching for phonelosers.org displayed a total of 1,280 captures of the site dating from 12/21/1997 through
8/14/2024 (Figure 17.08). Clicking the links presents quite a display of how the site has changed. Graphics are
archived as well, proving that we should always think twice about which photos we post to the internet. Each
view of the archived page will allow the user to click through the links as if it were a live page on the original
web server. Clicking through the timeline at the top of each page will load the viewed page as it appeared on the
date selected.
Wayback Search
Until 2016, you could not search keywords across Wayback Machine data. You had to know the exact URL of
a target website, or at least the domain name. Today, we can search any terms desired and connect directly to
archived data. At the time of this writing, a search bar was present at the top of every Wayback Machine page.
If that should change, you can also conduct a search via a direct URL. The following address searched "phone
losers" throughout the entire archive of information.
https://web.archive.org/web/*/phone losers
The results identify over twenty websites that include these terms. Within those sites are dozens of archived
copies of each. This data represents decades of content at your fingertips. Much of it is offline and unavailable
on the current public internet. Many domains have completely shut down. The results include several sites in

Search Engines 199

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

addition to phonelosers.org, and you would not find these by searching the domain directly through the Wayback
Machine. This is a reminder that we should check all available resources before completing our investigations.
Searching All Resources
Occasionally, there are websites that surface claiming to be able to extract and rebuild entire websites from
online caches. In my experience, none of these have ever provided a complete historical view versus a manual
approach. Engines such as Bing and Yandex generate a unique code when a cache is displayed. This action
prevents most automated search tools from collecting archived information. I do not believe any option, other
than navigating to each resource, will present you with the content that you need. I bookmark each of these
services in an individual folder titled Archives and open each tab when I have a domain as a target. I have also
created an online tool that will collect your target domain and forward you to the appropriate archive page. This
will be explained later when discussing domain searches.
Finally, it is important to acknowledge that these resources can be beneficial when everything on a website
appears to be present and unaltered. While caches work well on websites that have been removed and are
completely empty, they also can tell a different story about websites that appear normal. Any time that I find a
website, profile, or blog of interest, I immediately look at caches hoping to identify changes in content. These
minor alterations can be very important. They highlight information that was meant to be deleted forever. These
details can be the vital piece of your investigation puzzle. Most people have no idea that this technique exists.

Figure 17.07: Cache menu options on Bing and Yandex.

Figure 17.08: Wayback Machine results for an archived website.
Non-English Results
Not every piece of information that will be useful to you will be obtained by standard searches within English
websites. Your target may either be from another country or have associates and affiliations in another country.
While Google and Bing try to pick up on this, the technology is not perfect. Google has a search site and
algorithm that change by location. For example, google.fr presents the French search page for Google. While
this may produce the same overall results, they are usually in a different order than on google.com. Google no
longer maintains a page with links to each international version of its search, but I have a preferred method.

200 Chapter 17

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

2Lingual (2lingual.com)
This page will allow you to conduct one search across two country sites on Google. The Google search will
display a plain search box and choices of two countries. The results will display in single columns next to each
other. Additionally, the foreign results will be automatically translated to English. This feature can be disabled,
if desired. The first few sponsored results (ads) will be similar, but the official results following should differ.
This site can also be helpful when demonstrating to someone the importance of searching targets through
multiple countries.
Google Translator (translate.google.com)
Many websites exist in non-English languages. As internet enthusiasts, we tend to focus on sites within our
home area. There is a wealth of information out there on sites hosted in other countries which are presented in
other languages. Google Translator will take text from any site or document and translate the text to a variety
of languages. Usually, the service will automatically identify the language of the copied and pasted text. Selecting
the desired output will provide the translation. Alternatively, you can translate an entire website in one click
which will give a native view of the layout of the site. Instead of copying individual text to the search box, type
or paste in the exact URL (address) of the website you want translated. Clicking the "Translate" button will load
a new page of the site, which will be translated to English. This translation is rarely, if ever, perfect. However, it
should give you an idea of the content presented on the page. This will also work on social network sites such
as X (Twitter) and Instagram.
Bing Translator (bing.com/translator)
A few years after Google introduced free translation services, Bing created their own product. At first glance, it
looks like a replica of Google's offering. However, Bing's translations are usually slightly different than Google's
results. Similar to Google, you can also type or paste an entire foreign website to conduct a translation of
everything on the target page.
DeepL (deepl.com/translator)
While smaller than Google or Bing, this may be the most accurate translator service I have found. The page
appears and functions identical to the previous options, but the results may be substantially different.
Additional Online Translators
A few more online translation tools worth mentioning are PROMT Online Translator (https://www.onlinetranslator.com/translation). Libre Translate (https://libretranslate.com/), Lingva (https://lingva.ml/), and
MyMemory (https://mymemory.translated.net/). These services each provide independent translations. I
recommend adding all of these as bookmarks and experimenting with each.
Google Input Tools (google.com/inputtools/try)
There is one last feature regarding foreign language searching that I have found useful. Google's Input Tools
allow you to type in any language you choose. Upon navigating to the above website, choose the language of
your target search. In Figure 17.09, I have chosen Russian as the language and typed "Online Investigation" on
a standard English keyboard. The result is how that text might appear in traditional Cyrillic letters. I can now
search for pages which include my keywords in Russian as well as in English. This technique is extremely
important when you have located a username in a foreign language. As with all computer-generated translation
services, the results are never absolutely accurate. I expect this technology to continue to improve.

Search Engines 201

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Figure 17.09: A Google Input Tools translation from English to Russian.
Google News Archive (news.google.com)
This can be an amazing resource of information about a target. In the past, if someone relocated to a new
geographical area, he or she could leave the past behind and start over. Today, that is difficult. Google's News
Archive is continually adding content from both online archives and digitized content from their News Archive
Partner Program. Sources include newspapers from large cities, small towns, and anything in between. The link
referenced above will allow for a detailed search of a target's name with filters including dates, language, and
specific publication. In order to display this menu, click on the down arrow to the right of the search box. This
can quickly identify some history of a target such as previous living locations, family members through obituaries,
and associates through events, awards, or organizations.
Google Newspaper Archive (news.google.com/newspapers)
The previous option focused solely on digital content, such as your local newspaper website. Google's
Newspaper archive possesses content from printed newspapers. All results on this site consist of high-resolution
scanned newspaper pages. In my experience, this collection is not as extensive as the next option discussed.
However, it is definitely worth a look, and will likely continue to grow.
Newspaper Archive (newspaperarchive.com)
This paid service provides the world's largest collection of newspaper archives. The high-resolution PDF scans
of entire daily newspapers range in date from the 1800's until present. The first four editions of this book
explained a method of using the Google Site operator and cached results to obtain practically any page of this
newspaper collection without paying or subscribing. These vulnerabilities have all been patched and none of
those techniques work today. Fortunately, Newspaper Archive still offers a 7-day free trial with unlimited access
to every archive. While multiple trials can be obtained, each require a unique credit card number and email
address. Many libraries have asked this service to scan their entire microfilm archives and make them freely
available online. You will not find any mention of this free alternative on their home page, but a bit of searching
will guide you to the right place. The following search on Google identifies hundreds of public libraries that pay
for your access to their archives.
site:newspaperarchive.com "This archive is hosted by" "create free account"
The first part of the search tells Google to only look at the website newspaperarchive.com. The second part
mandates that the exact phrase "This archive is hosted by" appears in the result. The final piece isolates only the
newspaper collections that are available for free and without a credit card. This identifies the landing pages of
the various libraries that have made their collections freely available. While you will still be required to register
through the service, payment is not required for these collections. Consider the following usage that will likely
present you with free views of Newspaper Archive whenever you need them.
On 12/13/2017, I navigated to newspaperarchive.com/advancedsearch/ and conducted an advanced search for
anyone named Michael Williams from Cedar Rapids, Iowa. Newspaper Archive presented several results from
the Cedar Rapids Gazette. Clicking on any of these results prompted me to create an account and forced me to
enter a valid credit card number to proceed. I could not create an account from any of the pages without
providing payment. Instead, I conducted the following Google search.

202 Chapter 17

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

site:newspaperarchive.com "This archive is hosted by" "cedar rapids gazette"
The first result was a direct connection to crgazette.newspaperarchive.com. Clicking this link presented a page
dedicated to searching over 40 newspapers within the Cedar Rapids and Des Moines areas. In the upper right
corner was a link titled "Create Free Account". I clicked this link and provided generic details and a throwaway
email address. The membership choices now include a completely free option, which will only allow access to
the Iowa newspapers. After creating my free online account, I returned to the portal at
crpubliclibrary.newspaperarchive.com and repeated the search of my target. Every link allowed me full
unrestricted access to the high-resolution images.
While still logged in to this account, I navigated to delawarecolib.newspaperarchive.com, the direct page
associated with the Delaware County Library (which I found through the original Google search in this section).
I was not authorized to view this newspaper collection. However, after clicking "Create Free Account" on this
page, I entered the same data as previously provided to the Iowa newspaper. After verifying my email address,
I was allowed immediate access to this series of newspapers.
This technique will not obtain access to every collection on Newspaper Archive. However, it will provide a
surprising amount of free access to huge collections internationally. During an hour of downtime, I created a
free account on every library collection I could locate, using the same credentials on each. I can now log in to
my single Newspaper Archive account and navigate the site from any page. When I reach a newspaper of interest
after a search, I will be given full access if it is within a free collection. This is all thanks to the local libraries that
have paid this site to give free access to the public. If the free trial of Newspaper Archive or the free library
collections do not offer enough content, consider the following options.
Old Fulton (fultonhistory.com/Fulton.html):
57,000,000 scanned newspapers from the United States and Canada.
Library of Congress US News Directory (chroniclingamerica.loc.gov):
Scanned newspapers from the United States dated 1756-1963.
Library of Congress US News Directory (chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/search/titles):
Directory of newspapers from the United States dated 1690-Present.
Small Town Newspapers (stparchive.com):
Scanned and text versions of small town newspapers since 1890
Note that the search features on all of these options are mediocre at best. Always consider a Google search,
such as site:stparchive.com "michael bazzell".
Google Advanced Search (google.com/advanced_search)
If the search operators discussed in this chapter seem too technical, Google offers an advanced search page that
simplifies the process. Navigating to the above website will present the same options in a web page that are
possible by typing out the operators. This will help you get familiar with the options, but it will be beneficial to
understand the operators for later use. The Advanced Search page will allow you to specify a phrase for which
you are searching, just like the quotes in a search will allow. The site and filetype operators used earlier can be
achieved by entering the desired filters on this page. It should be noted that the file type option on this page is
limited to popular file types, whereas the filetype operator can handle many other file extensions.
Bing Advanced Search (search.yahoo.com/web/advanced)
Bing does not technically provide an advanced search page similar to Google's. However, since Yahoo uses
Bing's search, you can use Yahoo's advanced search page as a replacement. This page will allow you to easily

Search Engines 203

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

create a search that filters by individual terms, exact phrases, omitted terms, specific domains, file formats, and
languages.
Additional Google Engines
Google isolates some search results into specialized smaller search engines. Each of these focuses on a unique
type of internet search. The following engines will likely give you results that you will not find during a standard
Google or Bing search. While some results from these unique searches will appear within standard Google
results, the majority will be hidden from the main page.
Google Patents (google.com/?tbm=pts)
Google probably has the best patent search option on the internet. It allows you to search the entire patent
database within any field of a patent. This can be useful for searching names associated with patents or any
details within the patent itself. If you need further help, Google offers an advanced patent search at
google.com/advanced_patent_search.
Google Scholar (scholar.google.com)
Google Scholar is a freely accessible web search engine that indexes the full text of scholarly literature across an
array of publishing formats. It includes most peer-reviewed online journals of Europe's and America's largest
scholarly publishers, plus many books and other non-peer reviewed journals. My favorite feature of this utility
is the case law and court records search. I have located many court records through this free website that would
have cost money to obtain from private services.
Keyword Tool (keywordtool.io)
Keyword Tool displays autocomplete data from Google, Bing, YouTube, and the App Store. You have likely
noticed that Google quickly offers suggestions as you type in your search. This is called autocomplete. If I were
to type "macb" into Google, it would prompt me to choose from the most popular searches when people typed
those letters. This information may lead you to new terms to search in reference to your investigation. The
advantage of Keyword Tool over Google is that Google only provides the five most popular entries. Keyword
Tool provides the ten most popular entries. Additionally, you can choose different countries to isolate popular
terms. You can also see results from similar searches that Google does not display. Keyword Tool will redact
some results and present pop-ups unless you sign up for a free trial. The pop-ups can be blocked using uBlock
Origin as discussed earlier in this book.
Real World Application: I have successfully used this technique during the investigation of many businesses.
I was once asked by a medium-sized business to investigate reports of a faulty product that they had recently
recalled. They wanted to see customer complaints. After searching the typical review websites, I conducted a
search with Keyword Tool. I discovered that the 9th most popular search involving this specific product name
included a term that was a misspelling of the product name. It was different enough in spelling that my searches
were missing this content. Knowing this information, I was able to locate more relevant data for the client.
This can also be very valuable for marketing and promotion. Assume I want to know what additional terms
people search when they start with the word osint. Maybe I want to buy Google ads or tweak my website to be
noticed more often. With this tool, I now know that the following are the most popular osint-related searches
on Google.
osint meaning
osint websites
osint techniques
osint training

204 Chapter 17

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

The YouTube tab tells me that people are searching for videos related to the following terms.
osint tools
osint investigations
osint phone number
osint analysis
Finally, I see that Bing users seem to be a bit more focused with the following queries.
osint resources
osint api
osint mind map
osint michael bazzell
Other Alternatives
Google and Bing are great, but they do not do it all. There will always be a need for specialized search engines.
These engines usually excel in one particular search method which justifies the lack of search power in other
areas. The sites listed in this next section represent the extreme minority when it comes to search traffic. It is
often sites like these that implement the technologies that we later take for granted in more popular engines.
Searx (baresearch.org)
This meta-crawler was previously explained as a self-hosted option within our VM (preferred), but an online
instance is also available. It presents results from Google, Bing, and others. It often gets dismissed as another
comparison search site, but there are many other advantages to using this service. First, conducting a search will
provide results from the main search engines, but will remove duplicate entries. This alone is a quick way to
conduct your due-diligence by checking Google and Bing. Next, the top row of options will allow you to repeat
this redundancy-reducing option by checking results on Images, News, and Videos sections. Next to each result
on any search page is a "cached" link. Instead of opening the Google or Bing cache, clicking this will open the
cached page of the target website through the Wayback Machine. Finally, a "proxied" option next to each result
will connect you to the target website through a proxy service provided by Searx. This is basically a layer of
privacy preventing the website owner from collecting data about you, such as your IP address. Technically, Searx
opened the target site, and their data would be tracked instead of yours. There are ways for adversaries to bypass
this "anonymity", but it is decent protection for most sites.
If you have executed the self-hosted option previously presented, then you may never need an online instance
such as baresearch.org. Using your own self-hosted instance also prevents any third-party instances from
snooping on your queries.
DuckDuckGo (duckduckgo.com)
This search engine with a clean interface offers two unique services. It has gained a lot of popularity because it
does not track anything from users. Engines, such as Google, record and maintain all of your search history and
sites visited. This can be a concern to privacy advocates and those with sensitive investigations. Additionally, it
uses information from crowd-sourced websites such as Wikipedia and Wolfram Alpha to augment traditional
results and improve relevance. You will receive fewer results here than at more popular search engines, but the
accuracy of the results will improve.
Start Page (startpage.com)
Similar to DuckDuckGo, Start Page is a privacy-focused search engine that does not reveal your connection
information to traditional search engines. The difference here is that Start Page only includes Google results

Search Engines 205

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

versus DuckDuckGo's collaboration of multiple sources. The benefit to this is the ability to use Google's filters
while still protecting your identity. This includes filtering by date, images, and videos. Another benefit is the
ability to open any result through a "proxy" link. This option, labeled "Visit in Anonymous View " below each
search result, opens the linked page through Start Page's servers and displays the content within their site. This
protects your IP address from anyone monitoring connections at the target website. While this technique is not
foolproof, it provides a valid layer of protection. My search strategy involves Start Page whenever I have a
sensitive search that I do not want to associate with my computer or internet connection. This might include
investigations that involve highly sensitive topics such as tech-savvy stalker suspects.
Qwant (qwant.com)
Qwant attempts to combine the results of several types of search engines into one page. It was launched in 2013
after two years of research. It has an easily digestible interface that displays results in columns titled All, News,
Images, Videos, and Shopping. There is a Google "feel" to it and the layout can be changed to your own
preferences. A default search of my own name provided the expected results similar to Google and Bing.
Clicking on the tabs at the top introduced new results not found on the other engines. The results included
recent posts from X (Twitter), Facebook, LinkedIn, and Myspace from and about people with my name.
Million Short (millionshort.com)
This website offers a unique function that is not found on any other search engine. You can choose to remove
results that link to the most popular one million websites. This will eliminate popular results and focus on lesserknown websites. You can also select to remove the top 100,000, 10,000, 1,000, or 100 results. Million Short now
requires that we register a free account, but they will accept addresses from forwarding/masking services.
Tor Search Engines
Tor is free software for enabling anonymous communication. The name is an acronym derived from the original
software project name The Onion Router. Tor directs internet traffic through a free, worldwide, volunteer
network consisting of more than six thousand relays to conceal a user's location and usage from anyone
conducting network surveillance or traffic analysis. Using Tor makes it more difficult for internet activity to be
traced back to the user. This also applies to a website that is hosted on the Tor network. Usually, these sites
include illegal drug shops, child exploitation swaps, and weapon sales. Because these sites are not hosted on
publicly viewable networks, they are hard to locate and connect. Tor-based search engines and a proxy aid this
process.
Ahmia (ahmia.fi)
This is a very powerful Tor search engine. While no engine can index and locate every Tor website, this is the
most thorough option that I have seen. It should be the first engine used when searching Tor related sites. The
links in the results will not load if searching through a standard browser and connection. Using the Tor Browser
discussed previously is the ideal way to use this service.
Tor Link (tor.link)
This engine appeared in 2022 and was quite promising. Although it will often provide fewer results than Ahmia,
the results often include sites not present in the Ahmia results. This has complemented Ahmia well for many of
my Tor-based investigations.
Onionland Search (onionlandsearchengine.net)
This service relies on Google's indexing of Tor sites which possess URL proxy links. However, I find some
"hidden" sites with this utility which were not presented by the previous options.

206 Chapter 17

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Tor Search Sites
I believe some of the strongest Tor search engines exist only on the Tor network. You cannot access them from
a standard internet connection, and the Tor Browser is required for native use (alternatively you can use the
TOR functionality in Brave). My favorite is "Torch", which can be found at the following address if connected
to Tor.
http://torchdeedp3i2jigzjdmfpn5ttjhthh5wbmda2rr3jvqjg5p77c54dqd.onion
Alternatives to Torch include Haystack and Tor66, which can each be accessed at the following addresses via
the Tor network.
http://haystak5njsmn2hqkewecpaxetahtwhsbsa64jom2k22z5afxhnpxfid.onion.
http://tor66sewebgixwhcqfnp5inzp5x5uohhdy3kvtnyfxc2e5mxiuh34iid.onion
All of the options presented here, and several others, are available for automatic queries within your custom
search tool, as presented in a moment. Please note that these sites appear, disappear, and reappear often.
Search Engine Collections
I believe I could fill several chapters with tutorials for the hundreds of search engines available today. Instead, I
point you toward two of the best collections I have found.
Search Engine Colossus (searchenginecolossus.com)
This website is an index of practically every search engine in every country. The main page offers a list of
countries alphabetically. Each of these links connects to a list of active search engines in that country. I stay
away from this service when searching American-based subjects. However, if my target has strong ties to a
specific country, I always research the engines that are used in that area through this website.
Fagan Finder (faganfinder.com)
This website offers an interactive search page which populates your query into hundreds of options. Enter your
search term in the field and click any of the hundreds of buttons to begin a search. Many of the search services
are targeted toward niche uses, but you may find something valuable there which you do not see on the custom
offline search tool provided at the end of this chapter.
FTP Search
I believe that the searching of File Transfer Protocol (FTP) servers is one of the biggest areas of the internet
that is missed by most online researchers. FTP servers are computers with a public IP address used to store files.
While these can be secured with mandated access credentials, this is rarely the case. Most are public and can be
accessed from within a web browser. The overall use of FTP to transfer files is minimal compared to a decade
ago, but the servers still exist in abundance. I prefer the manual method of searching Google for FTP
information. As mentioned earlier, Google and Bing index most publicly available data on FTP servers. A
custom search string will be required in order to filter unwanted information. If I were looking for any files
including the term "confidential" in the title, I would conduct the following search on Google and Bing.
inurl:ftp -inurl:(http|https) "confidential"
The result will include files from ftp servers (inurl:ftp); will exclude any web pages (-inurl:(http|https); and
mandate that the term "confidential" is present (""). I have located many sensitive documents from target
companies with this query. The above search yielded 107,000 FTP results. However, these specific hits are not

Search Engines 207

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

the only valuable data to pursue. Consider the following example. I want to locate PDF documents stored on
FTP servers that contain "cisco" within the title or content, and I conduct the following search on Google.
inurl:ftp -inurl:(http|https) "cisco" filetype:pdf
This results in 20,000 options within multiple FTP servers hosted on numerous domains. The first result is
hosted on the Southwest Cyberport FTP server and connects to a PDF document at the following address. It
appears to be a chapter of a textbook.
ftp://ftp.swcp.com/pub/cisco/03chap01.pdf
Manually changing the last "01" to "02" loads the second chapter of the book. However, it is easier to eliminate
the document name altogether and browse the directory titled "cisco". The first of the following addresses
displays the contents of that folder, while the second displays the content of the "pub" folder. Copy these directly
into a web browser to see the results.
ftp://ftp.swcp.com/pub/cisco/
ftp://ftp.swcp.com/pub/
This type of manual navigation will often reveal numerous publicly available documents that traditional searches
withhold. I have located extremely sensitive files hosted by companies, government agencies, and the military.
Most File Transfer Protocol (FTP) servers have been indexed by Google, but there are other third-party options
that are worth exploring. At the end of each description, I identify the number of results included for the search
"Cisco" "PDF".
Napalm FTP (searchftps.net)
This FTP search engine often provides content that is very recent. After each result, it displays the date that the
data was last confirmed at the disclosed location. This can help locate relevant information that is still present
on a server. While it generated the most results of all four services, many of them were no longer available on
the target FTP servers. Some could be reconstructed with cached copies, but not all.
"Cisco" "PDF": 3,384
Mamoht (mmnt.ru)
This Russian FTP server allows you to isolate search results by the country that is hosting the content. This is
likely determined by IP address. While most of the filtered results will be accurate, I recommend searching
through the global results before dismissing any foreign options. My favorite feature of this engine is the "Search
in found" option. After conducting my search, I checked this option and my search field was cleared. I entered
"router" and clicked search again. I was prompted with the 436 results within my original hits that also included
the word router. While this could have been replicated manually, I appreciate the option.
"Cisco" "PDF": 789 results
For comparison, Google found 19,600 results for inurl:ftp -inurl:(http|https) "Cisco" "PDF".
FreewareWeb (freewareweb.com/ftpsearch.shtml)
This service is less robust than the previous options, but it should not be ignored. In 2022, I was searching for
documents with a unique file extension. This was the only service which presented the documents I needed,
which were contracts signed by my target.

208 Chapter 17

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

NerdyData (nerdydata.com/reports/new)
Google, Bing, and other search engines search the content of websites. They focus on the data that is visually
present within a web page. NerdyData searches the programming code of a website. This code is often not
visible to the end user and exists within the HTML code, JavaScript, and CSS files with which most users are
not familiar. This code can be extremely valuable to research in some scenarios. Viewing the source code of a
website can be done by right-clicking on the background of a page and selecting "View Source". The following
two examples should explain a small portion of the possibilities with this service.
In later chapters, you will learn about free services that try to identify additional websites that may be associated
with your target website. The backbone of these services relies on the indexing of programming data of websites.
Nerdy Data may be the purest way of searching for this data. If you were to look at the source code of one of
my previous websites (no longer online), you would have seen at the bottom that I used a service called Google
Analytics. This service identifies the number of visitors to a website and the general area where they are located.
The following is the actual code that was present.
<script type="text/javascript">
try {var pageTracker = _gat._getTracker("UA-8231004-3");
pageTracker._trackPageview();
} catch(err) {}</script>
The important data here is the "UA-8231004-3". That was my unique number for Google Analytics. Any website
with which I used the service would have needed to have that number within the source code of the page. If
you searched that number on NerdyData a few years prior, you would have received interesting results.
NerdyData previously identified three websites that were using that number, including computercrimeinfo.com
and two additional sites that I maintained for a law firm. You can often find valuable information within the
source code of your target's website.
Many web designers and programmers steal code from other websites. In the past, this would be very difficult
to identify without already knowing the suspect website. With NerdyData, you can perform a search of the code
of concern and identify websites that possess the data within their own source code. In 2013, I located a custom
search website at the YGN Ethical Hacker Group that inspired me to create my own similar search service. I
was curious if there were any other search websites that possessed this basic code that might give me more ideas.
I looked at the source code of the website and located a small piece of code that appeared fairly unique to that
service. I conducted a search on Nerdy Data for the following code.
<li>http://yehg.net/q?[keyword]&c=[category] (q?yehg.net&c=Recon)</li>
This code was within the JavaScript programming of the search website. The search results identified 13 websites
that also possessed the same code. Two of these results were hosted on the creator's website, and offered no
additional information. Three of the results linked to pages that were no longer available. Three of the results
linked to pages that were only discussing the code within the target website and how to improve the functionality.
However, four of the results identified similar search services that were also using the programming code
searched. This revealed new search services that were related to the website in which I was interested. NerdyData
now restricts queries to 35 characters, but they will allow you to enter multiple strings by automatically
connecting them with AND statements, so we just break longer code samples into smaller snippets.
This same technique could be used to identify websites that are stealing proprietary code; locate pages that were
created to attempt to fool a victim into using a cloned site; or validate the popularity of a specific programming
function being used on hacking websites globally.

Search Engines 209

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

IntelTechniques Search Engines Tool
At this point, you may be overwhelmed with the abundance of search options. I can relate to that, and I do not
take advantage of every option during every investigation. During my initial search of a target, I like to rely on
the basics. I first search Google, Bing, Yandex, and the smaller search engines. In order to assist with this initial
search, I created a custom tool that will allow you to quickly get to the basics. Figure 17.10 displays the current
state of this tool available in your downloads or at https://inteltechniques.com/tools. The search options
will allow you to individually search directly through Google, Bing, Yahoo, Searx, Yandex, and many others.
Across all options, each search that you conduct will open within a new tab within your browser. The search all
takes place on your computer within your browser, directly to the sources.
The "Submit All" option will allow you to provide any search term that will be searched across all of the services
listed. Each service will populate the results within a new tab in your internet browser. Regardless of the browser
that you use, you must allow pop-ups in order for the tool to work. You can also use any of the search operators
discussed previously within this tool, including quotation marks. I present a similar search tool at the end of
most chapters which summarizes and simplifies the query processes for the techniques explained. I encourage
you to become familiar with each of these. Once proficient, you can query target data across all options within
a few minutes. This saves me several hours every week.

Figure 17.10: The IntelTechniques Search Engines Tool.
Artificial Intelligence (A.I.) Engines
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is all the rage today. People are flocking to ChatGPT and other providers to chat with
machines and receive answers to practically any questions. Contrary to many new online OSINT courses, I
do NOT recommend the use of A.I. services within OSINT investigations. This will upset some readers,
but I offer the following reasons.

210 Chapter 17

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•
•

Most online A.I. tools collect and use any data you enter to further train their systems. The specific
details of your target might end up in someone else's chat box.
The information is more often incorrect than accurate. In a moment, I provide an example which
presented incorrect facts about me. We should not base our investigations on summarized content.

If you still want to proceed with A.I. as a part of your OSINT investigation process, offline Large Language
Models (LLMs) can be a benefit to you. LLMs are the backbone behind AI services. They are machine learning
models which can understand and generate human language text. They work by analyzing massive data sets of
language. Fortunately, we can download these models and use them completely offline without sharing any data
back to the companies which created them. There are many clients which allow access to this data, but most are
complicated to install and configure. My preference is an open-source program called Jan (https://www.jan.ai).
After installation, you will be prompted to browse the available models. For the following demonstration, I
downloaded the 4 GB Mistral Instruct7B Q4 model. Once complete, I could select it under the Model tab.
I can now securely ask anything desired without jeopardizing my privacy. In one example, I asked about myself
and where I live. The completely offline model summarized me and provided the city I live in as Omaha.
However, I do not live in Omaha, I did not write one of the books listed, and my firm name was not correct. I
hope you can see why I would never rely on this type of information. I believe these models can be used for
research, learning, or entertainment, but never for investigations.
A far more appropriate use of these LLMs is for organizing data and creating sample code. They are great at
creating sorted lists or building scripts to benefit our workflow. For example, a Windows user could use Jan
with the Codestral 22B Q4 model to create a script which installs a full set of our preferred OSINT applications
(Figure 17.11).

Figure 17.11: A Jan generated script.

Search Engines 211

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
SOCIAL NETWORKS: FACEBOOK

I hesitate writing anything within this chapter. It seems that most valuable Facebook search techniques
disappeared in 2019. There are still many methods we can apply, but the future outlook for targeted queries is
dim. I worry this chapter will become outdated before anything else, but there are some stable searches which
should have longevity. Before we dive in, let's take a look at the Facebook search issues timeline.
June 6th, 2019: This was the big date which began the decline of the Facebook graph. Previous profile queries
all failed, and everything seemed doomed. Our ability to view "hidden" content via URL modifications was gone
and we all scrambled for new techniques.
June 17th, 2019: Various researchers developed online search tools and browser extensions which brought back
most of the Facebook Graph functionality. Hundreds of OSINT researchers flocked to these and we restored
our missing techniques.
August 1st, 2019: On this date, all browser-based extensions which leveraged the Facebook Graph stopped
working. Facebook implemented new encryption which terminated all functionality.
August 2nd, 2019: The Facebook username to user ID conversion tool on my website stopped working. It
appeared that my web server was being blocked by Facebook. I switched the user ID conversion tool to a new
web server, and all appeared to be working again.
August 3rd, 2019, 12:38 pm ET: Facebook began blocking my new web server.
September 8th, 2019: On this date, we saw methods such as using the Facebook Messenger application to search
telephone numbers disappear, as well as most email search options. This appeared deliberate, and more evidence
of Facebook's desire to lock down the platform.
2020: Facebook drastically changed their layout, removed the wildcard (*) search operator, blocked some of the
"Base64" methods (explained in a moment), and continued to aggressively monitor the OSINT community's
response to their actions.
2022: Many search methods have disappeared, reappeared, and disappeared again. You have been warned that
some of the techniques here may no longer work by the time you read this. However, we still have many options!
Fortunately, many people still share intimate details of their lives within social networks such as Facebook.
Information that was once held privately within a small group of friends or family is now broadcasted to the
world via public profiles. This chapter should identify new techniques which can be applied to any Facebook
target. It will explain numerous ways to obtain user information, which is public data, even if not visible within
their official profile.
Official Facebook Options
Facebook's redesign in 2020 presented many new search options which can benefit online investigators. Once
logged in, a simple search field will be present at the top of any Facebook page. This is a generic starting point.
I encourage you to think of Facebook's current search landscape in two parts. The KEYWORD search is any
generic term, name, location, or entity of interest. The FILTER search is the options which eliminates unwanted
results. Let's start with a demonstration where we are looking for a profile of a person.

212 Chapter 18

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Typing in a target's real name should lead to results, many of which are unrelated to your investigation. Unlike
other social networks, Facebook users typically use their real name when creating a profile. This profile is usually
linked to an employer, graduating high school class, college alumni, or general interests. With billions of active
users, it will be likely that you will locate several user profiles under the same name as your target. There are a
few things that you can do to find the right person.
If your target's name is Tom Johnson, you have your work cut out for you. This does not mean that you will
never find his Facebook page, but you will need to take additional steps to get to your target. When searching
the name, several possibilities may appear in the results. This is obviously not the complete list of Tom Johnsons
that are present on Facebook. At the bottom of this list is an option to "See All" the profiles with your target
name. This is also not the complete list. Scrolling down should automatically populate more profiles. You could
look through these and hope to identify your target based on the photo, location, or additional information
displayed in this view. Instead, consider adding filters within the left menu.
Figure 18.01 displays my keyword search for "Tom Johnson" who lives in Chicago, Illinois, attended Vashon
High School, and currently works at Foot Locker. This located only one result, as this was a very targeted query.
The filters helped me get from thousands of targets to only one. However, this is not as easy as it sounds. There
are multiple Vashon high schools and dozens of Foot Locker Facebook pages. In a moment, we will force
Facebook to focus on specific entities.

Figure 18.01: A Facebook keyword search with filters applied.
Once a user's profile is located, the default view is the "Posts" tab. This will include basic information such as
gender, location, family members, friends, relationship status, interests, education, and work background. This
page will also commonly have a photo of the user and any recent posts on their page. Clicking through this data
may uncover valuable evidence, but you may be missing other data. I will explain numerous methods throughout
this chapter which should help identify all available content relevant to your investigation.
First, consider using the traditional filter options available on most Facebook pages. Figure 18.02 displays the
main filter bar on the top of every Facebook profile page. This will seek Photos, Videos, Places, Groups, and
other options associated with the profile. You may be able to click through the various sections in order to
reveal all publicly available content. There is also an option to search within the current profile by clicking on
the three horizontal dots above the target's timeline. A query such as "birthday" may reveal posts wishing a them
a happy birthday and thus shed light on the target's date of birth. My preference is to query via direct URL so
that I know I did not miss anything. Assume that your target is Mark Zuckerberg. His profile is available at the
following URL.
https://www.facebook.com/zuck

Social Networks: Facebook 213

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

This indicates his Facebook username is "zuck". We can apply this to the following URLs, each which connect
directly to the associated public information page. These direct URLs will be beneficial to our Facebook tool
presented soon. Since "zuck" does not share much, I replaced him with a random username of "mike" (not me).
Timeline: https://www.facebook.com/mike
About: https://www.facebook.com/mike/about
Employment: https://www.facebook.com/mike/about?section=work
Education: https://www.facebook.com/mike/about?section=education
Locations: https://www.facebook.com/mike/about?section=living
Contact Info: https://www.facebook.com/mike/about?section=contact-info
Basic Info: https://www.facebook.com/mike/about?section=basic-info
Relationships: https://www.facebook.com/mike/about?section=relationship
Family Members: https://www.facebook.com/mike/about?section=family
Bio: https://www.facebook.com/mike/about?section=bio
Life Events: https://www.facebook.com/mike/about?section=year-overviews
Friends: https://www.facebook.com/mike/friends
Following: https://www.facebook.com/mike/following
Profile Photos: https://www.facebook.com/mike/photos
Photo Albums: https://www.facebook.com/mike/photos_albums
Videos: https://www.facebook.com/mike/videos
Reels: https://www.facebook.com/mike/reels
Check-Ins: https://www.facebook.com/mike/places_visited
Visits: https://www.facebook.com/mike/map
Recent Check-Ins: https://www.facebook.com/mike/places_recent
Sports: https://www.facebook.com/mike/sports
Music: https://www.facebook.com/mike/music
Movies: https://www.facebook.com/mike/movies
TV Shows: https://www.facebook.com/mike/tv
Books: https://www.facebook.com/mike/books
Apps & Games: https://www.facebook.com/mike/games
Likes: https://www.facebook.com/mike/likes
Events: https://www.facebook.com/mike/events
Facts: https://www.facebook.com/mike/did_you_know
Reviews: https://www.facebook.com/mike/reviews
Reviews Given: https://www.facebook.com/mike/reviews_given
Reviews Written: https://www.facebook.com/mike/reviews_written
Places Reviews: https://www.facebook.com/mike/place_reviews_written
The Facebook search tool presented in a moment will allow you to execute all of these URL queries easily in
order to minimize the effort to explore a profile. Let's conduct another example of searching through Facebook's
official channels. Assume you want to see photos posted by Mark Zuckerberg while he was in San Francisco in
2015. First, we need to obtain access to Facebook's filters, which are not visible when looking at a target's profile.
We can access the option to search within the current profile by clicking on the three horizontal dots above the
target page's timeline. I enter "San" as my search term which will then cause the desired filters menu to appear
on the left side of the page (Figure 18.03).
This method was sloppy since I am forcing Facebook to include the keyword of "San" within my search. It is
also searching all posts on the profile, not specifically photos. At the time of this writing, there is no way to
search Facebook's site by filters only. You must include a search term. In a moment, our tool will bypass this
restriction with a new method. Photos can also be searched by generic location. Figure 18.04 demonstrates the
"Photos" option after searching "Chicago". The filter on the left can filter results based on author, type, location,
and date.

214 Chapter 18

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Let's conduct another keyword search within the official site. Assume you wanted to find any posts including
the term "OSINT". After conducting the basic search, you should click "Posts". This expands the search and
opens the Posts filter options. From there, you can filter by year or location. You could also click through the
other categories such as Videos or Groups. All basic Facebook filters can be applied using direct URLs.
Considering an interest in the term "OSINT", the following addresses replicate each of the filters of a standard
Facebook search.
All: https://www.facebook.com/search/top/?q=osint
Posts: https://www.facebook.com/search/posts/?q=osint
People: https://www.facebook.com/search/people/?q=osint
Photos: https://www.facebook.com/search/photos/?q=osint
Videos: https://www.facebook.com/search/videos/?q=osint
Marketplace: https://www.facebook.com/marketplace/category/search/?query=osint
Pages: https://www.facebook.com/search/pages/?q=osint
Places: https://www.facebook.com/search/places/?q=osint
Groups: https://www.facebook.com/search/groups/?q=osint
Events: https://www.facebook.com/search/events/?q=osint
Links: https://www.facebook.com/search/links/?q=osint
Watch:

Figure 18.04: Photo results from Facebook filter options.

Social Networks: Facebook 215

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

This presents the end of basic Facebook search techniques through the official site. Everything presented until
now should apply for a while, and these URL structures should not change soon. Analyzing all of the evidence
identified through these URLs should present substantial information. Many of these pages, such as a person's
timeline, will load continuously. Pressing the space bar on your keyboard should load everything until the end.
I have found taping down the space bar helpful for long pages. Some choose to use auto-scrolling browser
extensions, but I prefer to avoid these as any detected scripts or automation increases the chances of Facebook
suspending our user account. From here, we must dig deeper into profile data and apply some fairly technical
methods in order to get to the next level.
Profile Details
At this point, you should be able to locate a target's profile by name with filters; analyze the publicly available
content; and search by topic. That is just the tip of the iceberg. Facebook collects a lot of additional information
from everyone's activity on the social network. Every time someone "Likes" something or is tagged in a photo,
Facebook stores that information. Extracting these details can be difficult.
In order to conduct the following detailed searches, you must know the user number of your target. This number
is a unique identifier that will allow us to search otherwise hidden information from Facebook. Prior to mid2015, the easiest way to identify the user number of any Facebook user was through the Graph API. While you
were on a user's main profile, you could replace "www" in the address with "graph" and receive the profile ID
number of that user. This no longer works because Facebook removed the ability to search their graph API by
username. However, we can still obtain this powerful number through a manual search option.
This technique involves viewing the source code of any user's Facebook profile. The process for this will vary
by browser. In Firefox and Chrome, simply right-click on a Facebook profile page (not an image) and select
"View Page Source". Be sure not to hover on any hyperlinks during the right-click. A new tab should open with
the text-only view of the source code of that individual profile. Within the browser, conduct a search on this
page for "userID". This will identify a portion of the code within this page that contains that specific term. As
an example, the following is the source code visible in Zuck's profile.
"userID":"4"
Sometimes Firefox will search through the source code and highlight data, but the results don't match
the terms searched. I do not know why this happens. Also note that your own Facebook ID number will likely
return with this keyword search along with that of your target, so knowing the ID number for your own account
will allow you to ignore those entries. When necessary, I copy all of the source code and paste it into a text
editor, then search through it. In this example, the user ID of this profile is 4. We will use this number for
numerous searches within the next instruction. Some users prefer to look at the URLs of a target's photos in
order to identify the user ID, but I believe this is bad practice. If a user has no photos, this will not work. Also,
Facebook's photo displays often hide this information from plain sight. I prefer to rely on the source code view
or my Facebook tools for this identification. This number will allow us to obtain many more details about the
account. Until July of 2019, there were dozens of online search tools which would identify the user ID number
(4) when supplied a username (zuck). Almost all of these stopped functioning, including my own, when
Facebook began aggressively blocking these search tools.
While you may find an online option which still functions, we should not rely on these. If you are exhausted
from searching within each profile's source code in order to locate the user ID, I reluctantly offer the following
site which currently attempts to automatically replicate this process.
https://findidfb.com/

216 Chapter 18

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Facebook Base64 Encoding
Prior to June of 2019, a simple URL could be used for all of our Facebook queries, but then Meta began requiring
Base64 encoding for some queries. In essence, they added artificial complexity to some URL structures, likely
in an effort to block content scraping and third-party services. Base64 structured queries are primarily required
when using the target's Facebook ID number as part of our search. Let's break this down by looking at the
following URL structure for queries.
https://www.facebook.com/search/posts/?q=posts&epa=FILTERS&filters=
https://facebook.com/
search/
photos/
?q=photos
&epa=FILTERS&filters=

The Facebook domain
Instructs Facebook to conduct a search
Specifies the type of information desired
Searches any photos (videos and posts works here too)
Finishes the URL with a filter demand

Next, we must formulate our target data and convert it to a specific type of encoding called Base64. This is likely
used because it is extremely common and can be generated by any browser. Previously, I presented the following
data.
{"rp_author":"{\"name\":\"author\",\"args\":\"[USERID]\"}"}
This tells Facebook that we are searching for information from a specific profile (author), and the [USERID]
should contain your target's user ID number as determined earlier. If we were targeting "zuck", and knew his
user number was "4", we would have the following data.
{"rp_author":"{\"name\":\"author\",\"args\":\"4\"}"}
Notice the position of "4" as the user number. Now, we must convert this data into Base64. I prefer the website
https://codebeautify.org/base64-encode and we can check our work at the decoding version at
https://codebeautify.org/base64-decode. When I copy and paste the previous data into this website, I receive
the following.
eyJycF
The fin
receive
desired
Base64
origina
this in

bsite, I
lays the
ded in
k to the
fy all of

k 217

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Figure 18.06: Decoding text to Base64 on https://codebeautify.org/base64-decode.
Let's take a look at the entire URL as follows. Below it is a breakdown.
https://www.facebook.com/search/posts/?q=posts&epa=FILTERS&filters=eyJycF9hdXRob3IiOiJ7XCJuY
W1lXCI6XCJhdXRob3JcIixcImFyZ3NcIjpcIjRcIn0ifQ
https://facebook.com/
search/
posts/
?q=posts
&epa=FILTERS&filters=
eyJycF9hdXRob3IiOiJ7X…

The Facebook domain
Instructs Facebook to conduct a search
Specifies the type of information desired
Searches any posts
Finishes the URL with a filter demand
{"rp_author":"{\"name\":\"author\",\"args\":\"4\"}"}

Figure 18.07 displays the results of this URL. Facebook has provided images posted by our target, some of
which do not appear on his profile. Clicking "See All" opens even more images.

Figure 18.07: Post results from a Base64 search.
The results are public posts, but some may not be from his profile. In one investigation, I had a suspect with
absolutely no posts within his timeline. However, this method identified hundreds of posts he made on other
people's profiles. These included comments within posts and public messages to others. We can of course
recreate these results by manually using the Facebook filters menu, but understanding the URL structuring
allows us to add URL based queries to our OSINT tools. Remember, Facebook is constantly making changes
and most recently queries for photos and videos have become unpredictable.
Let's make this simpler. In a moment, I will present the most common URL queries which I have found valuable
to my investigations. Then, I will present the portion of my custom Facebook tools which automates this entire
process. First, below is a summary of each search by section.

218 Chapter 18

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Posts by User/Year:
Photos by User/Year:
Videos by User/Year:
Posts by Location/Year:
Photos by Location/Year:
Videos by Location/Year:
Posts by Keyword/Year:
Photos by Keyword/Year:
Videos by Keyword/Year:
Events by Location:
Profiles by Employer:
Profiles by Location:
Profiles by School:
Posts by Date:
Photos by Date:
Videos by Date:

Posts by a specific user on any page (filtered by year)
Photos by a specific user on any page (filtered by year)
Videos by a specific user on any page (filtered by year)
Posts submitted from a specific location (filtered by year)
Photos submitted from a specific location (filtered by year)
Videos submitted from a specific location (filtered by year)
Posts matching a search term (filtered by year)
Photos matching a search term (filtered by year)
Videos matching a search term (filtered by year)
Current and upcoming events by location (city or entity)
Profiles associated with employees of a specific business
Profiles associated with residents of a specific city
Profiles associated with students of a specific school
Posts by keyword (filtered by date range)
Photos by keyword (filtered by date range)
Videos by keyword (filtered by date range)

If your target was the Facebook username "zuck" with user number "4", the first three URLs would be as
follows. Notice that the Base64 encoding is identical on each and that I bolded the unique portions.
Posts by User:
https://www.facebook.com/search/posts/?q=posts&epa=FILTERS&filters=eyJycF9hdXRob3IiOiJ7XCJu
YW1lXCI6XCJhdXRob3JcIixcImFyZ3NcIjpcIjRcIn0ifQ
Photos by User:
https://www.facebook.com/search/photos/?q=photos&epa=FILTERS&filters=eyJycF9hdXRob3IiOiJ7XC
JuYW1lXCI6XCJhdXRob3JcIixcImFyZ3NcIjpcIjRcIn0ifQ
Videos by User:
https://www.facebook.com/search/videos/?q=videos&epa=FILTERS&filters=eyJycF9hdXRob3IiOiJ7XCJ
uYW1lXCI6XCJhdXRob3JcIixcImFyZ3NcIjpcIjRcIn0ifQ
If your target was the city of Chicago, user number "108659242498155", the desired URLs would be as follows
if no year was chosen. Selecting a specific year only changes the Base64 encoding.
Posts by Location:
https://www.facebook.com/search/posts/?q=posts&epa=FILTERS&filters=eyJycF9sb2NhdGlvbiI6IntcIm
5hbWVcIjpcImxvY2F0aW9uXCIsXCJhcmdzXCI6XCIxMDg2NTkyNDI0OTgxNTVcIn0ifQ
Photos by Location:
https://www.facebook.com/search/photos/?q=photos&epa=FILTERS&filters=eyJycF9hdXRob3IiOiJ7XC
JuYW1lXCI6XCJsb2NhdGlvblwiLFwiYXJnc1wiOlwiMTA4NjU5MjQyNDk4MTU1XCJ9In0
Videos by Location:
https://www.facebook.com/search/videos/?q=videos&epa=FILTERS&filters=eyJycF9hdXRob3IiOiJ7XCJ
uYW1lXCI6XCJsb2NhdGlvblwiLFwiYXJnc1wiOlwiMTA4NjU5MjQyNDk4MTU1XCJ9In0
We can now drill down within our queries. The following URLs would identify any time our target (zuck - user
number 4) mentions "OSINT" within a post, photo, and video. Notice how the bolded areas have changed from
the previous queries.

Social Networks: Facebook 219

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Posts by Keyword:
https://www.facebook.com/search/posts/?q=OSINT&epa=FILTERS&filters=eyJycF9hdXRob3IiOiJ7XC
JuYW1lXCI6XCJhdXRob3JcIixcImFyZ3NcIjpcIjRcIn0ifQ%3D%3D
Photos by Keyword:
https://www.facebook.com/search/photos/?q=OSINT&epa=FILTERS&filters=eyJycF9hdXRob3IiOiJ7X
CJuYW1lXCI6XCJhdXRob3JcIixcImFyZ3NcIjpcIjRcIn0ifQ%3D%3D
Videos by Keyword:
https://www.facebook.com/search/videos/?q=OSINT&epa=FILTERS&filters=eyJycF9hdXRob3IiOiJ7X
CJuYW1lXCI6XCJhdXRob3JcIixcImFyZ3NcIjpcIjRcIn0ifQ%3D%3D
We can now use additional filters to find events and profiles, as follows.
Events (Protest) by Location (City of Chicago-108659242498155):
https://www.facebook.com/search/events/?q=protest&epa=FILTERS&filters=eyJycF9ldmVudHNfbG9jY
XRpb24iOiJ7XCJuYW1lXCI6XCJmaWx0ZXJfZXZlbnRzX2xvY2F0aW9uXCIsXCJhcmdzXCI6XCIxMDg2
NTkyNDI0OTgxNTVcIn0ifQ%3D%3D
Profiles (Tom) by Employer (Harvard-105930651606):
https://www.facebook.com/search/people/?q=tom&epa=FILTERS&filters=eyJlbXBsb3llciI6IntcIm5hbW
VcIjpcInVzZXJzX2VtcGxveWVyXCIsXCJhcmdzXCI6XCIxMDU5MzA2NTE2MDZcIn0ifQ
Profiles (Tom) by Location (City of Chicago-108659242498155):
https://www.facebook.com/search/people/?q=tom&epa=FILTERS&filters=eyJjaXR5Ijoie1wibmFtZVwiO
lwidXNlcnNfbG9jYXRpb25cIixcImFyZ3NcIjpcIjEwODY1OTI0MjQ5ODE1NVwifSJ9
Profiles (Tom) by School (Harvard-105930651606):
https://www.facebook.com/search/people/?q=tom&epa=FILTERS&filters=eyJzY2hvb2wiOiJ7XCJuYW1l
XCI6XCJ1c2Vyc19zY2hvb2xcIixcImFyZ3NcIjpcIjEwNTkzMDY1MTYwNlwifSJ9
In 2022, we saw a change to the way Facebook handles searching by date. I have found searching by a single
date to be unreliable, but searching within a range of dates, even if the beginning and end are the same date,
seem to function better. Because of the two dates, the URL created by the custom tools will be longer (twice
the data). At the time of this writing, video queries were blocked, but searching for "top" entries was functioning
and appeared to be displaying mostly videos. There is no limit to the date range, but these focus on one day.
Posts (OSINT) by Date (September 5, 2022-September 5, 2022):
https://www.facebook.com/search/posts/?q=osint&filters=eyJycF9jcmVhdGlvbl90aW1lIjoie1wibmFtZVw
iOlwiY3JlYXRpb25fdGltZVwiLFwiYXJnc1wiOlwie1xcXCJzdGFydF95ZWFyXFxcIjpcXFwiMjAyMlxcXCIs
XFxcInN0YXJ0X21vbnRoXFxcIjpcXFwiMjAyMi05XFxcIixcXFwiZW5kX3llYXJcXFwiOlxcXCIyMDIyXFx
cIixcXFwiZW5kX21vbnRoXFxcIjpcXFwiMjAyMi05XFxcIixcXFwic3RhcnRfZGF5XFxcIjpcXFwiMjAyMi05
LTVcXFwiLFxcXCJlbmRfZGF5XFxcIjpcXFwiMjAyMi05LTVcXFwifVwifSIsInJwX2F1dGhvciI6IntcIm5hb
WVcIjpcIm1lcmdlZF9wdWJsaWNfcG9zdHNcIixcImFyZ3NcIjpcIlwifSJ9
Photos (OSINT) by Date (September 5, 2022-September 5, 2022):
https://www.facebook.com/search/photos/?q=osint&filters=eyJycF9jcmVhdGlvbl90aW1lIjoie1wibmFtZV
wiOlwiY3JlYXRpb25fdGltZVwiLFwiYXJnc1wiOlwie1xcXCJzdGFydF95ZWFyXFxcIjpcXFwiMjAyMlxcXC
IsXFxcInN0YXJ0X21vbnRoXFxcIjpcXFwiMjAyMi05XFxcIixcXFwiZW5kX3llYXJcXFwiOlxcXCIyMDIyX
FxcIixcXFwiZW5kX21vbnRoXFxcIjpcXFwiMjAyMi05XFxcIixcXFwic3RhcnRfZGF5XFxcIjpcXFwiMjAyMi
05LTVcXFwiLFxcXCJlbmRfZGF5XFxcIjpcXFwiMjAyMi05LTVcXFwifVwifSIsInJwX2F1dGhvciI6IntcIm5
hbWVcIjpcIm1lcmdlZF9wdWJsaWNfcG9zdHNcIixcImFyZ3NcIjpcIlwifSJ9

220 Chapter 18

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Videos (OSINT) by Date (September 5, 2022-September 5, 2022):
https://www.facebook.com/search/top/?q=osint&filters=eyJycF9jcmVhdGlvbl90aW1lIjoie1wibmFtZVwi
OlwiY3JlYXRpb25fdGltZVwiLFwiYXJnc1wiOlwie1xcXCJzdGFydF95ZWFyXFxcIjpcXFwiMjAyMlxcXCIs
XFxcInN0YXJ0X21vbnRoXFxcIjpcXFwiMjAyMi05XFxcIixcXFwiZW5kX3llYXJcXFwiOlxcXCIyMDIyXFx
cIixcXFwiZW5kX21vbnRoXFxcIjpcXFwiMjAyMi05XFxcIixcXFwic3RhcnRfZGF5XFxcIjpcXFwiMjAyMi05
LTVcXFwiLFxcXCJlbmRfZGF5XFxcIjpcXFwiMjAyMi05LTVcXFwifVwifSIsInJwX2F1dGhvciI6IntcIm5hb
WVcIjpcIm1lcmdlZF9wdWJsaWNfcG9zdHNcIixcImFyZ3NcIjpcIlwifSJ9
All of these queries will be easily created using our custom Facebook search tool in a moment,
including filtration by dates for full profile analysis. As a reminder, I obtained the user ID number for the
profile of "zuck" by searching the source code of the profile for "userID" or "pageID". However, location
profiles do not possess this data. Fortunately, the user ID for cities is within the URL. When I searched for
"City of Chicago" on Facebook, I clicked "Places" and selected the City of Chicago profile which possessed the
following URL.
https://www.facebook.com/places/Things-to-do-in-Chicago-Illinois/108659242498155/
The last group of numbers (108659242498155) is the user ID number.
Business pages, such as those associated with Harvard, Pepsi, and others, do not present this data within the
URL. Instead, we must search within the source code for "pageID", "page_ID", or "delegate_page_id"
(including quotes). When searching this within the source code for the Harvard page, I observed the following.
"pageID":"105930651606"
Pepsi's page (pepsiUS) included the following.
"pageID":"56381779049"
Event profile numbers can be found by searching "eventID".
Group profile numbers can be found by searching "groupID".
While I always prefer manual extraction from the source code of my target Facebook profile, the Facebook ID
tools previously presented should also identify profile numbers of business, event, and group pages.
It is extremely important to note that I did not discover this Base64 conversion technique. The online researcher
NEMEC (https://x.com/djnemec) was the first to post about this method. Practically every online search tool
generating these types of URLs, including mine, is due to the work of this person. I send many "thanks" on
behalf of the entire OSINT community for this work.
2024 Photos Update
While updating this chapter, most Base64 queries involving photos failed. We considered removing those
sections but decided against it. Since some random profiles still present photos with this technique, and there is
a chance it could return for all profiles, the instructions are still present. Know that if you get no results on those
queries, you are not alone.
IntelTechniques Facebook Tool
If you have not already skipped to the next chapter after all of this confusion, it is now time to simplify the
process. Finally, let's use the custom Facebook search tool to replicate all of this work. This interactive document

Social Networks: Facebook 221

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

is included within the "Tools" you previously downloaded or at https://inteltechniques.com/tools. Figures
18.09 and 18.10 display the current version of the tool. The following pages explain each section with examples.
The first input box in the "Facebook Profile Data" section allows you to enter a Facebook username, such as
zuck, and the tool will populate that data within all of the search options in that section. This makes it easy to
begin your queries. You can then use the submit buttons to search each entry, such as Timeline or Photos. Note
there is no "Submit All" option here. This is due to Facebook's scrutiny into accounts which automate any
queries. Submitting too many requests simultaneously will result in a suspended account.
The next section titled "Facebook Search Data" allows you to replicate the instruction on keyword searches
throughout all twelve sections of Facebook, such as Posts, Photos, and Pages. This presents immediate results
without relying on Facebook to present your desired data from a generic keyword search.
The "Base64 Conversion Queries" section presents the true power behind this tool. All of the technical search
techniques presented within the previous pages are replicated here without the need to do any of the work.
Instead of summarizing this section, let's run through a demonstration of each option.
Posts/Photos/Videos by User
I entered the user ID number of "4" (for the user zuck) in the first portion, as seen in Figure 18.11 (top). This
allows me to query posts, photos, and videos posted by that user to any public pages. The drop-down menu
allows me to filter by year, if desired, which is helpful if the target posted a lot of content. This option is available
for all three queries. This often identifies content unavailable within the target's own profile.
Posts/Photos/Videos by Location
I entered the user number of "108659242498155" (Chic
This allows me to query posts, photos, and videos po
down menu allows me to specify a year, if desired. This
search techniques.

echniques Facebook Tool.

222 C

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

ttom).
dropitional

Figure 18.10: The IntelTechniques Facebook Tool.

Figure 18.11: The IntelTechniques Facebook Tool options with date filtering.
Posts/Photos/Videos by Keyword
I entered the user number 4 (zuck) and a search term of "OSINT" in Figure 18.12. I can now select a year and
filter only those posts, photos, or videos.

Figure 18.12: The IntelTechniques Facebook Tool year filters.
Events by Location
I entered the user number of "108659242498155" (Chicago) and added the keyword "protest". I was immediately
presented dozens of active and future events matching my criteria.
People by Employer, City, and School
I entered the user number of "105930651606" (Harvard) in the first and third boxes, as seen in Figure 18.13.
This allows me to query people's profiles by their employer or school affiliation. These search options require
at least one additional piece of information. In this example, I searched the name "Tom". Notice the difference

Social Networks: Facebook 223

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

in the results within Figure 18.14. The left result identifies people named Tom who WORK at Harvard, while
the right displays people named Tom who ATTENDED Harvard. This search option can quickly identify your
target when you only know a small amount of information, or if they are using a false last name.

Figure 18.13: The IntelTechniques Facebook Tool options for profile search.

Figure 18.14: Facebook results from an IntelTechniques Tool query.
I suspect that these queries will change over time. I do not present the source code of these specific queries
within the book because they are quite complicated and lengthy. If this tool should be updated, I will make an
announcement at https://inteltechniques.com/osintbook11.
Manual vs. Tool Queries
If you are paying close attention, you can see that there are many similarities between conducting a search directly
within the official Facebook website and the options within my custom search tools. On the surface, these tools
may seem redundant and unnecessary. However, I assure you that there are some key advantages to the
Facebook tool. I present three quick examples where you can find content through the tool which is not available
on the site.
Videos by Date: The official Facebook site allows filtration of videos by date, but you can only choose from
"Today", "This Week", or "This Month". The tool allows detailed filters by year or exact date. The example
below is from 2015.

Posts by Location: I can query the official LAX page at facebook.com/LAInternationalAirport, but I cannot
query for posts from other people at that location. However, the search tool allows me to focus on posts from
any location which can be filtered by year. The following example was presented after entering location ID
"74286767824" and choosing "2018".

224 Chapter 18

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Posts by Date: I can search for any term on Facebook, but I can only filter by year. With the tools, I can focus
on any individual date. In the following example, I searched for anyone mentioning my site on the day that it
was briefly shut down due to legal demands, I quickly found evidence.

I encourage you to experiment with both manual and automated search options. There is a small learning curve
when querying Facebook, but the results are often fascinating.
Facebook Phone Number Search
In previous editions, I have included various techniques to identify a Facebook profile associated with a target
telephone number. At one time, entering a cell number into a Facebook search showed you the name, email
address, and photo of the user. That luxury is gone, but we do currently have one method which may be helpful.
The following URL requests Facebook to locate an account for a password reset. Entering a telephone number
will confirm if an account is associated to it, and will sometimes display the profile image for the user.
https://mbasic.facebook.com/login/identify/?ctx=recover
However, clicking "Try Another Way" within this technique should present even more details. While testing this
method on an unknown target's number, I received the following.
Send code via email
n***@g******
n***@y******
This confirms that a Facebook account is associated with the number; there are two email addresses associated
with the account; both email addresses begin with "n"; and the email service providers begin with "g" and "y".
My guess is that this user has a similar email address with both Yahoo and Gmail.
It is important that this tactic is only used from a browser and connection where you are not already logged into
a Facebook. This tactic can result in your session and associated IP address being flagged as potentially malicious.
Multiple attempts on the same address or phone number may result in the target account holder being notified.
If use of breach data is within policy and scope of your investigation, there are some Facebook breach data sets
floating around the internet and these can be of value in querying phone numbers to locate account holders.
Locating, organizing, and querying breach data will be covered in a later section of this book.
Facebook ID Creation Date
Digital forensics enthusiast and private investigator Josh Huff at LearnAllTheThings.net has conducted a lot of
research into the assignment of user ID numbers to Facebook profiles. We know that these numbers are
assigned in chronological order, but the intelligence goes much further beyond that. His research could fill
several pages and, in some situations, he can identify the month when a specific user account was created. For
the sake of space and most useful details, he has provided the following to me for publication.

Social Networks: Facebook 225

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Facebook transitioned from 32-bit numbers, such as 554432, to 64-bit numbers that begin with 100000 between
April and December of 2009. Therefore, if your target's number is less than 100000000000000, the account was
likely created prior to April 2009. An account with a 15-digit ID number would have been created after
December 2009. We can break down the numbers by year. The following are rough estimates that should only
be used as a general guideline. Facebook appears to have begun issuing random numbers outside of these ranges
in 2018.
2006: Numbers less than 600400000
2007: 600400000 - 1000000000
2008: 1000000000 - 1140000000
2009: 1140000000- 100000628000000
2010: 100000629000000 - 100001610000000
2011: 100001611000000 - 100003302000000
2012: 100003303000000 - 100004977000000
2013: 100004978000000 - 100007376000000
2014: 100007377000000 - 100008760000000
2015: 100008761000000 - 100010925000000
2016: 100010926000000 - 100014946000000
2017: 100014947000000 - 100023810000000
2018: 100023811000000 Facebook Friends Extraction
I was recently presented a Facebook scenario without any obvious solution. Assume that you find the Facebook
profile of your target, and there is a large list of "Friends". You want to document this list, and a screenshot is
not good enough. You want to capture the hyperlinks to each account and have a data set that can be
manipulated or imported elsewhere. There are several outdated online tools that claim to "scrape" this data, but
none of them work. In 2016, Facebook changed their Terms of Service (TOS) which now blocks any type of
scraping of Friend data. Furthermore, the Facebook API no longer allows the display of this data either. There
is a solution, and it will involve minimal geek work. First, identify the page of your target. For this example, I
will use public profile at https://www.facebook.com/darya.pino/friends.
She has several friends, so I will hold down the space bar on my keyboard to load the entire page. I will now
highlight her entire friends list and use "Ctrl" + "C" (Windows) or "command" + "C" (Mac) (or right-click >
copy) to copy the data. I find it best to click directly above the left side of the first friend and hold until the
lower right area of the last friend. The friends list should highlight. Now, open Microsoft Excel. Click on the
"B" in column B to highlight the entire column. Paste the content with either "Ctrl" + "V" (Windows) or
"command" + "V" (Mac) (or right-click > paste). This will appear disorganized, but the data is there. The images
will be on top of the user data, which will not work for a final report. Use F5 to launch the "Go To" menu and
select "Special". Select "Objects" and click OK. This will select all of those images. Hit the delete key to remove
them. You will now see only the text data (with hyperlinks). Now click on the "A" in column A and paste the
friend content again with either "Ctrl" + "V" (Windows) or "command" + "V" (Mac) (or right-click > paste).
Right-click any cell in this column and choose "Clear Contents". This will remove any text, but keep the images.
Place your mouse in between columns A and B and resize column A to be a bit larger than one of the images.
Do the same with Column B to fit in all of the text. Use the "Find and Replace" feature to find every instance
of "Add Friend" and replace it with nothing. This will remove those unnecessary entries. In the "Home" menu,
choose "Format" and then "Auto Fit Row Height". This will eliminate unnecessary spacing. Select Column B
and Left Justify the text. If desired delete empty cells from the top of column B and select "Shift cells up" to
further align the two columns. Your final result will be a clean spreadsheet with all of the images, names, and
active links from your target's Facebook "friends" page. This is not the cleanest way of doing things, but it will
work.

226 Chapter 18

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

While working with my target's friends/followers lists on any platform, I take moment to do a quick search for
any of my target's known first names, surnames, and usernames/aliases. This provides an opportunity to both
identify contacts who are family members while also looking for other accounts belonging to my target. It is
very common for individuals to follow a newly created account with existing accounts when they first create
that profile as everyone wants the appearance of having friends and followers.
Email Search
As stated previously, we lost all standard email address search options within Facebook in 2019. However, there
is one remaining technique which allows submission of some email addresses and provides identification of an
associated profile if allowed in the user's settings. However, it is not simple or straightforward. It will take some
work to set up, but will then be available as needed. This is often referred to as the "Page Role" trick. The
premise is that you create a Facebook business page and then assign another profile to possess management
rights. When you enter the email address of the target, Facebook confirms the name and profile to make sure
you truly want to give away authorization to the person. We can then cancel the request without any notification
to the target. The following steps replicate this technique.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Open "Menu" and click "Page" in the upper-right corner, then create a new page.
Assign a random name to your profile and select "Create page".
Skip any additional requests for information.
Once you see the new profile, click the "See dashboard" button in the upper-right.
On the new menu, click "Page Access" in the left column.
In the "People with Facebook access" section, click "Add new".
Enter the target email address.

This should present any Facebook profiles associated with the address entered. Figure 18.15 displays a result. I
entered an email address in this field and was presented the only Facebook profile which was associated with
the account. I can now search this full name within Facebook, look for the image previously displayed, and scour
the target profile for valuable information. Facebook continuously makes both minor and major changes to their
search functions. Some of these instructions may not work one day and work fine the next. Your mileage will
vary as Facebook scrutinizes your covert profiles, VPN protected networks, and overall "vibe" as a fake user.
Hopefully, this chapter ha
r next target on Facebook
and ideas to circumvent th

Figure 18.15: An email search through Facebook under the Page Access menu.
Facebook investigations are always a moving target. It is important to understand that if a technique fails to
produce a positive result, this does not necessarily rule out that your target is on the Facebook platform. Always
take multiple approaches, be creative, and expect to do some of your own problem solving. Throughout all of
the services explained in this book, Facebook is the most likely to change often. Fortunately, any changes always
bring new investigation opportunities. When we lost Graph search in 2019, we gained Base64 methods. When
we lose the current strategies, something else will become available. As with all OSINT techniques, daily practice
and understanding of the resources is more vital than the occasional nugget of data which is displayed on our
screens.

Social Networks: Facebook 227

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER NINETEEN
SOCIAL NETWORKS: X (TWITTER)

Until this point, every reference to "X" or "Twitter" has been labeled as "X (Twitter)". This is because Twitter
was rebranded as X in 2024, but many people still refer to the service as Twitter and the posts as Tweets. For
the rest of this book, I will only present references to the company as "Twitter", but URLs will be x.com. I think
this will prevent some confusion and redundancies. The biggest change in this chapter is that you must log in to
a Twitter account in order to benefit from optimal OSINT data. While you can see some content without an
account, you will always be somewhat restricted. Posts will be hidden and often rearranged chronologically. Use
the previous account creation lessons to ensure you have at least one Twitter account ready at all times.
Twitter is a social network and microblogging service that limits most posts to 280 characters. Paid subscribers
are allowed more content. In 2024, Twitter reported that there were over 415 million Twitter users with over
335 active users monthly. Basically, users create a profile and post Tweets announcing their thoughts on a topic,
current location, plans for the evening, or maybe a link to something that they feel is important. A user can
"follow" other users and constantly see what others are posting. Likewise, a user's "followers" can see what that
user is up to on a constant basis. The premise is simply sharing small details of your life for all of your friends
to see, as well as the rest of the world. Most people utilize the service through a mobile app within a cellular
phone. Obtaining information from Twitter can be conducted through numerous procedures, all of which are
explained here. Similar to Facebook, we will start with official search options through Twitter's website. As a
final reminder, you can view profiles and execute some queries without being logged in to a Twitter account,
but most of these features and pages will only be accessible while logged in.
Twitter Search (x.com/explore)
This is the official site's search interface, but it is nothing different than the search field at the top of any Twitter
profile or search result. I only present this because navigating to x.com often offers a signup page, but no option
to search. We will use this standard search bar to conduct specific queries in a few moments.
Twitter Advanced Search (x.com/search-advanced)
This page will allow for the search of specific people, keywords, and locations. The problem here is that the
search of a topic is often limited to the previous seven to ten days. Individual profiles should display Tweets as
far back as you are willing to scroll. This can be a good place to search for recent data, but complete archives of
a topic will not be displayed. The following explains each section.
All of these words: The order of wording is ignored here, and only the inclusion of each of the words entered
is enforced.
This exact phrase: Every Twitter search takes advantage of quotes to identify exact word placement.
Optionally, you can conduct the search here to get precise results without quotes.
Any of these words: You can provide multiple unique terms here, and Twitter will supply results that include
any of them. This search alone is usually too generic.
None of these words: This box will filter out any posts that include the chosen word or words.
These Hashtags: This option will locate specific posts that mention a topic as defined by a Twitter hashtag.
This is a single word preceded by a pound sign (#) that identifies a topic of interest. This allows users to follow
certain topics without knowing usernames of the user submitting the messages.

228 Chapter 19

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Language: This filter removes results which are not written in the specified language.
From these accounts: This section allows you to search for Tweets from a specific user. This can also be
accomplished by typing the username into the address bar after the Twitter domain, such as x.com/JohnDoe92.
This will display the user's profile including recent Tweets.
To these accounts: This field allows you to enter a specific Twitter username. The results will only include
Tweets that were sent to the attention of the user. This can help identify associates of the target and information
intended for the target to read.
Mentioning these accounts: While these messages might not be in response to a specific user, the target was
mentioned. This is usually in the form of using "@". Anyone mentioning me within a Tweet may start it with
@inteltechniques.
Dates: The final option allows you to limit a search to a specific date range. We will do this manually in just a
moment.
Overall, I do not ever use the Twitter Advanced Search page. You can replicate all of these queries with manual
search operators within the search field available on every Twitter page. I will explain each as we go through the
chapter. Knowing the Twitter search operators instead of relying on the advanced search page has many benefits.
First, we can use these techniques to monitor live Twitter data, as explained later in this chapter. Next, manual
searches allow us to better document our findings. This is vital if your discoveries will be used in court.
Later in the chapter, we will combine all of our new techniques within our own custom tool options, which will
be much more powerful than these standard solutions. The results of any of these searches can provide
surprisingly personal information about a target, or generic content that includes too much data to be useful.
We must learn each technique within a specific order before we can combine them into powerful queries.
Twitter data can be used for many types of investigations. Law enforcement may use this data to verify or
disprove an alibi of a suspect. When a suspect states in an interview that he was in Chicago the entire weekend,
but his Twitter feed displays his Tweet about a restaurant in St. Louis, he has some explaining to do. Private
investigators may use this content as documentation of an affair or negative character. Occasionally, a citizen
will contact the authorities when evidence of illegal activity is found within a person's Tweets. The possibilities
are endless. First, let's find your target's Twitter profile.
Twitter Person Search
Locating your target's Twitter profile may not be easy. Unlike Facebook, many Twitter users do not use their
real name in their profiles. You need a place to search by real name. I recommend Twitter's official search page
before relying on third parties. After searching any real name or username within the standard Twitter search
field, click through the five menu options, which are each explained below.
Top: This displays popular tweets matching your query. If your target is popular, you may see something here.
I typically avoid this tab as it allows Twitter to determine what evidence I should see instead of selecting content
based on specific queries.
Latest: This presents a reverse-chronological list of data which matches your search. It always begins with the
most recent post and goes backward. This works well when searching a topic, but not when locating a target's
profile.
People: Scrolling through this list allows you to look through the photo icons and brief descriptions to identify
your target. Clicking on the username will open the user's Twitter profile with more information. This is the
best option for searching by real name or username.

Social Networks: X (Twitter) 229

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Media: This searches for any photos or videos matching your query. This has been helpful when attempting to
identify images or videos posted by unknown people who mentioned your target by name.
Lists: Some Twitter users create and share curated lists of accounts based on some connection, topical or
otherwise. For example, you will find several public lists of OSINT professionals. Lists sometimes provide
insight into a targets' interests, culture, and communities which they may be active in.
If searching by real name through the previous methods does not produce your target, your best option is to
focus on the potential username. I will discuss username searches at length in a later chapter (Usernames).
Overall, any associated usernames from other networks such as Instagram, Snapchat, and YouTube, should be
tried on Twitter in the format of x.com/username.
Search by Email Address
Technically, Twitter does not allow the search of a username by providing an email address. If you attempt this
type of search on Twitter, you will receive no results, even if a profile exists for a user with that email address.
To bypass this limitation, you can sometimes use a feature offered within the mobile app version of Twitter.
This technique will require a new Twitter account and the Twitter app present within a virtual Android device,
as previously explained. There is always some risk that the emulation may be detected by Twitter services, but
this tactic could also be replicated on a physical mobile device such as a burner phone.
Within Android, open the Contacts application and add the email address of your target within a new contact
and save the entry. Open the Twitter app, navigate to the left menu and select "Settings and privacy", click on
"Privacy and safety", then "Discoverability and contacts". You can then manage your data and allow Twitter to
sync your Android contacts to their service.
Enabling this feature will not display your contacts within the application. Instead, look at your notification bar
within Android. You should see a pending notification which states "Find your friends on Twitter". Clicking
this should present the "Suggested Followers". Twitter will encourage you to add these profiles, but do not
choose that option. If you do, your target will be sent a notification from your account. In 2022, I witnessed this
strategy stop working within newer accounts, but appeared to still function within aged accounts. I suspect we
will see this technique continue to fade away into 2025.
Search Operators
Similar to the way that search engines use operators as mentioned in previous chapters, Twitter has its own set
of search operators that will greatly improve your ability to effectively search Twitter. Two of the most powerful
options are the "to" and "from" operators. I use these daily in order to filter results. Consider the following
examples using our target Twitter username of x.com/IntelTechniques. We can obviously navigate directly to
the page, but it could be full of promoted Tweets, ReTweets, and whatever content the owner wants us to see.
Instead, the following search within any Twitter window will limit our results only to the outgoing Tweets from
the account. Clicking the "Latest" option in the Twitter menu will place these in reverse-chronological order.
from:IntelTechniques
This provides a better view into the thoughts of the author. Both the Twitter profile and this results page give
us insight to the messages the user is sending out, but what about the incoming content? With most traditional
Twitter investigations, we tend to focus on one side of the conversation. There is often a plethora of associated
messages being sent to the attention of the target that go unchecked. In order to see all of the posts being
publicly sent to the user, we would search the following.
to:IntelTechniques

230 Chapter 19

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

We now see all of those incoming messages that the user cannot control. While one can prohibit them from
being seen on the profile, users cannot block us from this search. When I have a missing person or homicide
victim, I would much rather see the incoming messages versus the outgoing. We can also combine these options
to create an extremely targeted query. At first glance, I did not see many incoming messages to IntelTechniques
from protonprivacy. However, the following Twitter search tells a different story. It isolates only these posts.
to:IntelTechniques from:protonprivacy
We can also filter by replies with the following search. This would only display the tweets from our target which
were replies to someone else.
from:IntelTechniques filter:replies
I do not find this very helpful. I prefer the opposite of this approach. The following search within Twitter would
display only the tweets by my target which do NOT include replies.
from:IntelTechniques -filter:replies
Media, Highlights, Lists, Topics, Links, and Followers
You may want to filter all results from a target Twitter profile and only see those which have some type of media
embedded. There is not a search operator to force this, but the following direct URL will display only these
posts.
https://x.com/IntelTechniques/media/
Highlights are essentially a collection of "pinned" posts curated by the account holder.
https://x.com/inteltechniques/highlights/
Twitter Lists appeared recently, and there are two types which we might have interest. A traditional List is created
by the target and may include people they know or like. The structure is as follows.
https://x.com/IntelTechniques/lists/
If your target is on someone else's List, which is something they cannot control, we can see that with the
following.
https://x.com/IntelTechniques/lists/memberships
Once you identify a Twitter List of interest, you can dig deeper into the members. As an example, I am included
on a List called Open Source Intelligence, which I identified from the previous URL. Clicking that List opened
a new page with the following URL.
https://x.com/i/lists/1588523704245489664
1588523704245489664 is the List number. The following two URLs display the members of the List (the
accounts included within the list) and the followers of the List (people who monitor the List for content).
https://x.com/i/lists/1588523704245489664/members
https://x.com/i/lists/1588523704245489664/followers

Social Networks: X (Twitter) 231

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Twitter Topics is a feature which can quickly identify the interest of a Twitter user. When users add topics for
their feeds, we cannot see their choices within their profiles. However, the following URL displays them all
within one place.
https://x.com/IntelTechniques/topics
Next, we can focus only on tweets from a user which include a link to additional media. This could be an image,
video, or website. The following presents only tweets with links from my own account.
from:IntelTechniques filter:links
We can also filter for popular posts. The following searches for any tweets from my own account which received
at least 150 likes.
from:IntelTechniques min_faves:150
The following searches for any tweets from my own account which received at least 100 replies.
from:IntelTechniques min_replies:100
Finally, we can easily display a user's Followers (the people monitoring their profile) and Following (the people
the target monitors) with the URLs below.
https://x.com/IntelTechniques/followers
https://x.com/IntelTechniques/following
Now, let's combine a few searches. The following query would identify any tweets sent to our target
(IntelTechniques), from zerotrafficking, during the month of October of 2022, which included a link, and were
replies from another post.
to:IntelTechniques from:zerotrafficking since:2022-10-01 until:2022-10-31 filter:links filter:replies
Replicating this search reveals only one result in the "Latest" tab, which may have been otherwise buried within
the thousands of posts. Hopefully you can see the value of targeted queries. Later in the chapter, I present
the custom offline Twitter search tools which automate most of these queries. However, it is vital to
understand why these work in order to explain your methods when required.
Search by Location
If you are investigating an incident that occurred at a specific location and you have no known people involved,
Twitter will allow you to search by GPS location alone. The Twitter Advanced Search allowed us to search by
zip code, but that can be too broad. The following specific search on any Twitter page will display Tweets known
to have been posted from within one kilometer of the GPS coordinates of 43.430242,-89.736459. Note that you
may need to click the "Latest" tab after the query.
geocode:43.430242,-89.736459,1km
There are no spaces in this search. This will be a list without any map view. The "1km" indicates a search radius
of one kilometer. This can be changed to 5, 10, or 25 reliably. Any other numbers tend to provide inaccurate
results. You can also change "km" to "mi" to switch to miles instead of kilometers. If you want to view this
search from the address bar of the browser, the following page would load the same results.
https://x.com/search?q=geocode:43.430242,-89.736459,1km&f=live

232 Chapter 19

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

You can add search parameters to either of these searches if the results are overwhelming. The following search
would only display Tweets posted within two miles of the listed GPS coordinates that also mention the term
"fight".
geocode:43.430242,-89.736459,2mi"fight"
It would be inappropriate to finish this section without a discussion about the lack of geo-enabled Tweets.
Several years prior, this search would have been highly productive, as an alarming number of Twitter users were
unknowingly sharing their locations with every post. Today, it is the opposite. The default option for Twitter is
NOT to share location. A user must enable this option in order to appear within these search results. In my
experience, catching a criminal from a location-enabled Tweet is extremely rare. However, we should be aware
of the possibility while understanding that lack of results does not rule out tweet activity for a queried location.
Mandatory and Optional Search Terms
You may have a scenario that requires a search of both mandatory and optional terms. Twitter does not provide
a published solution for this. However, it does support this type of search. Assume you are investigating threats
against your target named Michael Parker. You believe that people may be tweeting about him with reference
to violence. Searching his name alone produces too many results. Placing the name within quotes forces Twitter
to only give you results on those exact terms, which is your "mandatory" portion. Additional optional words
could be added with the term "OR" between each. This term must be uppercase, and will only require one of
the optional words be present within the search results. Consider the following query on Twitter.
"Michael Parker" kill OR stab OR fight OR beat OR punch OR death OR die
Posts Linking to Outside Content
Searching for keywords included in posted URLs is not only useful for general research but also can identify
connections between the target account and sites outside of Twitter. Later in this book we will discuss tactics
for researching breach data. Although Telegram has become the platform of choice for those posting links to
breach data, I will occasionally find something worthwhile posted to Twitter. For example, the following Twitter
query will filter for posts which include a link to mega.nz which is a popular file sharing platform.
url:mega.nz breach
Obviously this is a very broad search and similar to our search engine queries, we will likely add additional
keywords and filters to dial it in to a more precise set of results. We may also wish to broaden the query even
further to include sites other than mega.nz. The following query will look for posts with the provided keywords
but will filter out any posts which do not contain links.
comb breach filter:links
COMB is a well-known breach data set that is fairly prolific, and this makes it a relatively good keyword to use
when experimenting with queries. We will discuss COMB further when we reach the chapters covering breach
data.
Date Range Search
If you are searching vague terms, you may want to filter by date. This option is now available on the advanced
search page, but I believe it is important to understand how Twitter performs this task. Assume that you are
investigating a bomb threat that occurred several weeks, months, or years ago. A search on Twitter of the terms
"bomb threat" will likely apply only to recent posts. Instead, consider a date specific search. The following query

Social Networks: X (Twitter) 233

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

on any Twitter page would provide any posts that mention "bomb threat" between January 1, 2015 and January
5, 2015.
since:2015-01-01 until:2015-01-05 "bomb threat"
My favorite use of this search technique is to combine it with the "to" operator or a name search (or both). This
allows you to go further back in time than standard profile and Twitter feed searches typically allow. Consider
an example where Twitter user humanhacker is your target. You can visit his live Twitter page and navigate back
through several thousand Tweets. However, you will reach an end before obtaining all Tweets. This could be
due to Twitter restrictions or browser and computer limitations. He currently has 15,000 Tweets. Even if you
could make it through all of his Tweets, you are not seeing posts where he is mentioned or messages sent publicly
to him. I recommend splitting this search by year and including mentions and messages directed toward him.
The following search within Twitter displays all Tweets from the Twitter name humanhacker between January
1, 2012 and December 31, 2012.
from:humanhacker since:2012-01-01 until:2012-12-31
This may create a more digestible collection of Tweets that can be collected and archived appropriately. There
may be no other way of identifying these messages since you cannot likely scroll back that far. In my
investigations involving targets with several thousand posts, I conduct multiple searches within Twitter that span
several years. The following would collect yearly sets of Tweets posted by humanhacker since 2006.
from:humanhacker since:2006-01-01 until:2006-12-31
from:humanhacker since:2007-01-01 until:2007-12-31
from:humanhacker since:2008-01-01 until:2008-12-31
from:humanhacker since:2009-01-01 until:2009-12-31
from:humanhacker since:2010-01-01 until:2010-12-31
from:humanhacker since:2011-01-01 until:2011-12-31
from:humanhacker since:2012-01-01 until:2012-12-31
from:humanhacker since:2013-01-01 until:2013-12-31
from:humanhacker since:2014-01-01 until:2014-12-31
from:humanhacker since:2015-01-01 until:2015-12-31
from:humanhacker since:2016-01-01 until:2016-12-31
from:humanhacker since:2017-01-01 until:2017-12-31
from:humanhacker since:2018-01-01 until:2018-12-31
from:humanhacker since:2019-01-01 until:2019-12-31
from:humanhacker since:2020-01-01 until:2020-12-31
from:humanhacker since:2021-01-01 until:2021-12-31
from:humanhacker since:2022-01-01 until:2022-12-31
from:humanhacker since:2023-01-01 until:2023-12-31
from:humanhacker since:2024-01-01 until:2024-12-31
This same technique can be modified to display only incoming Tweets to humanhacker for these years. Replace
"from" with "to" to obtain these results. The 2018 posts would appear as follows.
to:humanhacker since:2018-01-01 until:2018-12-31
You can combine all of these options into a single result, but I only recommend this after you have attempted
the more precise options mentioned previously. While the next search should theoretically display all of his
outgoing Tweets, incoming Tweets, and mentions, it is not always complete. The following would include 2018.
"humanhacker" since:2018-01-01 until:2018-12-31

234 Chapter 19

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

There are many uses for a date range search. Any supported Twitter search should work combined with dates.
This might include a location search for a specific date related to an investigation. As a test of the possibilities,
consider that you want to identify an email address for this target. His live Twitter page will not reveal this, as
he no longer posts his email, likely to prevent spam. However, the following search is quite productive.
from:humanhacker email since:2006-01-01 until:2009-12-31
This isolates only his posts from the beginning of Twitter until the end of 2009. Only seven results are present,
including the Tweet as seen in Figure 19.01 (top). These queries do not need to encompass an entire year. You
could use this technique to focus on a specific month or day. Figure 19.01 (bottom) tells me what Chris was up
to on October 2, 2017 with the following query.
from:humanhacker email since:2017-10-02 until:2017-10-03

Figure 19.01: An old Twitter post including an email address of the target.
Deleted, Suspended, and Missing Tweets
Twitter users may delete their own accounts if there is suspicion that an investigation is under way. If this
happens, searching on Twitter will not display any of the posts. Furthermore, a person might only delete
individual Twitter posts that are incriminating, but leave non-interesting posts on the profile to prevent raising
suspicion associated with deleting an entire account. Some users may find their accounts suspended for violating
Twitter's terms of service. In any of these scenarios, it is still possible to retrieve some missing posts using
various techniques.
If I encounter a Twitter user that has recently deleted some or all of their messages, I conduct a cache search of
their profile. There are various ways to do this, and I will demonstrate the most common. In this example, I
conducted a search on Twitter for "deleted all my Tweets" on December 15, 2017. This provided many users
who posted that they had just deleted all of their content. This helped me identify a good target for this type of
demonstration. The first user I located was "WestCornfield". He had one Tweet and it referenced deleting all of
his posts, and it is seen in Figure 19.02.
I attempted a search on Twitter of from:WestCornfield, which provided no results. I conducted a search of
to:WestCornfield, which provided dozens of incoming messages from his friends. This was a good start. I then
went to Google and conducted a search for "Twitter WestCornfield". The first search result was a link to the
user's live Twitter page. Instead of clicking on the link, I chose the Google Cache view of his profile by clicking
the small green "down arrow" next to the URL and selecting "Cached". Google has since removed the "cached"
button from Google results, as previously discussed in the search engines section of this book, but other search
engines still offer this embedded feature. We can also attempt the following URL to bring back limited Google
Cache functionality, replacing "inteltechniques" with your own target.
https://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:https://twitter.com/inteltechniques

Social Networks: X (Twitter) 235

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

This view identified twenty deleted Tweets from this account. Two of these posts can be seen in Figure 19.03.
Google identified this capture as taken on December 12, 2017. This may be enough for your investigation.
Occasionally, I need to identify content that was deleted weeks or months before my investigation. The previous
technique will likely not provide much assistance because the Google Cache is probably a recent copy of their
live page. The cache may be missing Tweets you want to see. I next replicated this process on Bing and Yandex.
Bing's cached view was taken on December 7, 2017 while Yandex's cached view was collected on November 3,
2017. Each of these possessed unique posts and images. Figure 19.04 displays a recovered post from Bing. Next,
I returned to Google to obtain further data. I searched the following, which provided only results that possess
a URL that begins with twitter.com, then my target's username, then "status". This will force Google to present
direct links to actual posts.
site:twitter.com/westcornfield/status
During the original writing, the result was 56 posts. When I clicked on each of these, Twitter informed me that
the post had been deleted. However, opening the cached version from the Google result displayed each of the
posts. In Figure 19.05, you can see that Google is now identifying deleted posts as far back as October 2017.
This process should also be repeated using the cached view options of Bing and Yandex. Next, we should check
the Wayback Machine as mentioned in Chapter Nine. If you recall, you can search their archives by keywords
or direct URL. The following address connects us directly to their archive of his account.
http://web.archive.org/web/*/twitter.com/WestCornfield
This identified a capture of his profile on December 6, 2017. Opening this archive displayed his Twitter profile
dating back to November 8, 2017. Figure 19.06 displays this deleted Tweet.
While our target removed his content from his profile, he did not remove his history. In order to see the Twitter
posts that he had previously liked before wiping out his page, we could previously navigate to a custom Twitter
URL. They killed this feature, but we can still use the following.
http://web.archive.org/web/*/twitter.com/WestCornfield/likes
While every investigation is unique, I wanted to demonstrate the importance of checking every source. These
searches took less than three minutes using my custom Twitter search tool discussed in the next section. While
you will likely never rebuild an entire deleted account, the posts obtained with this technique are something you
did not have before.

Figure 19.02: A live Twitter post announcing Tweet deletion.

236 Chapter 19

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Figure 19.05: A Google cached Twitter message URL of a deleted post.

Figure 19.06: A recovered deleted Tweet from the Wayback Machine.
Twitter Post Details
Assume that you have identified an individual Tweet of interest. The URL of the message will appear similar to
https://x.com/IntelTechniques/status/1821570065638256652. You have the tools to create a screen capture,
but you may want a few more details. If there is an image embedded into the Tweet, you can click on it to see a
larger version. However, this is sometimes not the original image size. In order to see the original full-size
version, right-click the image and choose "View image". This will load a new URL such as the following.
https://pbs.twimg.com/media/GUeEPxjW4AA73pe?format=jpg&name=small
After removing "&name=small" from the URL, a larger image is available. You can save this image by rightclicking and choosing "Save image as". This example is as follows.
https://pbs.twimg.com/media/GUeEPxjW4AA73pe?format=jpg
Adding "=large" to the end of this URL or right-clicking and opening the image in a new tab will give us an
even larger resolution version of the same image.
https://pbs.twimg.com/media/GUeEPxjW4AA73pe?format=jpg&name=large

Social Networks: X (Twitter) 237

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Tweet Deck (tweetdeck.x.com)
Tweet Deck is owned by Twitter, and it can take advantage of the live Twitter "Firehose". This huge stream of
data contains every public post available on Twitter. Many Twitter services do not have access to this stream,
and the results are limited. In 2023, Twitter changed TweetDeck to require "X Premium" and attempting to go
to https://tweetdeck.x.com will forward you to a page and ask you to sign up for premium. You could sign up
for a premium account but that would require you to associate payment information with your burner account
which could compromise your operational security. An alternative currently is to use an open-source browser
extension called OldTweetDeck.
You can download OldTweetDeck from https://github.com/dimdenGD/OldTweetDeck where they also have
concise steps for installation on Firefox and Chromium based browsers. The installation steps are
straightforward. For example, you can install OldTweetDeck on any Firefox browser using these steps:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Go to Release page and download OldTweetDeckFirefox.zip.
Go to Firefox Configuration Editor (about:config).
Change the preference xpinstall.signatures.required to false.
Go to addons page (about:addons).
Press "Install Add-on From File..." button.
Select zip file you downloaded.
Go to https://x.com/i/tweetdeck and use old TweetDeck.

Understand that this extension only restores most of TweetDeck's functionality and some features such as
filtering by likes is going to fail due to Twitter making them private. This project's level of functionality will likely
wane over time so your own results may vary.

Figure 19.07: Tweetdeck via the OldTweetDeck browser extension.
Whether you choose to purchase a premium account or use the OldTweetDeck extension, once the page is
loaded the functionality will be largely be the same. The plus symbol (+) in the upper left area will add a new
column to your view. There are several options presented, but the most common will be "Search" and "User".
The "Search" option will create a column that will allow you to search for any keywords on Twitter. The
following is a list of search examples and how they may benefit the investigator.
"Victim Name": A homicide investigator can monitor people mentioning a homicide victim.
"School Name": A school can monitor anyone mentioning the school for suspicious activity.

238 Chapter 19

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

"Subject Name": An investigator can monitor a missing person's name for relevant information.
"Event": Officials can monitor anyone discussing a special event such as a festival or concert.
The "User" option will allow you to enter a Twitter username and monitor all incoming and outgoing public
messages associated with the user. If several subjects of an investigation are identified as Twitter users, each of
the profiles can be loaded in a separate column and monitored. Occasionally, this will result in two of the profiles
communicating with each other while being monitored.
You can also use the Geo search mentioned earlier within Tweet Deck. A column that searches
"geocode:43.430242,-89.736459,1km" will display a live feed of Tweets posted within the specified range. A
more precise search of "geocode:43.430242,-89.736459,1km fight" would add the keyword to filter the results.
Figure 19.07 displays Tweet Deck with several searches.
The columns of Tweet Deck are consistently sized. If more columns are created than can fit in the display, the
"Columns" option with left and right arrows will provide navigation. This allows for numerous search columns
regardless of screen resolution. This is an advantage of Tweet Deck over the other services discussed. Tweet
Deck is one of my Twitter staples. I use it at some point during every investigation. I recommend familiarizing
yourself with all of the features before needing to rely on it during your searches.
Real World Application: In 2019, I was investigating a death threat toward a celebrity. I launched Tweet Deck
and began monitoring. First, I created a search column with "to:myclient". This started a stream of numerous
people mentioning my client, which was too much to monitor. Next, I created a column of "to:myclient kill OR
die OR shoot OR death". This presented very few tweets being sent to the celebrity including specific hateful
words. However, it did identify a suspect. A tweet was sent to the celebrity stating "I hope you die a fiery death
tonight". I then created another column of "from:suspect to:myclient". This identified every tweet he was
sending to the celebrity. Since I had to move on to other resources, I set one final Tweet Deck column of
"from:suspect to:myclient kill OR die OR shoot OR death" and added an alert. This instructed Tweet Deck to
play an audible sound if any new messages met the criteria. The same suspect was arrested a week later while
attempting to burglarize her apartment.
Third-Party Resources
We have reached the end of the Twitter search options within the official website. Next, we will focus on thirdparty search tools. Most of these services require you to authenticate with a Twitter account before any queries
can be submitted. This is largely due to Twitter's safeguards against fraud and abuse. I always recommend using
a "junk" Twitter account when this is required. You will be asked to give the third-party service access to and
control of the account in order to complete any tasks. This can be a security and privacy risk if using your true
personal account. I will never give any service access to my personal Twitter account, but I often allow services
to authenticate with one of my investigation accounts.
It is important to note that in 2023 Twitter closed their free API tier which resulted in almost all free third-party
sites and services to close down. Third party services are now required to pay for API access so do not expect
to get much back from free services, and most services which retained functionality are now premium only. The
number of third-party resources has been reduced drastically, but I will share the handful of sties which may still
be of use.
Twitter Location Information
While privacy-aware individuals have disabled the location feature of their accounts, many users enjoy
broadcasting their location at all times. Identifying a user's location during a Twitter post is sometimes possible
through various methods. Prior to 2014, identifying the GPS details of every post of many users was simple.
Today, most of these identification techniques are no longer working. A manual Twitter search method for
identifying posts by location was explained earlier. That technique is best for current or live information, and is

Social Networks: X (Twitter) 239

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

limited to only recent posts. You may have a need for historical details from previous posts from a specific
location. I have had better success with historical data than current content in regard to geolocation. I believe
this is because most people unknowingly shared their location while Tweeting for many years. When Twitter
changed the default location option to "Disabled", most users never intentionally re-enabled the feature.
Fortunately, there are third-party websites that collected this historical data, and can assist with easy searching.
The following options will work best when you are investigating events that occurred several years prior. While
you may get lucky and receive some recent posts, the majority could be quite old.
Omnisci (www.heavy.ai/demos/tweetmap)
Omnisci is a massive database platform developed through collaboration between MIT and Harvard.
Historically, each college had their own interface into this data, which supplied Twitter post locations from past
Tweets. Each interface provided new ways of searching information. Both websites have been disabled, and the
entire project has warped into Omnisci. This website can search by topic, username, or location. It can also
combine all three options to conduct a detailed search. Results appear as blue dots on a dark map. Each dot
represents a Tweet which possesses location data to the chosen area.
One Million Tweet Map (onemilliontweetmap.com)
This service only displays the most recent one million Tweets on an international map. They do not have access
to every Tweet available, often referred to as the "firehose", but they offer new Tweets every second. I would
never rely on this map for complete data about a location. However, monitoring a large event can provide live
intelligence in an easily viewed format. I recommend using a mouse scroll wheel to zoom into your location of
interest. Once you are at a level that you can see single Tweets, you can click any of them to see the content.
The page will automatically refresh as new information is posted.
Tweet Mapper (keitharm.me/projects/tweet)
If your target possesses Tweets with location data, but the previous two options failed to locate anything, this
map could reveal the data. The project appears to be abandoned, but I receive occasional results.
Fake Followers
There are a surprising number of Twitter accounts that are completely fake. These are bought and sold daily by
shady people who want to make their profiles appear more popular than they really are. I have seen a lot of
target profiles that have been padded with these fake followers. There are two websites that will assist in
distinguishing the authentic profiles from the fraudulent. They both require you to be logged in to a Twitter
account, and I will compare the results of each.
Twitter Audit (twitteraudit.com)
This option identified 9% of my followers as "fake" and provided very few details. It also allows for submission
through a static URL, but you still need to request an audit once you get to the page. The following would
display results for my own page. You will need to allow Twitter Audit to authenticate using a Twitter account,
which is fairly common for third-party Twitter services. You also only get one free query per user account.
https://www.twitteraudit.com/inteltechniques
Miscellaneous Twitter Sites
Every week, a new site arrives that takes advantage of the public data that Twitter shares with the world. These
sites offer unique ways of searching for information that Twitter does not allow on their main page. This partial

240 Chapter 19

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

list is a good start to finding information relevant to your target. I encourage readers to follow my blog, podcast,
and Twitter account for any updates which surface after this book has been published.
TweetBinder (dash.tweetbinder.com/report/free)
TweetBinder is a site aimed at users in the marketing field, so it is largely activity analytics. However, I have
found some useful information in the results occasionally. You can get a limited number of results with their
free search or you can set up a free or premium account on their service to receive more robust results. If
nothing else, this site can shed light on patterns of recent activity for the target account.
Memory.lol (github.com/travisbrown/memory.lol)
This project is a web service that provides historical information about social media accounts. Currently, it can
be used to look up 542 million historical screen names for 443 million Twitter accounts. Most of this data has
been scraped from either the Twitter Stream Grab or the Wayback Machine. As an example, the following URL
produces the result seen immediately below it.
https://api.memory.lol/v1/tw/IntelTechniques
accounts
id
257644794
id_str "257644794"
screen_names
IntelTechniques
0
"2015-04-06"
1
"2022-11-08"
I now know that the first time this profile, number 257644794, was seen within these resources was April 6th,
2015. I can also reverse this query when I know the user number. The following URL queries by number and
identifies the username and same account details, as seen following the URL.
https://api.memory.lol/v1/tw/id/257644794
id
257644794
id_str "257644794"
screen_names
IntelTechniques
0
"2015-04-06"
1
"2022-11-08"
This provides a quick way to identify usernames from profile IDs and vice versa.
Threadreader (threadreaderapp.com)
Threadreader is one of the few third-party sites which has retained functionality following Twitter's API changes.
The purpose of the service is to make long Twitter threads easily readable and replicated onto a normal looking
web page. Although technically a Twitter "bot", the Threadreader site can be used to view and even search
Twitter content. The level of content will depend on the target account. One of my primary use cases for this
site is simply a secondary means of viewing Twitter posts in scenarios where visiting the platform directly is not
possible or desirable. Threadreader has a search bar on their main page and we can also use URL manipulation
to run queries.
https://threadreaderapp.com/search?q=IntelTechniques

Social Networks: X (Twitter) 241

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

This would conduct a basic keyword search and does bring up dozens of results, but the results are not
comprehensive. Likewise, some user accounts can be queried with the following format.
https://threadreaderapp.com/user/inteltechniques
Most accounts in our testing did not show results using this technique. An example of a working account is
https://threadreaderapp.com/user/cyb_detective and this is likely due to that Twitter user utilizing the
Threadreader service. As an added bonus, Threadreader does not require us to provide our own Twitter
credentials or make an account in order to query for results on their service.
Pivoting to Alternate Microblogs
While Twitter placing their API behind a paywall has severely reduced the number of third-party tools and
services for analyzing accounts, changes to the platform have also pushed many users to move to alternative
microblogs. We can use this trend to our advantage. I have had significant success tracking Twitter users to
alternate platforms while providing additional avenues of investigation. We simply take a target's username,
vanity name, or any unique vernacular in their bio, and search it across the most popular Twitter competitors.
Popularity of these microblog platforms will vary depending on the culture and demographics of your targets
but many Twitter users have created alternate accounts on one or more of these platforms using account names
identical to or variations on their Twitter username.
Instagram (instagram.com): Although technically not a micro-blog, many of my targets have migrated to
posting Instagram content which they would have previously posted on Twitter. Likewise, groups which
previously organized events on Twitter, now do so on Instagram, with the added intelligence benefit of an image
or video being associated with every post.
Threads (threads.net): Threads is Meta's attempt to absorb users moving off of the Twitter platform. Any
Instagram account can be used to instantly create an associated Threads account and we will discuss Threads
further in the next chapter.
Bluesky (bsky.app): Bluesky is a federated platform which has absorbed many former Twitter users. It is
particularly popular amongst those who work in technical fields and although previously only available by
invitation, currently account creation on this platform is straightforward, making it relatively easy to investigate.
Mastodon (mastodon.social): Mastodon was one of the first federated platforms that was rumored to be the
next Twitter killer. Although fairly popular it never reached the level of adoption of Twitter, but it is popular
enough to be worth checking.
Often a simple google query is enough to locate any alternate accounts. For example, after seeing that a popular
technology podcast has moved off of twitter, we could use the following query to locate the new accounts.
site:threads.net OR site:bsky.app OR site:mastodon.social OR site:instagram.com "techpod"
These reverse queries or "pivots" will be discussed in greater depth when we tackle username tactics in a
forthcoming chapter.
IntelTechniques Twitter Tool
I found myself using many of these manual Twitter techniques daily. In order to prevent repetitive typing of the
same addresses and searches, I created a custom tool with an all-in-one solution. Download the archive
previously mentioned or visit https://inteltechniques.com/tools/Twitter.html to access this resource. This
page includes embedded JavaScript that will structure and execute web addresses based on your provided
information. The Twitter tool will replicate many of the Twitter searches that you have read about here. Clicking
the button next to each option executes the query in a new tab in your browser. As a reminder, this page collects
absolutely no information from your searches. They are all conducted within your own browser, and no data is
captured by my server.

242 Chapter 19

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER TWENTY

SOCIAL NETWORKS: INSTAGRAM
While Facebook and Twitter are likely going to offer the most bang for your buck in terms of web-based social
network presence, Instagram has captured a large share of the market over the past two years. Instagram is a
photo-sharing service that is now owned by Facebook. With well over 1 billion active monthly users, the amount
of content available here is overwhelming. This application works alone or in correlation with Facebook and
Twitter to distribute the photos. This service is very popular with most photo sharing Twitter users and should
not be ignored. My preferred method of downloading a person's entire Instagram profile is through the Python
tools Instalooter and Instaloader, as previously explained in the Linux, Mac and Windows chapters. These
utilities will download all the images and videos from a profile, but there is much more data out there which
may be valuable to your investigations. You will need to be logged in to an Instagram account for most
techniques in this chapter. First, let's start with some basics.
If you visit Instagram.com, there is no search feature unless you log into an account. If you have already created
a burner Facebook account, you can use that account to log into Instagram or you can create a new separate
account. Once logged in you will find a search option in the left menu, however, this will only identify a handful
of user accounts and recommended search terms. If you select one of the recommended search terms, you will
then receive image results based on the query. Although each image corresponds to a post, this is not very
efficient, as we would have to click on each image in order to see the corresponding account. Instagram's internal
search also provides no additional filters, but in a moment we will use search engines to provide precise queries.
In previous editions of this book, I detailed several third-party Instagram search options that unlocked a lot of
hidden content within user accounts. On June 1, 2016, Instagram tightened their API, and this killed most of
the useful websites. My own Instagram tools page suffered drastically from the new restrictions in 2018 and
2020, and I had to start over with new options. Fortunately, you still have many search options for your next
Instagram investigation. Let's start with keyword searching. I have found greater success with a custom Google
search instead of an Instagram search field. The following query on Google will produce thousands of results
that display Instagram posts that mention "OSINT" within the post title or comments.
site:instagram.com "OSINT"
This same term searched on an Instagram page only displayed users that have the term within the username.
When searching "#OSINT" on Instagram, I was provided a list of hashtags that include the keyword. Each of
these hashtags are associated with multiple Instagram posts. Consider the following example in order to identify
the benefits of searching away from the Instagram website. While on an Instagram page, I searched for my target
"Darren Kitchen" from Hak5. This presented several profiles associated with people having that name, but none
of them were my target. Instead, I went to Google and conducted the following search.
site:instagram.com darren kitchen hak5
This produced one result, but it was not connected to my target. Since people seldom use last names on
Instagram, I modified my search to the following.
site:instagram.com darren hak5
The first result was my target's profile (@hak5darren). Similar to Facebook and Twitter, a person's Instagram
profile only tells a small portion of the story. Conducting the following search on Google revealed 215 results.
site:instagram.com "hak5darren"

Social Networks: Instagram 243

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

These are the various pages and posts that contain the text of my target's username. Many of these are posts
from the target, which we have already seen by looking at his profile. A few are from associates of the target
and may otherwise be missed. I now only want posts that contain "@hak5darren" within the content. This is
more likely to find other people mentioning my target.
site:instagram.com "@hak5darren"
Similar to the previous search, it forces Google to ignore the target's profile, and only focus on people that are
posting "to" the target with @hak5darren instead of just his username alone. These searches can be modified to
include or exclude keywords, usernames, real names, or any other terms with which you have interest. You could
also repeat these on Bing and Yandex for better coverage. Figure 20.01 displays the difference in search results
while Figure 20.02 identifies a post targeted toward a user. Hopefully, you now have a target profile of interest.
Now we can dig into our target within Instagram and through third-party resources.

Figure 20.01: Google search queries for Instagram data.

Figure 20.02: Google search results of Instagram data.
Instagram Images
There is one obstacle with Instagram searches that needs to be addressed. When you identify a profile of interest,
there will always be a profile image at the top of the page. This is usually a 150x150 pixel profile image and a full
page of lower-resolution post images, all of which are small and heavily compressed. In 2015 and 2018,
Instagram changed the way these thumbnails and original images are stored. The goal of this technique is to
locate these low-resolution images and identify the full high-resolution images that were originally uploaded. For
an example, I will pick on the user "hak5darren". His profile is at instagram.com/hak5darren. When I right-click
on his profile picture, I am blocked from opening the image alone in a new tab. In fact, there is no right-click
menu whatsoever. If I right-click on the images, I also receive no option to view the image alone, which
previously would grant us a larger version. Instagram is actively blocking us, so we will need to dig into the raw
files from the page using our browser's developer tools.
In the past we have searched for links to image files in the page code using "View page source", but our browser's
built in developer tools provide a more direct method for locating and isolating these files. With the target
Instagram profile loaded in my browser window, I right-click and choose "Inspect", or strike F12, to open the
developer panel. Depending on your browser this panel will open to the side or below the target page. In the
panel select the "Network" tab. Once on this tab, we can refresh the page using F5 to view a cascading list of
files as the page reloads. To make things easier, we can use the image option in the filter bar in the developer
panel to show only files with common image file extensions. Anytime we add or remove a filter we must refresh
the page to generate a fresh list of files.

244 Chapter 20

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

One of the benefits of this technique is that the files are listed in the order that they load, so image files at the
top of the profile tend to be at the top of the file list. Therefore, one of the top images is likely to be our target's
profile photo. If we select the desired file from the list, a window to the right of the file will provide additional
information pertaining to that image. Within this window, the image itself will be displayed in the "Preview" tab
for Chrome browsers or the "Response" tab for Firefox users.
Now that we can see the target image, we can right click on it and either save it or open it in a new tab. In my
workflow, I prefer to open the file in a new tab which allows me to download it or perform a reverse image
search. If you are working in Firefox and you are unable to interact with the image in the "Response" tab, move
to the "Headers" tab where you can copy the direct link the image and then paste it into a new tab manually.
Many people use the same profile picture across multiple platforms, so this reverse image search has a good
chance of uncovering additional accounts belonging to our target. We will discuss reverse image searches further
in a later chapter. We also now have the direct URL for the image which we can add to our case notes.
This is often our best option for viewing and archiving media files from pages which do not allow direct
interaction with page content. Does this seem like too much trouble for every image of interest on Instagram?
Yes, no argument here. If you prefer to allow a third-party service to replicate this for you, the following sites
will download the best quality image available within a post. Regardless of your method, you should understand
the functions allowing for the capture of these high-resolution images. I suspect that these methods will change
slightly after this book is published. However, the replacement strategies explained in the examples should carry
over into the unknown changes Instagram will apply next.
https://instadownloader.co/
https://igram.io/
https://igdownloader.com/
https://toolzu.com/downloader/instagram/photo/

Metadata Details
You should also consider digging into the source code of your evidence in order to identify further details that
could be valuable. First, I like to identify the user number of an account. Similar to Facebook and Twitter, people
can change their username on Instagram, but not their user number. Right-click on your target profile page and
select the option to view the source code. This will open a new tab with a lot of pure text. Using either "Ctrl" +
"F" (Windows) or "command" + "F" (macOS), conduct a search for exactly the following. The numbers directly
after this data will be the user number of your target. In our previous example, his user number is 340416780.
"profile_id"
Social Networks: Instagram 245

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Sometimes Firefox will search through the source code and highlight data, but the results don't match
the terms searched. I do not know why this happens, but selecting "Wrap long lines" within the Firefox source
code page sometimes helps. When necessary, I copy all of the source code and paste it into a text editor, then
search there. Your target may change their username, but they cannot change their user ID. If you know that
your target's user ID is 340416780, but you can no longer access their profile based on the username, we can
query the Instagram API to get the new details. However, you must first spoof your user-agent. In Chapter Two,
I explained the Firefox extension called User-Agent Switcher and Manager. Open this menu within your Firefox
browser; change the second drop-down menu to "Android"; change the first drop-down menu to "Instagram";
select the first option; click "Apply"; and navigate to the following page.
https://i.instagram.com/api/v1/users/340416780/info/
The text-only result should display pages of details, but I find the following of most interest.
"pk": 340416780,
"username": "hak5darren",
"full_name": "Darren",
"is_private": false,
"media_count": 949,
"geo_media_count": 0,
"follower_count": 5855,
"following_count": 257,
"external_url": "http://hak5.org",
"has_videos": true,
"has_highlight_reels": true,
"has_guides": false,
"can_be_reported_as_fraud": false,
"is_business": false,
"profile_pic_url": "https://scontent-sea1-1.cdninstagram.com/v/t51.288519/13534173_1620017484977625_1916767107_a.jpg?stp=dstjpg_e0_s150x150&_nc_ht=scontent-sea11.cdninstagram.com&_nc_cat=109&_nc_ohc=q_PLR6nj2IQ7kNvgHT9czS&_nc_gid=ed08cb087dc34ce3be64efaea67ff6ff&edm=AEF8tYYBAAAA&ccb
=7-5&oh=00_AYDoftauBBbsGYPujN8B__fEB9wrigM7Cw-FqlS_R5wHA&oe=66EA669A&_nc_sid=1e20d2"

If the target had changed his username, we would see it here. As an added benefit we are provided with a
direct link to the target's profile image. While inconvenient, this is the most stable way to translate a user ID
back into a username. Next, let's tackle exact timestamps. Instagram might tell you a photo was posted 67
weeks ago, and hovering over that notification should tell you the exact date, but it never tells you the time of
the post. This detail can be crucial to a legal investigation. For this example, I located an image posted by our
target at the following address.
https://www.instagram.com/p/CR854ZigEhR/
Right-click the profile and select the "Inspect" option within your browser. Click on the "Network" tab and
reload the page. Click the small magnifying glass to conduct a search (not the filter URL option). Search for
"taken" and notice the data which follows. My example displayed the following.
"items":[{"taken1627648763,"pk":"2629230846841735249","id":"262923
The number following "taken", which was 1627648763 is a Unix timestamp. Converting this from Unix to
standard time on the website located at epochconverter.com reveals the image was uploaded on Friday, July 30,
2021 at 12:39:23 in universal time (GMT) format.

246 Chapter 20

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

I realize these details are very minor. However, documenting this content can announce the difference between
an average OSINT investigator and an expert. If you plan to serve any legal process later, knowing the user
number and exact time of activity will be crucial.
Hashtags
A hashtag is a word or phrase preceded by a hash sign (#) used on social media websites and applications,
especially Twitter and Instagram, in order to identify messages on a specific topic. If I wanted to view all posts
tagged with "osint", the following direct URL would be appropriate.
https://www.instagram.com/explore/tags/osint/
I do not pay much attention to hashtags within my investigations. I prefer to focus more on search terms. Many
people do not properly tag a post, and you can miss a lot by limiting your search to a hashtag. If I search for
hashtags of #shooting, I may see valuable data. If a potential target only posts the term "shooting" without the
"#", I would miss the post. This is why I rely much more heavily on searching within Google, as explained
momentarily.
Followers & Following
Instagram now requires users to be logged in to an account in order to view the followers of a target or the
profiles that a target follows (friends). Viewing these lists is not a challenge, but proper documentation can be
tricky. The following explains how I choose to view and document every Instagram follower and friend of my
target account, using hak5darren as an example.
After logging in to your account and navigating to the target profile, you will be able to simply click on
"Followers" or "Following". In this demonstration, I chose the people he is "following", often referred to as
friends. This opened a new window on my screen with the first twenty people displayed. Since hak5darren
follows 215 people, I can scroll down the entire list to load all of the accounts. You will not be able to see all of
the accounts at once because the window only displays ten within its boundaries. This causes screen capture
tools to be useless in this scenario. If you are using either the Firefox browser we created within Linux or your
own version of Firefox with the recommended Add-ons, you can easily copy this list.
After scrolling down to load all of the users, press either "Ctrl" + "A" (Windows & Linux) or "command" +
"A" (Mac) on your keyboard. This will highlight or "select" the entire list. Next, right-click within this window
and choose "Copy selected links". This copies all of the Instagram account hyperlinks within the target's
following list into your computer clipboard. Open your desired documentation software, such as Word, Excel,
or any text editor, and paste the contents into the application. I prefer Excel (or Calc within the free LibreOffice
suite) for this task. Pasting the results confirmed 199 accounts, four of which are shown below. Repeat the
process with "Followers".

In my experience, Instagram limits the number of accounts within this window to 1,000. This should be
sufficient for most friends of the target, but may be limited when looking at the followers of famous people.
While Instagram offers a text-only view of followers and following, it appears limited to 50 random profiles. I
included these long links within the search tools, but I do not rely on them. I prefer this manual method. If your
target's user ID was 340416780, the following URL presents the first 50 people he is following.
https://www.instagram.com/graphql/query/?query_hash=d04b0a864b4b54837c0d870b0e77e076&variables
={%22id%22:%22340416780%22,%22include_reel%22:true,%22fetch_mutual%22:false,%22first%22:50}
Social Networks: Instagram 247

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

As you can see, this is quite messy and only presents partial information. While viewing who the target is
following, I can also use the search bar in that window to do a quick query for accounts of known aliases. I often
search for my target's surname to potentially locate family members. Remember, people will often follow their
own account with their alternate accounts so searching for known aliases and usernames can be very beneficial.
The "Following" window also has a tab for hashtags which will allow us to see a list of hashtags associated with
our target. This can be good cultural intelligence on our target while also providing us with additional keywords
which we may find useful when we move back to running queries in Google.
Likes & Comments
Similar to Twitter, users can "Like" or comment on each post. Unique from Twitter, this is only seen when you
load the target post in your browser. In other words, if a user posts a comment to a photo published by our
target, we do not see that comment within the account of the person who made it. We only see it within the
specific post directly from the target. We also cannot search within Instagram by keyword in order to identify
comments, but we can with Google as explained momentarily. First, let's focus on Likes.
Viewing an individual Instagram post reveals a heart icon below any comments. Clicking that icon "likes" the
post from your account, so this should be avoided. Directly below the heart is a summary such as "557 Likes".
Clicking on this opens a new window, which identifies each account that liked the post. Slowly scrolling through
this list expands it until all accounts are present. Similar to the previous method of capturing friends and
followers of a target, a manual approach is best here. Pressing "Ctrl" + "A" (Windows) or "command" + "A"
(macOS) on the keyboard selects all of the content, and "Ctrl" + "C" (Windows) or "command" + "C" (macOS)
copies it to your computer memory, which can be pasted into a spreadsheet or word processor. You can repeat
this process for the comments within the post.
If you locate a comment which is valuable to your investigation, you may want to document the date and time
of the post. This is not available within the standard view. As an example, look at the post at
https://www.instagram.com/p/Bqi6r9uA0Y3. Inside the comments includes a response of "now I gotta go buy
some beer" from a friend. At the time of this writing, Instagram displayed "303w" under the post, indicating it
was posted 303 weeks previous to the current date. There is also a date for the post listed below the number of
likes, but this may not be sufficiently accurate for our needs. While on the page, right-click and choose the
"Inspect" option as we did previously. While on the "Inspector" tab, search for the terms (now I gotta go buy
some beer) and expand the text immediately after the result, as displayed in Figure 20.04. You can now see that
this comment was made on November 24, 2018, at 14:27:02 GMT. Alternatively, we could conduct the same
keyword search in the "Network" tab of our developer tools in order to find the exact Unix time of the post.

Figure 20.04: "Like" data within an Instagram post.
Complete Post Analysis
Assume that you have located your suspect (https://www.instagram.com/hak5darren) and found an
incriminating post on his account (https://www.instagram.com/p/BK1KWEthQkb). This is a high-priority
investigation, and extensive manual documentation is justified. You have already attacked his account with
248 Chapter 20

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Instaloader, Instalooter, and Osintgram as explained in previous chapters. You possess all of the images from
the account. The following outlines the next steps I would take toward this target.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Use our browser's developer tools to inspect the loaded files for the target URL.
If the media files have not been previously saved using scripts, save the image from the post manually
as previously explained.
Close the developer panel.
Scroll through the comments, and expand any, if necessary, by clicking "+".
Click the summary of likes below the heart icon.
Scroll until all are loaded, select all with "Ctrl" + "A" or "command" + "A" on keyboard.
Open a new spreadsheet through Microsoft Office or LibreOffice and paste the results.
Rename this tab "BK1KWEthQkb" and open a new tab.
Repeat the process with any other posts of interest.
Return to the account (https://www.instagram.com/hak5darren) and click "Followers".
Load the data, copy it, and paste it into the new sheet titled "Followers".
Repeat the process for "Following".
On the target profile, scroll down until all posts are loaded and select/highlight all.
Right-click, choose "Copy selected links", and paste data into a new sheet titled "Posts".

You now have a spreadsheet with multiple pages inside it. The first provides the comments, details, and likes of
a specific post. The second displays all of the target's followers. The third shows his friends, and the fourth
provides the direct URL of every post for later analysis or extraction. Figure 20.05 displays a partial view of my
example, highlighting the final sheet created. This was a lot of work, and I do not replicate these steps for every
Instagram investigation. You must decide when the extra work is warranted. Unfortunately, there is no reliable
automated solution which extracts all data.

Figure 20.05: A spreadsheet created from a target Instagram post.
Channels
While Instagram was originally introduced as a photo-sharing platform, it is quickly becoming dominated by
user-submitted videos. Many profiles now include a video channel which was formerly called "IGTV". Meta has
replaced the IGTV button on profile pages with "REELS", which are more similar to TikTok's format, but at
this time channels can still be accessed directly via URL with the following structure.
https://www.instagram.com/ambermac/channel/
Opening a video page allows you to play the content and see any details such as likes and comments. Capturing
the text data can be done using the techniques previously explained. However, saving the video introduces new
challenges. While the video URL is embedded into the source code of the page, it requires heavy modification
in order to replicate the content in a format which can be archived. Instead, we will rely on our browser to help
us locate the stream. While viewing any Instagram video page, launch the "Inspector" tool within your Firefox
or Chrome browser. You should be able to simply right-click on the page and select "Inspect Element". If this
is not visible, you can launch Inspector from the Developer Tools within the browser menu (F12).

Social Networks: Instagram 249

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Within the developer tools, click the "Network" tab and play the video. If the video was already playing, reload
the page. The inspector will display a lot of information which can seem overwhelming. Instead of manually
filtering through these network connections, simply type "mp4" within the search field directly below the
"Network" tab. This will result in multiple files being listed. Sort this list by file size and select the largest file. In
the right side panel you will see a long URL in the "Headers" tab. Copy this link and paste it into a new browser
tab. Now delete the last part of the URL which will be similar to "&bytestart=4635232&byteend=4933185" and
hit enter. The new tab within your browser should present the video in full-size resolution. You can now rightclick on the video and select the option to save it. Figure 20.07 displays results similar to what you should see in
your developer tools.
This may all seem tedious and complicated. While there are browser extensions which simplify these processes,
they are replicating the manual methods presented here. Knowing these manual functions allows you to explain
the capture process when mandated. When I testified in criminal trials about my online evidence, I proudly
explained the ways I captured evidence from the source rather than relying on third-party tools which do not
disclose their exact methods.

Figure 20.06: The "Inspector" utility within Firefox identifying an Instagram video MP4 file.
Tagged Users
Instagram allows users to be tagged within posts. On any target profile, you may see the "Tagged" link directly
above the images. You can also navigate directly with the following structure.
https://www.instagram.com/hak5darren/tagged/
Google Instagram Search
We have exhausted all useful aspects of collecting data from within Instagram.com. The search functions are
extremely limited there, so we must utilize a third-party search engine to find further data and connections. In
my experience, Google is our best option, and you should be familiar with the queries conducted at the beginning
of the chapter. Let's conduct a demonstration. Earlier, we searched site:instagram.com "hak5darren" and
received hundreds of results. Browsing through these three pages reveals no evidence of a post including the
word "Pager". However, I know he posted a photo with that term in the title. Searching the following reveals
the target post.
site:instagram.com "hak5darren" "pager"
This confirms that Google indexed the post, but did not present it when I searched the suspect's Instagram
username. This means that we should also query search terms when we conduct searches associated with a
250 Chapter 20

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

target. The search tools presented in a moment simplifies this, but let's conduct one more manual attempt. I see
that "hak5darren" posts comments to "snubs" within his posts. I would like to search for any Instagram posts,
within any accounts, which contain either a mention of or comment by both "hak5darren" and "snubs". The
following is appropriate.
site:instagram.com "hak5darren" "snubs"
Twitter Instagram Search
Many people who post to Instagram broadcast the links on Twitter. Following this data can reveal our target's
Twitter account and any unique comments from Twitter users. Because of these reasons, we should always
check Twitter for Instagram posts. The user "hak5darren" on Instagram is also "hak5darren" on Twitter. The
following Google search identifies posts on Twitter (site:x.com) which mention "hack5darren", and possess an
Instagram image URL (instagram.com/p).
site:x.com "hak5darren" "instagram.com/p"
Third-Party Tools
Overall, the various Instagram search websites do nothing more than what we replicated in the previous
instruction. However, these sites could identify that one piece of vital evidence which we missed. Therefore, it
is always best to have as many resources as possible. I have found the following third-party resources beneficial
to my investigations. Third-party Instagram tools appear and disappear rapidly. After publication, I will continue
to update the Instagram search tool with new features, as explained soon.
Instagram Stories
Instagram Stories are vertical photos or videos, up to 15 seconds in length, which disappear 24 hours after
posting. Instead of being displayed in the user's feed, they are displayed at the top of an active user's app when
they are logged in. If there are active stories, we can click on the target's Instagram profile image to view them,
but we must be logged into Instagram in order to do so. Since Stories disappear quickly, they are often used
much more casually than the public Instagram feed. I have found the following utilities helpful for displaying
and downloading this temporary content. I demonstrate each.
InstaFollowers (instafollowers.co/download-instagram-stories)
Of these, InstaFollowers has been the most beneficial. It was the only option which displayed "Stories
Highlights" of previously expired content and easily allowed download of all stories directly through Instagram.
Consider the following example. Using their search tool, I conducted a query for my target. Several "Stories"
were presented with a "Download" button below each. That button forwarded me directly to the Instagram host
of each video. Each link is quite long, but should load the video directly in your browser. Right-clicking should
present the option to download the file.
StoriesDown (storiesdown.com/)
This service is very similar to the previous and should present most of the same data. These sites break or
disappear often, so having multiple sites with redundant functionality is always a benefit.
Snapinsta (snapinsta.app)
A newer service which simplifies media download is Snapinsta. It allows download of images, videos, Reels,
IGTV, and stories without the need to understand browser developer tools. However, it requires you to trust a
third party with the identity of the target of your investigation. I prefer to go straight to the source.

Social Networks: Instagram 251

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Dumpor (dumpor.com)
From an evidence perspective, I believe it is best to obtain your Instagram data from the official website.
However, account requirements might hinder your investigation. Some organizations prevent employees from
using any covert account to access data about a target. If logging in to Instagram is prohibited, consider Dumpor.
This service allows you to navigate through a person's Instagram posts without the need for an account. Dumpor
also allows for easy downloading of media files by right-clicking on any image or video. You can search a
username or tag from the main site, or submit a direct URL query as follows.
Username: https://dumpor.com/v/ambermac
Tag: https://dumpor.com/t/osint
Toolzu (toolzu.com)
In 2022, I found this site to be quite beneficial to Instagram investigations. It relies on the Instagram API, so
you will not find any content which is not already public. However, the layout and analysis of profile data is
unique. It also allows direct URL input, so it will play well with our tools. Consider the following.
https://toolzu.com/profile-analyzer/instagram/?username=@ambermac
Toolzu creates a summary of the account, but then extracts all profile data and analyzes if to provide details
which are not available directly from Instagram. In this example, I now know that my target:
Posted over 2000 Instagram uploads
Has 35,600 followers
Posts 1.29 times weekly
Averages 5.54 posts per month
Is most likely to post on a Tuesday or Wednesday
Most commonly tags with Partner, TheFeed, CanadasSeniorCare, Seniors, and AmberMacMedia
Most commonly captions with newsletter, Canada, Tuesday, and technology
Interests include business (15,38%), travel (3,85%), marketing (3,85%), and art (3,85%)
Most commented post is https://www.instagram.com/p/CiSniiBgqKH/
Most liked post is https://www.instagram.com/p/CiSniiBgqKH/
Suspension Warning
I have some bad news. I have witnessed suspension of Instagram accounts when using third-party Instagram
tools which require you to log in to an account. Always log in to a "junk" account and expect that you may be
blocked. Logging back in to the account and completing a Captcha usually reverses the suspension.
Threads (threads.net)
In 2023, Twitter's popularity and number of active users began to decline. Meta responded to this change by
opening up a competing microblogging service named Threads. Although hosted on its own domain, and having
a format more similar to Twitter, Threads functions more as an extension to Instagram than it does its own
platform. Threads in fact uses your existing Instagram login and anyone with an Instagram account can instantly
use it to generate an associated Threads account. Threads uses Instagram credentials so every Threads user also
has a corresponding Instagram account, but not every Instagram user has activated their corresponding Threads
account. At some point in the future, Meta may choose to separate Threads from Instagram, but currently one
is merely an extension of the other.
Locating targets on Threads is very straightforward. We can take our target's Instagram account name and easily
check to see if they are also on threads using the following URL structure.

252 Chapter 20

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

https://www.threads.net/@ambermac
We can also use our search operators to search for accounts or topics.
site:threads.net/@ "accountname"
site:threads.net/ "keyword"
Threads does have its own search functionality and unlike Instagram, you can perform some internal queries
without being logged in, although you will receive additional filters if you are logged into a burner account.
Likewise, when viewing without authenticating you will receive only a limited number of results for your queries.
Unlike Instagram, the internal search feature on Threads does provide results for both accounts and posts.
Threads search feature can be accessed at https://www.threads.net/search or we can use the following URL
structure to manually formulate search queries.
https://www.threads.net/search?q=osint
The account identifiers will be identical to the target's Instagram account because on the back end it is all the
same account. This means the account ID will be the same number as the Instagram account. Once an Instagram
user joins Threads, they can change the bio and profile photo on the Threads account, so you may find some
new data points if they have activated their Threads account. There will typically be overlap in followers, but
there may be some unique followers on Threads.
Threads is still very new and has very limited functionality, so at this time the associated Instagram account
tends to be a much richer source of intelligence. In my workflow, I analyze the target's Instagram first and then
move on to their Threads account. Although Threads boasts a high number of users due to the integration with
Instagram, many users are not actively posting to the platform.
The Threads mobile application does not boast any significant advantages over browser access. In our tests, the
Threads application did not currently support contact exploitation, but this may change in future releases.
Contact exploitation is where we use a clean virtual or physical phone, load our target's information in as a
contact, and then prompt mobile applications on that device to locate "friends" by accessing our contacts list.
The contacts list only has one entry, our target, so any account which shows up in the social media application
would belong to our target. Hopefully this functionality will be added to the Threads application in the future.
I expect Threads to change rapidly as features are added as well as restrictions. Meta has a long history of
increasing restrictions around access as their platforms gain in popularity. Currently Threads is in the honeymoon phase where it is easy to access and search, but this will likely change in the future.
Meta has already started to integrate Threads with some other microblogging ecosystems, such as Mastodon.
Part of Threads' development roadmap is to add this interoperability and some functionality is in place for those
who opt-in. Some of the other "fediverse" platforms are not very excited about Meta connecting to their
communities, so it remains to be seen if this cross-platform communication will ever be fully supported.
IntelTechniques Instagram Tool
If this all seems like a lot of work for minimal information, consider using my custom Instagram Tool, which
includes many of the search options previously discussed. It cannot replicate the source code techniques, but
may save you time with username and keyword searching. The online version is available on my website at
https://inteltechniques.com/tools/Instagram.html, and an offline copy is presented within your
downloads portal.

Social Networks: Instagram 253

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
SOCIAL NETWORKS: TIKTOK

The previous edition of this book included only a section about TikTok in the following chapter. The service
was popular, but not a household name. In the past two years, TikTok has exploded with users. If you are
investigating any person under 30 who is active within social media, they are very likely on TikTok.
TikTok (tiktok.com) is a Chinese-owned video-sharing social networking service which has become viral
globally. It is used to create short videos which appear to viewers in an endless stream of content. Posts accept
and display comments, both of which require login for access. There is a limited native search within the website,
but we can formulate URLs to gain direct access to targeted details. The following URL structure displays the
user profile for "snubsie".
https://www.tiktok.com/@snubsie
If you suspect your target possesses a username which includes "osint", but do not know the exact profile name,
the following URL should assist. It displays every username which includes "osint" anywhere in the name.
https://www.tiktok.com/search/user?q=osint
Many users "tag" their posts with a keyword. The following displays posts which include the tag "osint".
https://www.tiktok.com/tag/osint
The search field within TikTok pages can be unreliable. Instead, we can formulate a URL with search terms.
The following presents posts which include "osint" within the original post (requires account).
https://www.tiktok.com/search?q=osint
If you want to isolate this search to only display videos which include "osint", the following URL would apply
(requires account).
https://www.tiktok.com/search/video?q=osint
Google indexes individual TikTok posts, so the following search query would present results which include the
term "osint" within any post or author profile. This can be beneficial to discover deleted posts.
site:tiktok.com osint
Some TikTok users will broadcast live. Any current live streams can be found with the following URL.
https://www.tiktok.com/live
Once you find your target, navigating through the posts is similar to the techniques previously mentioned with
Instagram. However, we do have a few unique offerings. Each profile possesses three identifiers within the
source code view of the page. In the following example, I searched the following text within the source code
view of the TikTok page of @willsmith, with the result in parentheses.
"id" (6727327145951183878)
"uniqueId" (willsmith)
"nickname" (Will Smith)

254 Chapter 21

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Note that nicknames are not unique. They are vanity names which can be reused. We can now search the user
number within search engines in order to identify additional posts which may no longer be present within the
TikTok website. Once you identify an individual post, it may appear as follows.
https://www.tiktok.com/@willsmith/video/7032216839878905134
This will usually include a video which can be played in full screen by clicking on it. Once in the player view,
you can right-click the video and save it natively as an MP4 file. However, there could be issues with this easy
technique. TikTok could remove the feature at any time and you are at their mercy for the file resolution. If they
believe you are on a mobile device, you may receive a smaller file with lower resolution. I believe there is a better
way to acquire TikTok files.
In the first section of this book, I explained my usage of a Terminal-based program called yt-dlp to acquire
YouTube videos. This method also works great for TikTok. The following command within your OSINT VM
(or any machine with yt-dlp installed) will download our target video.
yt-dlp https://www.tiktok.com/@willsmith/video/7032216839878905134
We can add --write-info-json at the end of the command to acquire the metadata associated with the file.
This file included the following details within it.
"Accept-Language": "en-us,en;q=0.5",
"Sec-Fetch-Mode": "navigate", "Referer":
"https://www.tiktok.com/@willsmith/video/7032216839878905134"},
"channel": "Will Smith",
"channel_id": "MS4wLjABAAA222ObGXxt07F9BIh4QH3-g1P1DHyChT2LLi2cn-vAE2R53-H672ZO",
"uploader": "willsmith",
"uploader_id": "6727327145951183878",
"uploader_url": "https://www.tiktok.com/@willsmith",
"track": "original sound",
"artists": ["gakuyen"],
"duration": 9,
"title": "Sometimes we just be feelin' cute on this #kingrichard promo tour!",
"description": "Sometimes we just be feelin' cute on this #kingrichard promo tour!",
"timestamp": 1637315587,
"view_count": 4500000,
"like_count": 406400,
"repost_count": 542,
"comment_count": 1723,
"webpage_url_basename": "7032216839878905134", "
webpage_url_domain": "tiktok.com",
"extractor": "TikTok",
"extractor_key": "TikTok",
"upload_date": "20211119",
"ext": "mp4",
"vcodec": "h265",
"acodec": "aac",
"filesize": 1353054,
"width": 1080,
"height": 1920,"
This presents a ton of details, all generated directly by TikTok.

Social Networks: TikTok 255

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Most videos display an upload date within the content, but I always prefer to obtain a full date and time of
upload. To do this, right-click a post and choose to view the page source. When this new tab of text opens,
search (ctrl-f or cmd-f) for "~tplv". This should present a result similar to the following.
1637781925~tplv
The numbers directly before this search term represent a Unix timestamp, which was explained in previous
chapters (Instagram). We can convert this number at unixtimestamp.com, which produces the following result.
Wed Nov 24 2021 19:25:25 GMT+0000
We now know the exact date and time of the post. Accessing some features and content on TikTok requires
you to be logged in. I always recommend a "burner" account which is associated with a Gmail address or social
network connection. When you attempt to create an account, you will see a list of accepted associations. In my
experience, attempting to make a new account only associated with an email address will result in a demand to
download their app to continue. I never recommend this. Instead, I open a new Firefox container assigned
specifically to an investigative Google account. I then allow TikTok to build my account based on that data.
From a privacy perspective, I hate these associations. If the Google account is free of any activity or personal
information, I tolerate it. Associating an active Google account almost always bypasses the need to install the
app, and allows full functionality within a browser
The commenting system on TikTok is very similar to Facebook and Instagram. Each comment post presents a
username with hyperlink; the comment from that user; the date of the comment; the number of "likes"; and an
option to expand further comments to that comment. Screen captures may work well for unpopular posts, but
posts with many views may be a problem. Export Comments (exportcomments.com) will extract the first 100
comments from any post. A premium account is required to download larger content. There are several
"scraper" applications and Chrome extensions which claim to aid in comment exportation, but I have found
them all to be unreliable.
You can also see the comments within the browser element inspector under the section labeled
https://www.tiktok.com/api/comment/list/. If you load our previous video, right-click outside the video area,
choose Inspect, click the Network tab, and play the video, you should see comments populating within the page.
Conduct a search within the lower Inspect area for "comment/list". This should limit you to a single file. Rightclick that entry and select "Open in new tab". This should launch the JSON view of the comments. The
following is a very partial entry from this text-only view, highlighting the most interesting data. This presents
more granular detail from the comments, and is the same way that online extraction services pluck this data.
"comment_language": "en",
"create_time": 1637626005,
"desc": "TianeMarshaxのコメント,
"reply_score": 0.00056,
"text": "I thought Robert was on the loose. I nearly damn cried
"nickname": "TianeMarshax",
"uid": "6866147955729728517",

",

Most users will display a small avatar icon next to their account details. If a larger image was uploaded, we can
usually retrieve it through the source code. Let's test this for our current target (Will Smith). Navigate to
https://www.tiktok.com/@willsmith, right-click the avatar and save the image. In my attempt, this downloaded
a 55 kb jpeg image. Return to the avatar on the profile, but this time right-click and choose "Inspect". This
should open a lower frame with this image selected. Right-click the highlighted image. Mine appeared as follows.

256 Chapter 21

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

https://p19-pu-sign-useast8.tiktokcdn-us.com/tos-useast8-avt-0068tx2/62fcd65727a185278429a12d6bfecced~c5_720x720.jpeg?lk3s=a5d48078&nonce=4635&refresh_token=5
19f43cd9d35bc895cd7ee813fe3248f&x-expires=1726412400&xsignature=E3aqvnZoVgUmkmD%2Fo825fBqfTcw%3D&shp=a5d48078&shcp=81f88b70
This opened the same 720p version of the profile image which we retrieved by simply downloading the icon.
However, we want the largest image possible. Return to the profile, and right-click to select "View Page Source".
Within this text, search for "jpeg". I observed only five files. One of which was the following.
"https:\u002F\u002Fp16-pu-sign-useast8.tiktokcdn-us.com\u002Ftos-useast8-avt-0068tx2\u002F62fcd65727a185278429a12d6bfecced~c5_1080x1080.jpeg?lk3s=a5d48078&nonce=83375&refresh
_token=f0f967025448777565f868d4cf4b1e7f&x-expires=1726412400&xsignature=eh2w6gICA5RKyDTw46ZhT89%2BxOc%3D&shp=a5d48078&shcp=81f88b70"
Opening this link will fail. However, we can use the previous URL and this URL to combine the text needed to
access the larger image. Notice in the 720p link, the image name started with "62fcd657". We see in this larger
URL the same characters. If we copy every character beginning with "62fcd657" through the end of the URL
and replace the text in the previous smaller image URL, we should receive the larger image. My URL was the
following.
https://p16-pu-sign-useast8.tiktokcdn-us.com/tos-useast8-avt-0068tx2/62fcd65727a185278429a12d6bfecced~c5_1080x1080.jpeg?lk3s=a5d48078&nonce=83375&refresh_token
=f0f967025448777565f868d4cf4b1e7f&x-expires=1726412400&xsignature=eh2w6gICA5RKyDTw46ZhT89%2BxOc%3D&shp=a5d48078&shcp=81f88b70
This presented a 1080p image, and is the largest available. Was this a lot of effort for little reward? Quite possibly.
If you want an easier route, online extractors such as ttsave.app do the same thing for you. Personally, I prefer
the manual way which I can articulate in my report. Figure 21.01 displays the process of using the browser's
Inspect tool.
There are also numerous third-party TikTok services which provide analytics on target profiles. I prefer those
which allow submission within the URL, such as the following, which display results for "vancityreynolds" (Ryan
Reynolds, who was an owner of Mint Mobile, which may be of interest to listeners of my show).
https://tokcount.com/?user=vancityreynolds
https://tokcounter.com/?user=vancityreynolds
https://exolyt.com/user/vancityreynolds/full
These four sites confirm the following details about my target.
25.5M Followers
15 Following
157M Likes
43.7k Average Post Comments
39.4M Average Plays
108k Average Shares

Latest Bio Details
Profile Image
All Recent Posts
Daily Engagement Rate Changes
Follower Growth Chart
Daily Performance Score

Social Networks: TikTok 257

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Figure 21.01: Using our browser's developer tools to inspect comments
While most of these granular details will not be very helpful to an investigation, they should all be documented.
I have included most of the TikTok search features within the Communities Search Tool presented in the next
chapter. There were not enough options to justify its own page.
The popularity of the TikTok platform across many demographics has made it a fertile source of intelligence
and I now regularly include it in my investigations. When assisting law enforcement colleagues with a recent case
involving underground street racing, TikTok was pivotal in exposing involved individuals, video evidence of
crimes, and intelligence on forthcoming events. Whereas the targets had privatized content on other platforms,
they had used identical account names on the TikTok platform and were publicly posting valuable investigative
leads. This tactic of searching known usernames across popular platforms is a key technique in our arsenal and
TikTok's popularity makes it one of the best places to look for our target's alternate accounts and postings.
At the very least, understand how to properly create screen captures and full video exports as evidence. It is
important to understand this platform and the many ways of exploring the content.

258 Chapter 21

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
ONLINE COMMUNITIES

Online communities are very similar to social networks. The thin line which has separated the two is slowly
disappearing. While social networks cater to a broad audience with many interests, these communities usually
relate to a specific service or lifestyle. Some online communities do not get indexed by search engines; therefore,
the presence of a target's participation will not always be found through Google or Bing. Any time that a target's
interests or hobbies are located through the previous search techniques, you should also seek the online
communities that cater to that topic. This can often identify information that is very personal and private to the
target. Many people post to these communities without any regard to privacy. Some communities require
registration to see the content, which is usually free. Occasionally, a cached version of the pages on the site is
available without registering. This chapter will provide methods of infiltrating these communities to maximize
the intelligence obtained.
While we see high usage on the most popular social network sites, such as TikTok and Instagram, we may not
see much incriminating evidence. Instead of finding your suspect confessing to your investigation on Facebook
or Twitter, you may be more likely to find his grandmother testifying to his innocence. Your suspect may feel
exposed on the bigger sites, but a bit more private on smaller communities.
For OSINT purposes, I believe social networks are defined as generic areas which cater to a wide audience with
various interests. We see much more general engagement between members within these platforms. People
from all walks of life are on Facebook, regardless of their profession or age.
On the contrary, I believe online communities cater to a niche audience and are likely ignored by the masses
which do not have a similar interest. I place LinkedIn, Snapchat, and dating services in this category. Most people
on Tinder are single, and Snapchat primarily consists of a young audience. These are specialty sites with which
my mother is unfamiliar (I hope).
It is impossible to mention even a fraction of potential communities which may contain online evidence about
your target. Instead, I focus on those which have large numbers of members and are common to most internet
users. My goal is to present various investigation tactics within each popular community which can be carried
over to networks which are not discussed.
As an example, the Google "site" queries which will be used to identify LinkedIn content can also be used for
hundreds of other networks. Please watch for techniques instead of specific resources or links. I promise that
the following methods will need to be adjusted over time, but the overall strategies should prove to be useful
when we see changes in the search infrastructure from the networks. Let's start with the most popular options
and work our way down to the niche sites.
LinkedIn (linkedin.com)
When it comes to business-related social networking sites, LinkedIn is the most popular. It is owned by
Microsoft and currently has more than 675 million subscribers internationally. The site requires searchers to
create a free profile before accessing any data. As with any social network, I recommend creating a basic account
with minimal details. The search field of any page offers a search using a real name, company, location, or title.
These searches will often lead to multiple results which identify several subjects. The site was redesigned in 2020,
which provides new options. The upper center portion of any search result page will offer some basic
refinements to the search to filter by Jobs, Posts, Groups, People, Products, Companies, Schools, Courses,
Events, and Services. These can also be queried by direct URL. The following includes a summary of each filter
and the direct search URL which we will add to our custom search tools.

Online Communities 259

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Jobs: (https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/index/?keywords=john%20wilson)
This presents current job openings and includes numerous additional filters. While beneficial for employmentseekers, I find this less useful than the other queries when my target is a person. However, it can be quite useful
when investigating a company. Network penetration testers can use this to identify software applications used
by the client, which could lead to identification of vulnerabilities.
Posts: (https://www.linkedin.com/search/results/content/?keywords=john wilson)
This option is similar to Facebook and presents posts including the provided search terms. This helps find
content about (or by) our target. Further filters include search by date, author, and industry.
Groups: (https://www.linkedin.com/search/results/groups/?keywords=john wilson)
This option presents LinkedIn groups which contain your keyword within the title or description. It does not
search for member names.
People: (https://www.linkedin.com/search/results/people/?keywords=john wilson)
This is the most common filter which presents profiles of people. Further filtering includes location and
employer. This URL would find people named John Wilson.
Products: (https://www.linkedin.com/search/results/Products/?keywords=osint)
This search often nets limited results, but when researching a company, it may prove useful to also query their
product and service offerings on LinkedIn.
Companies: (https://www.linkedin.com/search/results/companies/?keywords=john wilson)
This query strictly identifies companies which include the searched keywords. Further filters include location,
industry, and company size.
Schools: (https://www.linkedin.com/search/results/schools/?keywords=john wilson)
This queries schools with the keywords in the title.
Courses: (https://www.linkedin.com/search/results/learning/?keywords=osint)
This search returns results for courses hosted on the LinkedIn Learning platform, which is built on what was
originally Lynda.com until they were acquired by LinkedIn in 2015.
Events: (https://www.linkedin.com/search/results/events/?keywords=john wilson)
This queries events with the keywords in the title.
Services: (https://www.linkedin.com/search/results/services/?keywords=osint)
The results from a services query will list service pages which is primarily made up of contractors.
Knowing the real name of your target will be most beneficial. The results page should include the target's
employer, location, industry, and possibly a photo. After identifying the appropriate target, clicking the name
will open that user's profile if the user has not restricted access in the visibility settings of their account. If
searching a common name, the filters will help limit options.
Profiles
The profiles on LinkedIn often contain an abundance of information. Since this network is used primarily for
business networking, an accelerated level of trust is usually present. Many of the people on this network use it
to make business connections. Some of the profiles will contain full contact information including cellular
telephone numbers. This site should be one of the first stops when conducting a background check on a target
for employment purposes. The target profile often contains previous employment information, alumni details,
and work associates. Aside from searching names and businesses, you can search any keywords that may appear

260 Chapter 22

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

within someone's profile. Since many people include their phone numbers or email addresses in their profile,
this can be an easy way to identify the user of that specific data. Visiting this profile identifies further information
as well as confirmation of the target number. You can also search LinkedIn for a specific username, which may
be directly associated with a profile. As an example, the following URL connects directly to a target.
https://www.linkedin.com/in/ambermac/
Posts
In years prior, LinkedIn was a place to create a profile and communicate directly with another person. Today, it
is a true social network with Posts, Likes, and Comments. Conducting a keyword search through any LinkedIn
page or my own custom tool will present anything applicable. From there, consider the following.
•
•
•
•
•

Clicking the three dots within a post allows you to copy a static URL of the content, which is beneficial
during documentation.
Expanding all comments before generating a screen capture presents additional evidence within your
documentation.
Many posts are redacted to save space. Click "...see more" to enable this hidden content before
generating a screen capture.
Clicking the number next to the "clapping hands" icon presents a list of people interested in the post,
which looks almost identical to the Instagram options.
The Instagram media capture techniques previously presented work the same for LinkedIn. Use the
Network tab in your browsers developer tools to filter for images or filter for "mp4" to isolate direct
links to video files.

Timestamps
Much like other social networks, LinkedIn hides the dates and times behind generic announcements such as
"posted 2 weeks ago". As online investigators, we need something more specific. Let's conduct a detailed
example, which can be replicated across all of LinkedIn. Consider the post in Figure 22.01. The date of posting
is "1w" in the upper-right corner, insinuating the post was published one week prior to today's date. In that
image, I have already clicked the three dots in the upper-right which presented a new menu. I clicked "Copy link
to comment", which was the following.
https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:6996561887907692544?commentUrn=urn%3Ali%3Ac
omment%3A%28activity%3A6996561887907692544%2C6996572489061474307%29
Loading that URL in the browser presented the same comment, but it was technically a unique page from the
original post which generated this response. Next, I right-clicked on the page and selected the option to "View
Page Source", much like we did previously with Instagram. I searched through this code for the message, which
is "Congratulations!" in this scenario. I then saw the following text, and I have bolded the important areas.
Congratulations!&quot;,&quot;$type&quot;:&quot;com.linkedin.voyager.common.TextViewModel&quot;},
&quot;createdTime&quot;:1668112871423
The numbers represent Unix time, the same as with Instagram. We can visit the Epoch Converter site at
epochconverter.com again to convert this number to GMT time, which happens to be Thursday, November 10,
2022 at 20:41:11. We now have a specific date and time of the post.

Online Communities 261

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Figure 22.01: A generic timestamp on a LinkedIn post.
I believe this is the most reliable way to investigate this, but we have one additional option which does not
require viewing any source code. Let's revisit the URL above, but break down the pieces. The first numbers
(6996561887907692544) represented the original poster's activity number for the post. The second numbers
(6996561887907692544) repeated this activity number again, but the third numbers (6996572489061474307)
presented a unique activity number for the "Congratulations" response, which is our target. We can now create
two unique addresses. The first URL below would present the original post. The second URL would present an
error, but contains the timestamp of the "Congratulations!" response in the source code.
https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:6996561887907692544
https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:6996572489061474307
You could paste both of these URLs, or any other LinkedIn URL, into my LinkedIn timestamp tool, which is
explained in a moment, to immediately see the timestamp of each post. My tool relies on JavaScript originally
created at github.com/Ollie-Boyd. Figure 22.02 displays the result from this demonstration.

Figure 22.02: Timestamp results using https://inteltechniques.com/tools/Linkedin.html
Searching by Personal Details
You might get lucky and find your target with a simple name search. Unfortunately, this is rarely the case. With
hundreds of millions of profiles, LinkedIn must make some assumptions when choosing the profiles to display
after a search. This is especially true with common names. Let's conduct several queries as part of a
demonstration of LinkedIn's URL structure. Searching "John Smith" produces practically useless results at the
following URL.
https://www.linkedin.com/search/results/people/?keywords=john%20smith
Instead of the default "keywords" parameter, let's force a change with the following URL.
https://www.linkedin.com/search/results/people/?firstName=john
Changing to "firstName" displays content associated with people named John. This is still fairly unhelpful and
includes a lot of content which is not applicable to our target. Now, let's specify the full name of our target in
the following URL.
https://www.linkedin.com/search/results/people/?firstName=john&lastName=smith

262 Chapter 22

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

The results now only include links to profiles of people with the real name of John Smith. This is much more
useful and may be all you need to identify your target. With a name such as John Smith, we need to go a few
steps further. The following URL adds his employer (Microsoft).
https://www.linkedin.com/search/results/people/?firstName=john&lastName=smith
&company=microsoft
If you wanted to go further, we could specify his title (Manager) and school (Oklahoma) in the following URL.
If you know these details about your target, you could start with this, but I find that providing too many details
can work against you. Figure 22.03 displays the result of this URL, which identified the only person on LinkedIn
which fit the criteria.
https://www.linkedin.com/search/results/people/?firstName=john&lastName=smith
&company=microsoft&title=manager&school=Oklahoma
The previous URL query is the most precise option we have. This has been the most beneficial structure I have
found to navigate directly to my target. However, it can fail. If your suspect did not provide the school attended
or current employer to his profile, you will not receive any leniency from LinkedIn within this search. However,
we can rely on Google to help us. Your target may have mentioned an employer somewhere else within the
profile or listed a school within the "Interests" area. The following reveals many profiles associated with the
target.
site:www.linkedin.com john smith Microsoft manager Oklahoma
Searching by Company
If you are searching for employees of a specific company, searching the company name often provides numerous
profiles. We can easily structure the following URL which queries for a person (John Smith) associated with a
specific company (Microsoft).
https://www.linkedin.com/company/microsoft/people/?keywords=john%20smith
Unfortunately, clicking on any of these profiles presents a very limited view with the name and details redacted.
The name of the employee is usually not available, but the photo and job description are usually visible. You are
now required to upgrade to a premium account, or be in the same circles as the target, in order to get further
information. Instead, consider the following technique. Search for the business name of your target company,
or the employer of your target individual. I typed "Uber" into the search bar and received the official business
page on LinkedIn. Clicking the "See all 88,788 employees on LinkedIn" link presented me with numerous
employee profiles such as the one visible in Figure 22.04. Notice the name is redacted and only "LinkedIn
Member" is available. Clicking this first result prompts me with "Profiles out of your network have limited
visibility. To see more profiles, build your network with valuable connections". We struck out, but there are
ways that you can proceed in order to unmask these details. First, copy the entire job description under the
"LinkedIn Member" title. In this example, it is "Account Executive at Uber". Use this in a custom Google search
similar to the following.
site:linkedin.com "Account Executive at Uber"
The results listed will vary from personal profiles to useless directories. Since Uber is such a large company, I
had to view many pages of results until I identified my target. When I opened the 24th search result, the LinkedIn
page loaded, and her photo confirmed it was the correct target. The easier way would have been to search the
images presented by Google. After the above search is conducted, click on the Images option within Google
and view the results. Figure 22.05 (left) displays a section, which easily identifies the same image as the LinkedIn
target. Clicking this will load the profile page with full name and details.

Online Communities 263

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Another way to accomplish this is to navigate through the profiles in the "People also viewed" column. These
pages include other profiles viewed that are associated with whichever person you are currently analyzing. These
people may not be friends or co-workers with your target, but there is a connection through the visitors of their
pages. As an example, I returned to the Google search at the top of this page. I clicked on the first search result,
which was not my target. However, in the "People also viewed" area to the right, I saw my target, including her
full name and a link to her complete profile. Figure 22.05 (right) displays this result. In 2024, LinkedIn replaced
"People also viewed" with "More profiles for you" which functions similarly.
Finally, the last option is to conduct a reverse image search on the photo associated with the target's profile. Full
details of this type of search will be presented later. For this demonstration, I will right-click on her photo and
choose "Copy image location". On the Google Images page, I can click the camera icon and submit this URL.
While the first result is not the target, clicking the page does present a link to the target's unmasked page. I will
later explain many detailed ways to fully query reverse image search options within the upcoming Images chapter.

Figure 22.04: Redacted employee results from a business search.

Figure 22.05: Google Images results (left) and un-redacted LinkedIn results (right).
Searching by City or Country
To complete a query and filter the results by country or city, I first conduct a keyword search as usual using the
LinkedIn search field. I then scroll to the type of results I am interested in, such as "People" and click on See all
people results". This will bring up additional filters including "Locations", which will allow you to add a specific
city or country.
PDF Profile View
You may want a quick way to collect the publicly available details from the profiles that you find. One option is
to have LinkedIn generate a PDF of the information. While on any profile, click the "More…" button and
choose "Save to PDF". This will not extract any private details, but will make data collection fast.

264 Chapter 22

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Google Search
When all else fails, go to Google. It scrapes and indexes most of LinkedIn's profiles and pages. The following
search would identify profiles of our target, followed by the direct URL.
site:www.linkedin.com john smith microsoft
https://www.google.com/search?q=site%3Awww.linkedin.com+john+smith+microsoft
Google Images
The results may be overwhelming. Often, I know the face of my target and I simply want to browse images
from LinkedIn. The following URL queries Google for any images (&tbm=isch) associated with my target's
name (john+smith) on LinkedIn (site:linkedin.com). In a moment, we will replicate all of this with my tools.
https://www.google.com/search?q=site:linkedin.com+john+smith&tbm=isch
Google Videos
Many LinkedIn posts contain embedded videos. While a keyword search directly on LinkedIn may not find
them, a query on Google should. The following URL replicates our image search, but focuses only on videos
(&tbm=vid)
https://www.google.com/search?q=site:linkedin.com+john+smith&tbm=vid
Bing Search
While Google is typically our most powerful search engine, I prefer Bing for LinkedIn queries. Microsoft owns
both Bing and LinkedIn, and indexes LinkedIn data well. The following search on Bing replicates our Google
attempt, followed by the direct URL.
site:linkedin.com john smith microsoft
https://www.bing.com/search?q=site%3Alinkedin.com+john+smith+microsoft
Yandex Search
Finally, we should always consider Yandex as a LinkedIn search engine. The following search on Yandex
replicates our Google attempt, followed by the direct URL.
site:linkedin.com john smith microsoft
https://www.yandex.com/search/?text=site%3Alinkedin.com+john+smith+microsoft
IntelTechniques LinkedIn Tool
These search techniques may seem complicated, but we can simplify them with our custom search tool. The
"LinkedIn" section of the offline tool, which you previously downloaded, possesses several advanced search
features. Most techniques mentioned in this section are available as automated queries within this tool. The
online version is available at https://inteltechniques.com/tools/Linkedin.html.

Online Communities 265

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Snapchat (snapchat.com)
Overall, Snapchat is a difficult OSINT resource. It is available officially as a mobile application, and there is
minimal native web search. The majority of the content is set to auto-destruct after a specific amount of time,
and is privately delivered from one user to another. In 2018, we started to see much more public content, and
in 2020, we saw better search options. In 2024, we witnessed many of our favorite search techniques disappear.
Today, Snapchat is locked down more than ever before. While there are some extended search options within
the app itself, I will only focus on traditional web resources here. Let's start with official options within the
Snapchat website. However, you will always receive better results within the Snapchat mobile application.
Keyword Search: (https://www.snapchat.com/explore/osint) This queries the search term throughout
Snapchat. I find it to fails often, but should be attempted.
User Search: (https://www.snapchat.com/add/inteltechniques) This option may forward to the "Story" page,
which can also serve as the landing page for that profile. The privacy settings on the target account may limit
our results.
Google/Bing/Yandex
You should expect by now that we can use traditional search engines to query specific sites and services. A query
of site:snapchat.com "inteltechniques" would search for any mention of "inteltechniques" within Snapchat
across the three major search engines. I include Snapchat query options within the Username Tool, which is
explained later.
Google Networks
Every Google account has been issued a specific numeric ID which associates the account with any Google
service used. This includes Gmail addresses, YouTube accounts, photo albums, and other areas. My goal is
always to identify the Google ID and then research any areas which may be associated with my target. First, we
must find the ID itself. There are several ways, let's start with the manual option.
•
•
•
•
•

Log in to any covert Google account and navigate to mail.google.com/chat.
Right-click on the page and select "Inspect".
Click "Find a Chat" and enter your target's email address.
Strike enter but do not send any communication.
In the "SearchHTML" field, enter the email address of your target.

Striking enter or return on your keyboard should cycle through the results. One of the results should contain
data such as "data-member-id="user/human/100202552162672367520". The numbers after "human/" is the
Google User ID of your target. I typically document this within my report for future reference. The following
URL should display any public map contributions made by this target. However, this technique seems to be less
reliable every year.
https://www.google.com/maps/contrib/100202552162672367520
Let's conduct a real example using my friend Justin Seitz as the target. We know his personal email address is
justin.seitz@gmail.com (he is the creator of Hunchly and provided permission to do this). This means that he
has a valid Google account, so he should also have a Google ID. I used the premium Epieos tool (epieos.com)
to search his email. The result appears in Figure 22.06 (left). This identifies his Google ID as
"100202552162672367520". Clicking "Reviews" presents the content in Figure 22.06 (right).

266 Chapter 22

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

(left) associated with a map review (right).
We now know his interests and potential area of residence. We can also use this technique to confirm association
from our target to malicious negative reviews. My success rate of viewing public photo albums with this method
is low, but the availability of mapping data has been high. This will immediately display reviews of businesses
and photos of locations which have been shared by your target with the Google Maps service.
Tumblr (tumblr.com)
Tumblr was purchased by Yahoo in 2013, Verizon became the owner when it acquired Yahoo in 2017, but then
sold Tumblr to WordPress owner Automatic in 2019. While I believe neither Yahoo or Verizon took advantage
of the reach of this network, I suspect we will see Tumblr continue to thrive over the years under control of
Automatic. Tumblr is half social network and half blog service. At the time of this writing, there were hundreds
of millions of blogs and hundreds of billions of posts. These posts can include text, photos, videos, and links to
other networks. The search method and layout are no longer user-friendly. The search feature will only identify
blogs that were specifically tagged by the creator with the provided search terms. I suggest using a custom
Google search. As an example, I conducted a search of "osint" within the official Tumblr search and received
three results. I then conducted the following search in Google and received the appropriate 611 results.
site:tumblr.com "osint"
Once you find a blog associated with your target, consider the Photo Gallery Tool explained in Chapter Four.
It will retrieve all of the images and videos. Opening each post within a browser allows you to see and capture
all "likes" and "reblogs". Similar to other networks such as Instagram, people can "tag" items with specific terms.
The following URL presents any posts tagged "osint". At the time of this writing, the tag URL presented many
more items than a keyword search on Tumblr.
https://www.tumblr.com/tagged/osint
Usernames cannot be queried, but a direct URL may locate the content. If your target uses "inteltechniques" on
other sites, you may find applicable content at the following URL.
https://inteltechniques.tumblr.com
Most profiles contain a search field dedicated to the author's posts. It can also be queried with a direct URL. If
you wanted to search for any posts by "inteltechniques" which contain the term "osint", the following URL
would apply.

Online Communities 267

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

https://inteltechniques.tumblr.com/search/osint
Many Tumblr blogs display a large layout which hides many of the posts. Therefore, I always prefer to browse
a user's posts with the "Archive" display.
https://inteltechniques.tumblr.com/archive
I have incorporated some of these queries into the Username Tool, which is explained in a later chapter. While
accessing the Tumblr site you may receive popups requiring you to login to an account. You can remove these
popups by blocking them with uBlock Origin using blocking rules or the zapper tool (the lightning icon in
uBlock Origin).
Telegram (telegram.org)
Much of the content on Telegram is encrypted private communications between individuals. However,
"Channels" were added in 2015 and have become quite popular. These are publicly visible and often include
content replicated from other social networks and websites. There is no official search option on telegram.org,
but options exist based on the public data. I have found site searches on Google to be the most helpful. The
following examples may help explain. I searched "osint" within different official Telegram domains and received
very unique results from each.
site:telegram.me "osint" (2620 results)
site:t.me "osint" (22 results)
site:telegra.ph "osint" (255 results)
Although the results tend to be limited, I sometimes have luck structuring a query to search specifically for
groups.
site:t.me/joinchat "osint"
We can also use URL manipulation to manually query usernames, although the level of detail included in the
results will vary based on the target account's profile settings.
https://t.me/inteltechniques
Limited results will likely open within browser windows if you do not have Telegram installed, and may launch
the Telegram desktop application if it is available. Note that I will dive much deeper into Telegram usage
within the data breaches chapter.
Telegram Analytics (tgstat.ru - telemetr.io)
I believe these are the most robust Telegram Channel search options currently available. A keyword search
presents channels which are associated with the terms and immediately displays analytics including subscribers,
growth, and post reach. Clicking on the channel name presents further details about post behaviors and history.
Some search features on these sites require that we create a free account using a burner email address such as
SimpleLogin (app.simplelogin.io).
Access to Private Profiles
There have been several "hacks" in the past that would allow a type of "back door entry" into a profile that is
marked as private. By the time these methods become known, the vulnerability is usually corrected by the social
network host. Websites or applications that publicly claim to be able to access this secured data are most often
scams or attempts to steal your own passwords. In my experience, it is best to avoid these traps and focus on

268 Chapter 22

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

finding all available public information. At the time of this writing, an application had recently surfaced that
claimed to be able to obtain all information from within private Facebook accounts. The program did not work,
but installed a malicious virus instead. If it seems too good to be true, it probably is.
Contact Exploitation
Previously, I explained how to add cell phone numbers and email addresses as contacts to an Android virtual
machine in order to supply them to various apps. When programs received the numbers directly from the
contacts list, it believed the contacts were "friends"; therefore, they often identify the names and accounts
associated with each number or email. I refer to this technique as contact exploitation, and the Android
technique is not the only option for this type of activity. This technique works throughout several social
networking environments. I keep covert Gmail accounts solely for adding my target's contact information and
asking networks to find friends based on this data. I am often presented with profiles in my target's true name
as well as alias accounts.
We now know that locating someone's social network profile can reveal quite a lot about them. Just knowing a
target name can make use of the people search engines that will identify places to seek more information.
Unfortunately, sometimes the investigator does not know the target's name. A common scenario is an
investigation into some type of event. This could be a specific violent crime, a bomb threat on a campus, or
inappropriate chatter about a particular business. All of these scenarios require search engines that monitor
social network traffic. There is an abundance of these types of services. Some will work better on reactive
investigations after an incident while others show their strength during proactive investigations while monitoring
conversations. Many of the sites mentioned here will find the same results as each other.
Overall, some of the strongest methods of searching social network traffic have already been discussed in the
Facebook and Twitter chapters. Searching for traffic at the source, such as on x.com, will usually provide more
accurate and updated content than on an aggregated website of multiple sources. Furthermore, searching specific
services through Google or Bing may sometimes quickly locate results that would be difficult to obtain anywhere
else. The use of the site operator previously explained will take you far. Aside from direct searches on social
networks and targeted search engine queries, there are other options. The accuracy of the services mentioned in
the rest of this chapter varies monthly. Hopefully, you will find some of these websites to have value in your
investigations. I believe that the options in this chapter should be used to supplement, not replace, the results
obtained from previous methods.
Social Searcher (social-searcher.com)
I had previously discouraged users from attempting searches on the first version of Social Searcher. Since then,
I have begun to rely on their free service to digest data located on the main social networks. You can provide
any keywords, usernames, or terms and receive the most recent results from Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and
the overall web. It allows email alerts to be created for notification of new content matching your query. One
of the unique features of this website is the free ability to export search results into CSV format. This output
contains the username, date & time, and entire message among other information. Having this in a spreadsheet
format can be incredibly beneficial. This document also included dozens of Reddit and other network posts.
The document could be imported into any other collection system.
International Social Networks
While this book is heavily focused on social networks popular in the United States, they tend to be fairly global
with an international presence. This is especially true for Facebook and Twitter. However, there are many social
networks which are not popular within the United States that are the primary networks to local residents abroad.
This section attempts to identify and explain the most popular foreign networks that may be used by your
international targets.

Online Communities 269

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Russia: VK (vk.com)
VK is basically a Russian version of Facebook. You can create a new free account or log in using your existing
Facebook credentials. Most search options function without logging in to an account. The page at
vk.com/people offers advanced search options which allow filtering by location, school, age, gender, and
interests. Most profiles publicly display a user's birthday, location, and full photo collection.
Russia: Odnoklassniki (ok.ru)
Odnoklassniki works similar to most other social media platforms. It is intended to be a way to communicate
with friends, as well as an opportunity to network with other people with similar interests. The service is
concentrated on classmates and old friends, and translates to "Classmates" in Russian. The official search page
is located at ok.ru/search, but you will need to create an account to take full advantage of the options. I have
found a targeted site search on Google to be most effective. Searching for Michael Smith could be conducted
with "site:ok.ru michael smith". The links connect directly to profiles, which can be browsed as normal. These
will appear very similar to Facebook profiles. The upper-right portion of a profile will announce the date of the
user's last login. Most of the profile details are public, and do not require any type of URL trickery in order to
expose the details.
China: Qzone (qq.com)
Qzone is typically used as a blogging and diary platform. Most of the loyalty to the platform is due to the
popularity of the instant messaging tool "QQ". This is a one-to-one messaging platform, so opportunities for
public search are not present. The search options on qq.com pages provide results similar to Chinese search
engines such as Baidu. The searches are not restricted to the social network profiles. I have found searching on
Google or Baidu to work best for English queries. The format of "site:user.qzone.qq.com michael smith" should
begin your query, although results will be sparse. We can use the password recovery page located at
https://accounts.qq.com/psw/find to query email addresses, although anytime we use this method assume that
the platform will notify the account holder that a password recovery was attempted.
Newer Social Networks
These social networks represent only a portion of the available options. Overall, resort to custom Google
searches when new services appear. As I write this, I am monitoring newer sites such as Parler (parler.com),
Gab (gab.com), Gettr (gettr.com), and Mastodon (mastodon.social), all of which claim to be the next generation
of social networks. The search techniques previously presented throughout this book also apply to these new
platforms. Let's briefly dissect each.
Parler was previously shutdown, but has been recently been reopened after being acquired by a new company
in 2023. Conducting queries on Parler is very straightforward and we can start by using our Google site: operator.
site:parler.com "keyword"
Once you identify a target profile, such as "inteltechniques", or a topic, such as "bomb", the following should
disclose details.
https://app.parler.com/inteltechniques
https://app.parler.com/search?type=user&s=inteltechniques
https://app.parler.com/search?type=hashtag&s=bomb
Clicking through options such as "Media", "Following", and comment notifications should present data similar
to Twitter and Instagram. There is no real magic here, what you see is what you get.

270 Chapter 22

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Gab has been widely described as a haven for extremists including neo-Nazis and white supremacists, and has
attracted users who have been banned from other social networks. We have the following direct query URLs
assuming your target is "inteltechniques" and your keyword of interest is "osint". Note that an account is required
to view most data.
https://gab.com/inteltechniques
https://gab.com/search/top?q=osint
https://gab.com/search/people?q=osint
https://gab.com/search/groups?q=osint
https://gab.com/search/statuses?q=osint
https://gab.com/search/links?q=osint
https://gab.com/search/feeds?q=osint
https://gab.com/search/businesses?q=osint
https://gab.com/search/marketplace?q=osint
https://gab.com/search/hashtags?q=osint
We can also use our site: operator on Google although results tend to be limited. If we start with site:gab.com
osint, one of the top results is https://gab.com/Numbers_Stations. We can click on the three vertical docs next
to that Google result to open the "About the source" panel. If we click on "More about this page" we will see
an option at the bottom which reads "See previous versions on Internet Archive's Wayback Machine". Selecting
that will take us to previously saved versions of the target Gab profile on Archive.org. This has proven useful
for locating old posts and deleted content.
Gettr is a Twitter clone targeted toward far-right political beliefs. The structure of all accounts and feeds follows
the Twitter examples previously presented. The following would apply if I were a member.
https://www.gettr.com/user/inteltechniques
https://www.gettr.com/user/inteltechniques/followers
https://www.gettr.com/user/inteltechniques/following
https://gettr.com/user/inteltechniques/recommend
https://www.gettr.com/search?q=to:inteltechniques
https://www.gettr.com/search?q=from:inteltechniques
https://www.gettr.com/user/inteltechniques/comments
https://gettr.com/user/thedahmercase/live
https://gettr.com/user/thedahmercase/gtok
https://www.gettr.com/user/inteltechniques/medias
https://www.gettr.com/user/inteltechniques/likes
Search is straightforward and we have options for using both Google and Gettr's own search feature.
site:gettr.com "osint"
https://gettr.com/search?q=osint
Mastodon received a lot of attention in late 2022. As Elon Musk began taking over Twitter, many people exited
and sought alternative options. Mastodon is a very popular Twitter clone, so many people ended up there. While
search engines will push you toward joinmastodon.org, that domain will not offer many search possibilities. You
might find mastodon.social, but it is only one of many communities which allow connection through the
Mastodon network. This is because Mastodon is a decentralized social network which can be self-hosted and
is available on numerous servers. Services such as Twitter are centralized. You must connect through x.com
and Twitter has the power to prevent your access. You can join and participate in Mastodon from a number of
servers, each independent of any Mastodon domains. This can cause a lot of confusion. Let's start with
mastodon.social, but we will rely on official APIs for our OSINT research. Assuming your target was
"alexwinter" and he was present on the "mastodon.social" instance, the following would apply.

Online Communities 271

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

https://mastodon.social/@alexwinter
https://mastodon.social/@alexwinter/with_replies
https://mastodon.social/@alexwinter/following
https://mastodon.social/@alexwinter/followers
https://mastodon.social/@alexwinter/media
These URLs would display his profile and all messages; messages with replies; the people following him; the
people he follows; and posts which contain media. This should seem very familiar after the Twitter chapter.
While his username on "mastodon.social" is simply "alexwinter", his full Mastodon username, including the
community where he joined, is "@alexwinter@mastodon.social". This means that someone could join
Mastodon through another server with his exact username. The following are examples of multiple accounts
with a username of "JohnDoe".
https://social.tchncs.de/@JohnDoe
https://social.linux.pizza/@JohnDoe
https://mastodon.top/@JohnDoe
This is why you should never rely on one site, such as mastodon.social. While it may connect you to everything
on the Mastodon network, your results could be filtered without you knowing. Next, let's compare a typical
graphical view of a profile with the API option. I will return to https://mastodon.social/@alexwinter. I can see
the date he joined, an image, and general biographical details. Let's compare that to the following URL.
https://mastodon.social/api/v2/search?q=alexwinter&limit=40&type=accounts
This URL reveals the following text-only result.
id
username
acct
display_name
locked
created_at
note
url
followers_count
following_count
statuses_count
last_status_at
verified_at

"109292970397906870"
"alexwinter"
"alexwinter@mastodon.social"
"Alex Winter"
false
"2022-04-25T00:00:00.000Z"
"Boring, suburban dad, mostly making things at Trouper Productions."
"https://mastodon.social/@alexwinter"
6229
468
138
"2022-11-12"
null

I believe this provides more explicit details, and can be easily copied into a report. The "limit=40" is the
maximum number of results which can be returned. Next, let's repeat this with a different server, specifying
something different than the server which the user joined.
https://infosec.exchange/api/v2/search?q=alexwinter&limit=40&type=accounts
The results are identical since each server is relying on the overall Mastodon API for this data. We can also use
the API to query hashtags. Mastodon has greatly improved cross instance search results so that we now receive
almost identical results when we compare the following API queries.
https://mastodon.social/api/v2/search?q=osint&limit=40&type=hashtags
https://infosec.exchange/api/v2/search?q=osint&limit=40&type=hashtags
Similarly, the following two URLs display very similar results.

272 Chapter 22

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

https://mastodon.social/tags/osint4good
https://infosec.exchange/tags/osint4good
These new search options are included within the Communities Tool, which is discussed later in the chapter.
There is no way to predict which social networks will be the next big thing. However, possessing a sharp set of
Google and OSINT skills will take you far. If desired, you could add these options to the custom search tools
explained in Section One. Until I see wide-spread usage of these platforms, I will wait.
Reddit (reddit.com)
This social news aggregation, web content rating, and discussion website went from a place for those "in-theknow" to a resource often cited on mainstream media. More users than ever post, reply to, and read the usersubmitted content in the form of either a link or text, each submitted to a specific category known as a Subreddit.
Other users then vote the submission up or down, which is used to rank the post and determine its position on
the website's pages. The submissions are then discussed on the "comments" page of every entry. The Subreddits
cover practically any topic you can imagine. If your target has the slightest interest in the internet, he or she has
probably been to Reddit. As of 2024, there were over 850 million registered users.
Reddit Search
The official search option on Reddit has been plagued with problems since inception. The search field in the
upper right of every page will allow you to query any terms you desire, but the results have not always been
optimal. In 2016, I saw the search function improve drastically, and even with some added new features. When
typing terms into the search field on any Reddit page, the results will be from all pages, including thousands of
Subreddits. While you should understand this option, and even execute target searches from the home page on
occasion, we should consider some advanced search options. We can replicate that standard keyword search
within a URL. This is beneficial for bookmarking searches of interest that need checked often. The format for
a search about OSINT is as follows.
https://www.reddit.com/search?q=OSINT
The results from such a generic search can be quite overwhelming. With the following URL, we can force Reddit
to only deliver results if our search term is within the title of a post, and not simply present within comments.
https://www.reddit.com/search?q=title:OSINT
If you know the name of the Subreddit, you can navigate directly with the following structure.
https://www.reddit.com/r/OSINT/
If you locate a username of interest while searching Reddit, you can load all of that user's posts and comments
by clicking on the name. Alternatively, the following URL can be used.
https://www.reddit.com/user/inteltechniques
If you want to see a summary of all original posts, the following URL can be used.
https://www.reddit.com/user/inteltechniques/submitted/
If you want to see a summary of all original comments, the following URL can be used.
https://www.reddit.com/user/inteltechniques/comments/

Online Communities 273

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

If you have a target website, and you want to know if the URL has ever been posted as a submission link, the
following URL will display all results.
https://www.reddit.com/search?q=site:inteltechniques.com
If Reddit is not providing the results you think you should be receiving, you should return to our previous
instruction on Google searching. The following query would identify any posts, categories, or users that included
the word "surveillance".
site:reddit.com "surveillance"
If you wanted to force Google to restrict its searching to a specific Subreddit, such as OSINT, you would add
"/r/osint" after the first portion. If you wanted to restrict the searching to a specific user, you would add
"/user/inteltechniques" to the end. The following are two examples.
site:reddit.com/r/osint "surveillance"
site:reddit.com/user/inteltechniques "surveillance"
Each of these queries could be replicated within both Bing and Yandex. While Google is good at indexing new
content within Reddit, I have witnessed better performance from Yandex when the content was associated with
pornography and other adult content.
"Old" View
Since 2018, Reddit has been changing the layout and function of their website. This also includes many additional
trackers which collect information about your usage. I prefer the "old" view of Reddit, which can be achieved
by replacing "www" with "old" within any Reddit link. This is personal preference, and I believe the old view
provides a more compressed experience which displays more content within each page.
Deleted Content
If you have identified any Reddit content of interest, you should consider checking any online third-party
archives. These historic representations of an account will often disclose previously deleted or modified content.
It is extremely common for Reddit users to edit or delete a comment entirely, especially if it was controversial.
I have investigated numerous Reddit accounts where the evidence I expected to find was not present. First, I
always search the standard archive options which were previously explained. The following direct URLs would
attempt to display historic versions of a Reddit user's profile. The first only works occasionally. You could
replace the Reddit user URL within each of these with a Subreddit address or Reddit post URL.
webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:https://www.reddit.com/user/mikeb
web.archive.org/web/*/https://www.reddit.com/user/mikeb
You may get lucky with these queries, but the results are often limited. These will display the historic view of a
Reddit account at a specific moment in time. While this may provide evidence for your investigation, you should
also identify any further deleted content. In order to dig much deeper, we must understand Pushshift
(pushshift.io) and PullPush (pullpush.io).
Pushshift was an active archive which contained most of the content which was publicly posted to Reddit from
2005 through 2023. This provided an amazing collection of data, including most deleted posts. Any time your
target wiped out various Reddit posts before you could collect the evidence, Pushshift revealed the deleted
content. This site allowed you to take advantage of their robust application programming interface (API). In
2023, Reddit drastically changed their own API which eliminated Pushshift's ability to access any new content.

274 Chapter 22

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

The sites are still up, but the functionality has been shuttered. A new project called PullPush acquired the data
and returned the search functionality.
First, let's assume that you are only interested in a specific user that has deleted all content. Figure 22.07 displays
a partial post which I created on Friday, July 19, 2019. On September 1, 2019, I deleted all of my posts from
Reddit, including that initial content. Figure 22.08 displays the confirmation my account was empty. As I wrote
this in 2024, the following URL queried the data set for posts that have been archived by PullPush for user
inteltechniques.
https://api.pullpush.io/reddit/search/comment/?author=inteltechniques
This URL presented a lot of information about my deleted posts, but I was most interested in the data visible
in Figure 22.09. It displayed the entire deleted comment and the subreddit location. Furthermore, it provided a
Unix time of 1563580052, which converts to Friday, July 19, 2019 5:47:32 PM GMT.

Figure 22.07: A Reddit post prior to deletion.

Figure 22.08: A Reddit post after deletion.

Figure 22.09: A PullPush result of a deleted post.
This URL will display up to 99 of the most recent posts, regardless of whether they are still on Reddit or have
been removed. This is a great start, but our target may have thousands of posts. The following URL adds two
options at the end to force sorting in ascending format and force display of 100 comments within a single page.
https://api.pullpush.io/reddit/search/comment/?author=inteltechniques&sort=asc&size=100
Likewise, we can force a descending view with the following URL.
https://api.pullpush.io/reddit/search/comment/?author=inteltechniques&sort=desc&size=100
If you are seeking a specific post with unique wording, you can accomplish this with the following URLs. The
first example would identify public and deleted posts mentioning my username in ascending order while the
second is in descending order.
https://api.pullpush.io/reddit/search/comment/?q=inteltechniques&sort=asc&size=100
https://api.pullpush.io/reddit/search/comment/?q=inteltechniques&sort=desc&size=100

Online Communities 275

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Each of these searches may present too much content and may not be easy to digest. We can filter unwanted
content in order to produce less results. The following would repeat our previous queries, but only display
content from the Subreddit Privacy.
https://api.pullpush.io/reddit/search/comment/?q=inteltechniques&subreddit=privacy&sort=asc&size=100
https://api.pullpush.io/reddit/search/comment/?q=inteltechniques&subreddit=privacy&sort=desc&size=100

In order to demonstrate the value of this, consider the following random example. On November 8, 2020, a
Twitter user posted the Tweet seen in Figure 22.10. Reddit user Defaultyboi6829 posted on Twitter "Good
thing I deleted my Reddit account". Today, in 2024, we can confirm this account was deleted by viewing
https://old.reddit.com/user/Defaultyboi6829. I navigated to the following URLs, which each displayed 100
deleted posts in ascending and descending order from this user. His latest post was a disagreement about
Mine
n the
live vi
https:
https:

Figure 22.10: A Twitter post announcing deletion of a Reddit account.

Figure 22.11: A deleted Reddit post.
Note that all of these searches only identify results which are comments and not user submissions. A submission
is a new topic, and a comment is a post within a specific submission. In order to replicate all of these queries
for user submissions, simply replace "comment" in each example to "submission". The following URLs only
displays my deleted submissions.
https://api.pullpush.io/reddit/search/submission/?author=inteltechniques&sort=asc&size=100
https://api.pullpush.io/reddit/search/submission/?author=inteltechniques&sort=desc&size=100
In a moment, I will demonstrate my offline search tools which you can use to simplify this entire process. The
ability to extract deleted content from a community as large as Reddit is a substantial OSINT technique. I
encourage you to monitor Reddit for new features and changes in order to update your own tools as needed.

276 Chapter 22

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

I am sure many readers are wondering what will happen if PullPush goes away in the same way PullPush
disappeared. If desired, you could download this entire archive of Reddit consisting of every live and deleted
post from June of 2005 through December of 2023 from the following locations.
https://academictorrents.com/details/9c263fc85366c1ef8f5bb9da0203f4c8c8db75f4
I will warn you that this consists of 2.52 Terabytes of data (compressed), and accessing the content quickly
exceeds the scope of this section. However, you may want to dive in after reading the upcoming section about
data breaches and accessing large amounts of data.
Images
Reddit is well-known for hosting entertaining images and memes. The majority of linked images on Reddit are
now self-hosted, but I still see a lot of images hosted on a photo-sharing site called Imgur (imgur.com). This
can be very beneficial when you are investigating an image post that has been removed from Reddit. If a user
posted a photo to Imgur, then linked it to a Reddit post, and then deleted the post, the image is still online. You
will no longer have a link to the image, and randomly searching Imgur will be unproductive. Instead, we can
browse all of the Reddit images on Imgur with a direct URL. The following address will display the current
images, in reverse chronological order, associated with the Subreddit titled NetSec. Scrolling will continuously
load older images.
https://imgur.com/r/netsec
If you find an image of interest, you should consider searching the name of the image within PullPush. Let's run
through an example. Assume that you suspected your target was posting images of his antique vehicle on the
Subreddit /r/projectcar, but he deleted the posts before you could find them. You should first navigate to the
following page of related images on Imgur.
https://imgur.com/r/projectcar
Assume you then located a potential suspected vehicle image at the following address.
https://imgur.com/J0C7Mi9
You should right-click on the image and select "View Image" to open view the full-size version in a new tab.
https://i.imgur.com/J0C7Mi9.jpg
The filename of the image is J0C7Mi9. The following two URLs search this image within both submissions and
comments within all of Reddit, including deleted posts.
https://api.pullpush.io/reddit/search/submission/?q=J0C7Mi9
https://api.pullpush.io/reddit/search/comment/?q=J0C7Mi9
The second URL provides the following data within the result. Note that I had to refresh the query a few times
to obtain the data. This is a scenario where possessing all of the content from the previous download links could
work in your favor. You could query through all data without relying on PullPush's search term queries.
Author: mrmoto1998
body: [Obligatory pic of the moldsmobile](https://imgur.com/J0C7Mi9.jpg)
created_utc: 1568129504
link: /r/projectcar/comments/d296fl/tore_up_some_carpet_in_the_moldsmobile/eztg3jk/

Online Communities 277

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

You now know the author, date, and original link of the post on Reddit. The previous example may be an
extreme case scenario, but the possibilities are endless. The important message is to search any keyword data
through PullPush when your investigation is associated with Reddit. Next, you should consider a reverse image
search. This will be explained in detail later, but you should know now that you have a Reddit-specific reverse
image search option called Karma Decay. Assume that you located an image on Imgur at the following URL.
https://imgur.com/r/funny/0DnE1aB
You can navigate to karmadecay.com, supply this address, and immediately see if that image has been posted to
any other locations within Reddit. If you wanted to bookmark a direct URL for future checking, you could use
the following to obtain the same result.
http://karmadecay.com/imgur.com/r/funny/0DnE1aB
Investigation Subreddits
There are many Subreddits that can provide a unique benefit to an investigator, three of which are outlined here.
There are several versions of each of these, but those that I present here have the most history of being helpful.
You will find additional options with a bit of searching.
Reddit Bureau of Investigation (reddit.com/r/rbi)
This active community helps other Reddit users solve crimes and other problems. Internet gurus will help find
deadbeat parents; computer specialists will aid in tracking stolen devices; and private investigators will assist with
investigation techniques. I have used this option several times during my career. The most successful cases
involved hit and run traffic crashes. In 2013, I assisted a northern Illinois police department with the
investigation of a fatal car crash. The offender fled the area and an elderly woman died. Three small pieces of
the offending vehicle were left at the scene. After posting this information to local media outlets, I submitted it
to RBI. Within minutes, several vehicle body shop employees were tracking down the parts and eventually tied
them to a specific year and model of a 10-year-old vehicle. This information led to the arrest of the subject.
Another victim of an unrelated hit and run traffic crash posted a blurry photo of the suspect vehicle and asked
for assistance. Within hours, a Reddit user identified the license plate through digital correction techniques.
Pic Requests (reddit.com/r/picrequests)
A constant frustration in my work is blurry, out of focus, or grainy digital images. Commonly, I will receive
surveillance photos that are too dark or light to identify anything of value in the image. Occasionally, I will find
images on social networks that could be beneficial if they were just a touch clearer. Pic Requests saves the day.
This Subreddit consists of digital photo experts that can perform Photoshop magic on practically any image.
Many Reddit users will request old photos colorized, torn photos digitally repaired, or unwanted subjects
removed from an image. I have uploaded several surveillance images to this group with a request for assistance.
The users have been incredibly helpful by identifying digits in blurred license plates and turning dark surveillance
footage into useful evidence.
What Is This Thing? (reddit.com/r/whatisthisthing)
I am consistently amazed at the results from this Subreddit. What Is This Thing is a place where you can post a
digital photo of practically anything, and someone will know exactly what it is while providing detailed and cited
additional information. Many users post images of old antiques and intricate items hoping to identify something
valuable in their collection. I use it to identify tattoo meanings, graffiti, suspicious items mailed to politicians,
vehicle parts, and just about anything else that is presented to me during my investigations.

278 Chapter 22

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Real World Application: In 2012, I was asked to assist with a death investigation of a "Jane Doe". I submitted
a sanitized version of a tattoo on her back that appeared to be Chinese symbols. Within five minutes, a Reddit
user identified the symbols, their meaning, and references to the region of China that would probably be related
to my investigation. A reverse image search of his examples led to information about a human trafficking ring
with which the victim was associated. This all occurred over a period of one hour.
If you plan to use these techniques on Reddit, please consider a few things. You should create a free account
now and hold on to it. Creating a new account and asking for help minutes later can be viewed as rude. I like to
use accounts that appear to have been established a long time ago. If you are visible as an active member of
Reddit with a history of comments, this might encourage other active members to assist you. You should never
be demanding in your requests. Remember, these people are volunteering to help you. Many of them possess a
skill set that cannot be found elsewhere. I also never upload any content that is not already publicly available. If
digital images were released to the press, I have no problem releasing them to Reddit. If my target image is
already on a public social network, I see no reason it cannot be linked through Reddit.
While Reddit seems to get most of the attention in this type of community, there are alternative options that are
rapidly growing. These include 4chan, Hacker News, and others. I will briefly discuss the most common search
options, which can be replicated with my Custom Communities Tool that is explained later.
4chan (4chan.org)
4chan is a mess. It is an image-board website and users generally post anonymously, with the most recent posts
appearing above the rest. 4chan is split into various boards with their own specific content and guidelines,
modeled from Japanese image-boards. The site has been linked to internet subcultures and activism groups,
most notably Anonymous. The site's "Random" board, also known as "/b/", was the first board to be created,
and is the one that receives the most traffic. This site is full of bullying, pornography, threats, and general illicit
behavior. It has also been the focus of numerous investigations. There is no search feature. In this scenario, we
will use 4chansearch.com. The following examples are direct URLs that take advantage of this third-party search
option, each using "OSINT" as a search term.
Active Search: http://4chansearch.com/?q=OSINT&s=4
Archives Search: http://4chansearch.com/?q=OSINT&s=7
Archives Alternative: https://archive.4plebs.org/_/search/text/OSINT/order/asc/
Google Search: https://www.google.com/search?q=site:4chan.org%20OSINT
Hacker News (news.ycombinator.com)
While this site is targeted toward a tech-savvy community, general discussion topics are followed by millions of
users daily. Fortunately, we have a lot of control with searching specific posts, keywords, users, and favorites.
The following searches locate data based on a keyword (OSINT) and user (inteltechniques).
Text Search: https://hn.algolia.com/?query=OSINT&type=all
Username Search: https://news.ycombinator.com/user?id=inteltechniques
User Posts: https://news.ycombinator.com/submitted?id=inteltechniques
User Comments: https://news.ycombinator.com/threads?id=inteltechniques
User Favorites: https://news.ycombinator.com/favorites?id=inteltechniques
Google Search: https://www.google.com/search?q=site:news.ycombinator.com+OSINT
Nextdoor (nextdoor.com)
This popular online community allows for people within a specific neighborhood or geographical area to
communicate privately within a controlled space. People within a neighborhood in Texas cannot see posts from
a neighborhood in Illinois. In order to join a specific neighborhood, one must either receive an invite from

Online Communities 279

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

another neighbor or request a physical invite be sent via postal mail to an address within range. This presents
problems for OSINT. If you are investigating posts within your county, there are a few things you can do to
extend your range.
While logged in to a Nextdoor account, navigate to "Settings" then "Neighborhoods". By default, you can only
see activity within your specific neighborhood. However, clicking the "Explore Neighborhoods" button should
present surrounding areas which you can join. In my experience, you can usually see the majority of your county
by joining all available groups. Law Enforcement and other public sector teams have an additional option of
creating an overt "public agencies" account (https://nextdoor.com/agency/apply) for use in monitoring their
jurisdiction.
Meetup (meetup.com)
Meetup consists of users and groups, with all communication related to events where people actually meet in
real life. Each user creates a profile that includes the person's interests, photos, and username. A group is created
by one or more users and is focused on a general interest in a specific location. An example would be the
"Houston Dog Park Lovers", which is a Houston-based group of dog owners that meet at dog parks. Each
group will post events that the members can attend. The majority of the events posted on Meetup are visible to
the public and can be attended by anyone. Some groups choose to mark the details of the event as private and
you must be a member to see the location. Membership is free and personal information is not required.
You can search Meetup by interest or location on practically any page. Once you locate a group page, you can
browse the members of the group. This group page will also identify any future and past events sponsored by
the group. These past events will identify the users that attended the event as well as feedback about the event.
This site no longer offers the option to search by username. In order to do this, you will need to use a search
engine as described in a moment. A user profile will often include links to social networks and messages from
associates on the website. Additionally, these profiles will identify any future Meetup events that the user plans
on attending. Because of this, the site has been used in the past by civil process servers, detectives, and the news
media to locate people that had been avoiding them. The following Google search structures have been most
helpful in my experience, although access to certain results may require the use of a burner Meetup account.
Name Search (Michael Smith): site:meetup.com "michael smith"
Event Search (Protest): site:meetup.com inurl:events Protest
Event Search (Chicago): https://www.meetup.com/find/?location=us--il--Chicago&source=EVENTS
Event Search (Chicago & Protest): https://www.meetup.com/find/?keywords=protest&location=us--il-chicago&source=EVENTS
Post Search (Protest): site:meetup.com inurl:discussions Protest
Google Keyword Search (OSINT): site:meetup.com OSINT
Dating Websites
When investigating cheating spouses, background information, personal character, or applicant details, dating
sites can lead to interesting evidence. The presence of a dating profile does not mean anything by itself. Millions
of people successfully use these services to find mates. When a target's profile is located, it will usually lead to
personal information that cannot be found anywhere else. While many people may restrict personal details on
social networks such as Facebook, they tend to let down their guard on these intimate dating websites. In my
experience, the following will apply to practically every dating website.
•
•
•

You must have an account to browse profiles, which is usually free.
You must have a premium (paid) account to contact anyone.
If a target uses one dating service, he or she likely uses others.

280 Chapter 22

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Instead of explaining each of the dating services, I will focus on methodology of searching all of them. While
each website is unique and possesses a specific way of searching, they are all very similar. Overall, there are three
standard search techniques that I have found useful, and they are each identified below.
Username: Every dating website requires a username to be associated with the profile, and this data is
searchable. Surprisingly, most users choose a username that has been used somewhere else. I have seen many
dating profiles that hide a person's real name and location, but possess the same username as a Twitter account.
The Twitter account then identifies name, location, and friends. Additional username tools are presented later.
Text Search: This is a technique that is often overlooked. Most dating network profiles include an area where
the users can describe themselves in their own words. This freeform area often includes misspellings and obvious
grammatical errors. These can be searched to identify additional dating networks since many users simply copy
and paste their biography from one site to another. In 2013, I was teaching an OSINT course in Canada. During
a break, one of the attendees asked for assistance with a sexual assault case that involved the dating website
Plenty Of Fish. The unknown suspect would meet women through the online service and assault them. All of
the information on his profile was fake, and the photos were of poor quality and unhelpful. Together, we copied
and pasted each sentence that he had written in his bio for the profile. Eventually, we found one that was very
unique and grammatically worded poorly. A quoted Google search of this sentence provided only one result. It
was the real profile of the suspect on Match.com, under his real name, that contained the same sentence
describing himself. The high-quality photos on this legitimate page were used to verify that he was the suspect.
Photo Search: In later chapters, I explain how to conduct reverse-image searching across multiple websites.
This technique can compare an image you find on a dating network with images across all social networks,
identifying any matches. This will often convert an "anonymous" dating profile into a fully-identifiable social
network page. This applies to any dating networks, and photos will be your best way of identifying your target.
The list of popular dating websites grows monthly. The following are the current most popular services.
Match (match.com)
Plenty of Fish (pof.com)
eHarmony (eharmony.com)
OK Cupid (okcupid.com)
Hinge (hinge.co)
Bumble (bumble.com)
Christian Mingle (christianmingle.com)
Ashley Madison (ashleymadison.com)
Adult Friend Finder (adultfriendfinder.com)
Farmers Only (farmersonly.com)
Elite Singles (elitesingles.com)
Zoosk (www.zoosk.com)
Friendfinder-X (friendfinder-x.com)
Badoo (badoo.com)
Tinder (tinder.com)
A section about online dating would not be complete without a reference to Tinder. The simplest explanation
of Tinder is that it connects you with people in your immediate geographical area who are also using the service.
Some call it a dating app, some refer to it as a "hook-up" app. Either way, it is probably the most popular dating
service available today.
While this service was once natively available only through a mobile app, they have recently begun allowing
account access via their website. However, I find this to be full of frustration. In order to access Tinder via their
web interface, you must provide either Facebook account information or a mobile telephone number. I never

Online Communities 281

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

advise connecting any third-party service to any covert Facebook account, so that option is out. Instead, you
can provide a Google Voice number, which is a bit more acceptable. Supply a covert Google Voice telephone
number and prepare for the issues.
First, Tinder will send you a text message with a code to verify your number. Supplying this code to Tinder
passes the first hurdle. If you are using a VPN, you will immediately be sent to a series of tests to verify you are
human. If you have been annoyed by Google Captcha pop-ups in the past, Tinder's options take frustration to
a new level. In most scenarios, you will be asked to complete a series of 20 small tasks. In my experience,
completing them perfectly results in a failure report 99% of the time. Tinder simply does not like a combination
of a VOIP number and a VPN. Providing a real cellular number seems to pacify Tinder somewhat. Providing a
true number and internet connection without a VPN seems to make it happy. However, you sacrifice privacy
and security in order to do so. If you accept these risks, you can proceed with the web-based access to Tinder.
After I explain the process, I will present my chosen solution.
In order to access Tinder from your web browser, several things must be perfectly aligned in order to prevent
account blocking. Tinder gets bombarded with fraudulent accounts, and their radar for investigative use is very
sensitive. The following instructions assume that you do not have an existing Tinder account.
•
•
•
•
•

Connect to a public Wi-Fi location, without a VPN, near your target.
Click the Login button at tinder.com and choose "Log In With Phone Number".
Supply a Google Voice number.
Confirm the text message received on Google Voice number.
Complete registration with alias name and photo.

These instructions may seem simple, and too good to be true. They are. Tinder has begun blocking any type of
GPS spoofing, even if done manually through the browser inspector. They focus much more on the networks
through which you are connected. The previous edition explained ways to spoof GPS within your browser and
pretend to be at another location. In my experience, these tricks simply do not work anymore. If you are able to
connect through the web version of Tinder, it is unlikely to be of any use. Furthermore, your "matches" will
likely be far away from your actual location. Personally, I no longer try to make this work.
Instead, I keep an old Android phone ready for any Tinder investigations. I have the Tinder app installed along
with the "Fake GPS Location" app. I keep the Tinder app logged in using a covert Google Voice number. Before
I open Tinder, I set my desired location through the Fake GPS Location application. Upon loading Tinder, I
can control the search settings through the app. I usually choose to limit the search to a few miles away from
my target's location. In my experience, this will not work on an iPhone due to GPS spoofing restrictions. Since
Tinder actively blocks emulators, connecting through VirtualBox or Genymotion does not work. This will
simply require a dedicated Android device.
Real World Application: I have two recent experiences with covert Tinder accounts to share. The first is a
human trafficking investigation with which I was asked to assist. The investigation unit received information
that a well-known pimp had recruited several children to enter his world of prostitution. He was not promoting
them on websites, as he believed it was too risky. Instead, he posted profiles to Tinder while located at a rundown motel. From several states away, I spoofed my GPS on my Android device to the motel of interest. I set
my search settings for females within five miles aged 18-19. I immediately observed two images of what appeared
to be young girls in a shady motel room. I "swiped right" to indicate interest, and was immediately contacted by
the pimp pretending to be one of the girls. We agreed on a price and he disclosed the room number. The local
agency working the case began immediate surveillance while a search warrant was obtained. While waiting, they
arrested two men before the "date" could begin, and also arrested the pimp after a search warrant was obtained
for the room.
The other example I have presents a much different view of Tinder usage. An attorney reached out requesting
assistance with a cheating spouse investigation. He was looking for evidence which confirmed the husband was
282 Chapter 22

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

involved with other women. He provided several images of the man and common locations which he was known
to frequent. After many failures, I had Tinder launched with the GPS spoofed to the suspect's office. I claimed
to be a woman looking for a man his age, and I was eventually presented an image of my target. I swiped right,
as did he, and we began a conversation. The evidence piled up immediately.
What photo should you use? First, uploading one photo and vague information to your account looks suspicious.
Providing images of other people without their consent is wrong. Using stock photography from the internet
will quickly get you banned from Tinder. I rely heavily on Fiverr (fiverr.com). I search for people willing to send
unique photos of themselves for a few dollars. I once paid a 21-year-old woman $30 for five "selfies" while
dressed in different outfits. I received a signed consent form allowing me to upload them to Tinder with the
intent of luring cheating spouses. At first, she assumed I was a pervert with a unique fetish. After my explanation,
she loved the idea and was eager to assist. Another option is to use copy and crop images generated by services
such as https://thispersondoesnotexist.com/. This tactic has been successful in the past but has limitations such
as the inability to generate more than one photo of the same likeness.
Tinder Profiles
Tinder users can optionally create a username within the network. Instead of being limited to the identity of
"John, 30, NYC", a user can claim a specific username such as John911. This generates a web profile which can
be seen publicly (often unknowingly to the user). The following format would display a user with that username.
Both should connect to active profiles with multiple photos of each target.
https://www.gotinder.com/@John911
https://www.gotinder.com/@TomB
If you open the source code view of these profiles, we can dig deeper. Searching "birth_date" for user TomB
reveals "1996-09-26" while ""_id" displays "53d8b9d0b3158f947bccd832". We now know the date of birth and
Tinder user ID of our target. If he should change his name or username, we still have a unique identifier which
could be checked within a new profile. For those in law enforcement, this account ID number will also be critical
should we intend to serve Tinder with any legal requests, such as subpoenas or warrants. When submitting legal
requests, we should always include the account name and account number of the target profile.
Discord (discord.com)
Discord is a free voice, video, and text chat application and digital distribution platform which was originally
designed for the video gaming community. Today, it is heavily used within various hacking, doxing, and other
communities associated with cybercrime. Some call it a modern-day IRC replacement. Discord allows users to
create virtual servers which further divide into text and voice channels. Discord stores unlimited logs of all
channels within every server. Anybody who joins a Discord server has full access to all server history. Access to
a Discord server is granted through invites in the form of a URL. Discord is classified as a "deep web" resource,
as Discord servers are unable to be indexed by conventional search engines such as Google. I present two initial
thoughts on Discord investigative techniques.
•

•

You must receive some type of invite in order to join a server. Once you have an invite, joining is easy
and covert details are accepted. You can often find generic invite links within related forums or simply
by asking a member of the server. Administrators will know that you joined, but will only see the details
you provided during registration. Invite links expire often so do not be surprised if some invitation links
located in Google are no longer valid.
Once you are in the server, you should have access to complete chat history since inception. In 2018, I
was asked to assist the podcast Reply All with an investigation into the OG Users Discord. Members
of this group stole social network accounts from random people and sold them to each other and the
public. The primary avenue for communication was through a designated Discord server. The episode
is titled 130-The Snapchat Thief if you want to hear more.

Online Communities 283

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Let's conduct a demonstration of finding, joining, and archiving a Discord server. First, I navigated to Disboard
(disboard.org). This free service indexes numerous Discord servers which have open invitations. I conducted a
search for the term "osint" and received one result of "Team Omega Cybersecurity and Analysis". The static
Disboard link was the following.
https://disboard.org/server/join/605819996546924544
This immediately forwarded to the Discord link at the following address. This is the official invitation link which
could be shared by members of the channel. I found it through Disboard because someone from the group
likely posted the details with the intent of increasing usage. If you do not find any servers of interest on Disboard,
try Discord Me (discord.me).
https://discord.com/invite/DbtGker
I was greeted with a login window asking for the name I wished to use in the channel. I provided OSINTAuthor
and completed a Captcha. I was immediately given an error which demanded a cellular telephone number in
order to join this server. This is common when using a VPN, hardened browser, and guest login. Therefore, I
never recommend this route. Instead, register for a Discord account at https://discord.com/register, but take a
few precautions. In my experience, creating the account from within Chrome appears less "suspicious" than
Firefox. Connecting from a network without a VPN seems to allow registration while an IP address from a VPN
results in another telephone demand. Therefore, I create a handful of accounts any time I am at a hotel or library.
I create them from within my Windows VM using Chrome on the public Wi-Fi without a VPN. These accounts
can be stored until needed.
I prefer to conduct all Discord investigations within their official Windows application while inside a virtual
machine. Conduct the following steps to replicate my Discord machine.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Create a Windows 10 virtual machine as previously discussed (Section One).
Title your new VM "Discord" and conduct the following inside the Windows VM.
Download and install the Discord app from https://discord.com/download.
Download the first file titled "DiscordChatExporter.zip" from the website located at
https://github.com/Tyrrrz/DiscordChatExporter/releases.
Extract the contents of the zip file to your Windows VM Desktop.
Launch DiscordChatExporter.exe from within the new folder.
Launch the Discord app, provide your account credentials, and connect to the target Discord server
(example: https://discord.com/invite/2SUWKFnHSm).
Now we must locate our Discord token by logging into Discord on your browser of choice.
Press "Ctrl" + "Shift" + "I" on the keyboard to launch the developer tools.
Move to the Network tab of the developer tools and reload the page by hitting F5.
Locate and select an entry that starts with "messages".
In the right panel, open the "Headers" tab and scroll down to "Request Headers".
Your token will be listed after "Authorization:".
Select and copy the entire token key (without the quotes).
Paste the token into the DiscordChatExporter program and click the arrow.
Select the desired target server on the left and the target channel on the right.
Choose the "CSV" export format and leave the dates empty.
Choose the save location and click "Export".

The result is a text-only CSV file with the entire contents of the exported server and channel. You should repeat
this process for each channel of your target server. In 2019, I located a Discord server used to share file-sharing
links to recent data breaches. I exported all of the content, which included thousands of links to mega.nz, Google

284 Chapter 22

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Drive, Dropbox, and other hosts. The day after I created the export, the Discord server was removed due to
policy violations. However, I already had the full export and could investigate the links at my own pace. If
desired, you could export an HTML report which would be much more graphically pleasing. I prefer the CSV
option because I can import and manipulate the text easier than an HTML web page. If you prefer to run the
export in an environment similar to the Discord application, there is a third party viewer available at
https://github.com/slatinsky/DiscordChatExporter-frontend.
Discord user IDs are easily located by first selecting the target user within the application or web client. This
will bring up a window with basic user details. Click on the three dots on the top right of this panel and then
select "Copy User ID". We can now add this to our report or legal requests. We can reverse search user IDs
using the third party tools at https://discordlookup.com and https://discord.id/.
Discord is not the only platform for this type of communication, but I find it to be the most popular with
amateur cyber criminals. Slack (slack.com) appears very similar, but it is targeted more toward professionals.
Element (element.io) and Tox (tox.chat) each possess encrypted communications and better overall security,
but adoption is lower than Discord. I believe you should be familiar with all of these environments, and be ready
for an investigation within any of them. I keep an investigation VM with all four applications installed and
configured. This can be a huge time-saver when the need arises.
Board Reader (boardreader.com)
Online forums provide a unique place for discussion about any topic. If you can think of the subject, an entire
site full of people is probably hosting a discussion about the topic. These are usually referred to as user forums.
Sometimes, these sites are excluded from being indexed by search engines. This can make locating them difficult.
A new wave of forum search sites fills this void. Board Reader queries many forum communities, message
boards, discussion threads, and other general interest groups which post messages back and forth. It also offers
an advanced search which allows you to choose keywords, language, date range, and specific domain. If you
have trouble filtering results on other forum search sites, this can be useful.
Craigslist Forums (forums.craigslist.org)
This forum is categorized by topic instead of location, but location filtering is supported. These forums are not
indexed by most search engines, so a manual search is the only way to see the content. In order to search these
areas, you may be required to create a free user account. As usual, you can use fictitious information in your
profile. After logging in, you can search by keyword on this main page, but not by screen name. This option will
identify posts matching the search terms within any of the topics.
The "Handle" option would search by username, but the search field for this query was removed in 2020.
Fortunately, we can replicate it with a URL. The following URL displays all posts within the past 31 days by
Craigslist user "honeygarlic".
https://forums.craigslist.org/?act=su&handle=honeygarlic
This page also provides two valuable pieces of information. The first line identifies the date the account was
created and number of days since inception. Our example appears as follows.
since: 2004-06-16 06:40 (5992 days)
Next, we are notified if the user has deleted any posts in the past 31 days, as follows.
0% of this handle's posts in the last 31 days have been deleted

Online Communities 285

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

As a general rule, most people will use the same username across several sites. Craigslist is no exception. If you
have identified a username of a target, a search on the Craigslist forums is worth a look. Although you will not
get a result every time you search, the commentary is usually colorful when you do. When you locate a username
of a target on the Craigslist forums, searching that username on other sites could provide an abundance of
information.
Online Prostitution
Craigslist was once used by many prostitutes nationwide as an avenue to meeting "Johns". Likewise, many people
used the site to locate a prostitute. In 2009, Craigslist was forced to remove the "Erotic Services" section that
hosted these posts announcing this activity. In 2018, Backpage was forced offline and seized by various
government agencies. Today, it is difficult to find a post offering prostitution on Craigslist and impossible on
Backpage. This does not mean that the prostitutes and their clients simply stopped the potentially illegal
behavior. Instead, they found new resources. There are many sites online that aid in prostitution and human
trafficking. A few of the big players are listed here. I encourage you to investigate which services are applicable
to your cities of interest.
https://5escorts.com
https://www.bedpage.com
https://cityoflove.com
https://www.eros.com
https://www.escort-ads.com
https://escortbabylon.net/
https://escortindex.com
https://www.humaniplex.com
https://ibackpage.com

https://onebackpage.com
https://preferred411.com
https://privatedelights.ch
https://sipsap.com
https://skipthegames.com
https://www.slixa.com
https://www.tsescorts.com
https://theotherboard.com
https://www.tnaboard.com

Escort Review Websites
These types of services may be difficult for some readers to understand. I was also surprised when I first found
them. This is where prostitution clients communicate with each other and leave reviews of their experiences
with the prostitutes. These "Johns" document the slightest details of the experience including price, cleanliness,
and accuracy of the photograph in the ad. Furthermore, this is the first location that will announce an undercover
operation by the police. This is important for law enforcement, as this could create an officer safety issue. It is
also how the police can determine when a new name or photo should be used in future covert ads. Another
purpose for this data is to create documentation of the reviews of an arrested prostitute. This can prove to be
valuable in court for the prosecution of offenses. There are several of these services, and every metropolitan
area will have a preferred website by the customers. A Google search of "Escort reviews Anaheim" will get you
to the popular options. Of course, replace Anaheim with your city of interest.
The Erotic Review (theeroticreview.com)
If you do not know of any individual services that prostitution clients are using in your area, The Erotic Review
is a safe bet. Practically every metropolitan area has a presence here. Much of this site will not be available unless
you join as a premium member. However, there should be plenty of visible free content for basic investigations.
Most of the posts are unsuitable for this book. At the time of this writing, this site was blocking U.S. IP addresses.
Switching my VPN to Canada or any other country bypassed the restriction.
Real World Application: While participating in an FBI Operation, I focused on locating juvenile prostitutes
and women forced into the sex industry by pimps. One easy way to determine if a sex worker was traveling
extensively was to search her number through various escort websites. If it returned numerous cities with
postings, that was a strong indication that she was a full-time sex worker and was likely not traveling alone.
Every contact that we made with traveling prostitutes resulted in the identification of their pimps.

286 Chapter 22

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Online Newspaper Comments
Practically every newspaper now has some sort of online presence. Most digital editions allow readers to leave
comments about individual articles. These comments can usually be seen at the bottom of each web page. While
the value that these comments add to the newsworthiness of each piece of news is debatable, the content can
be important to an investigation. In years past, most newspapers hosted their own digital comment delivery
system within their website. This often resulted in a large headache while trying to maintain order, prevent feuds
between readers, and delete direct threats. Today, most news websites use third-party services to host these
comments. The most popular are Facebook and Disqus. When Facebook is utilized, most people use their real
names and behave better than when using only a username on Disqus. Any complaints about the comment
activity can be referred to Facebook since they technically store the content. Searching Facebook comments can
be conducted through the technique previously explained.
In order to search for content within the Disqus comment system, you can conduct a custom Google search.
First, it is important to understand how the Disqus system is recognized by Google. There is an option to log
in to a Disqus account and you can "upvote" or "downvote" each comment to show your approval. The words
visible on this page that were provided by Disqus are important for the search. The word "comments" will be
visible on every Disqus provided environment and there will also be a link to disqus.com. Therefore, the
following search on Google should provide any websites that have the Disqus comment delivery system and
also have a reference to OSINT.
"osint" "disqus" "comments"
This may produce some non-Disqus results that happen to possess all three words, but those should be rare.
This will also identify many pages that do not contain any comments whatsoever. In order to only receive results
that actually have comments, alter your search to the following.
"osint" "disqus" "1..999 comments"
This instructs Google to only display results that contain the keywords "OSINT" and "Disqus" and also contain
the exact phrase of any number between 1 and 999 followed immediately by the term "comments". This would
provide results that contain any number of comments with the exception of "0" or over "1000". The "1..999"
portion is the Google range operator that will display any number within the specified range.
Craigslist Auctions (craigslist.org)
Craigslist is one big online classified ad for every area of the world. The site can ease the pain of finding an
apartment; provide numerous options for buying a vehicle locally; or assist in locating just about any item or
service that you can imagine that is within driving distance of your home. It is also a landing spot for stolen
goods, illegal services, and illicit affairs. While Craigslist offers a search option, the results are limited to active
posts only. You can also only search within one category at a time. You can browse through the posts
individually, but this will be overwhelming.
Government and private investigators have found much success in locating stolen goods within this site. To
start, you must find the Craigslist site for your area. Often, simply visiting craigslist.org will direct you to the
landing page for your geographical area. If this does not happen, navigate through your country, then your state,
then your metropolitan area to see listings around you. If the theft occurred recently, a live search in the "for
sale" section may produce results. I do not recommend searching from the main page, as there are no advanced
options. Instead, click on any section title. For example, clicking on the "for sale" section will take us to that
area. The top of the page will have a search field that will search all of the categories in this section. Additionally,
we can filter by price range, posts that contain images, or terms that only appear in the title of the post.

Online Communities 287

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Craigslist also has features that allow you to view results by list view, gallery view, or map view. These locations
will only refer to the city of the item, and not exact GPS location. The gallery view can be used as a "photo
lineup" to identify a stolen item. The map view can be beneficial when only looking for items within surrounding
areas. Four new options on the upper left of every result page allow you to sort the items by newest listings
(default), relevance, lowest price, and highest price. Most pages with items for sale will also allow you to filter
the results so that only items being sold by individuals are listed. This would eliminate businesses and dealers.
The default is to show both, and I recommend it unless you are overwhelmed by the number of results.
If a thief sells the item on Craigslist, he or she will usually delete the post after the transaction is complete. If
the post is deleted, it will not be listed in the results of a search on Craigslist. This is where Google and Bing
come into play. Both Google and Bing collect information from Craigslist posts to include in their search results.
This collection can never be complete, but a large archive of posts is available. Searching Google or Bing with
"site:craigslist.org" (without quotes) will search through archived posts on Craigslist that are both active and
removed. Similar to the previous example, you can search "site:craigslist.org laptop Edwardsville" (without the
quotes). This search produced 572 results that match these criteria on Google. These include the current posts
that were available with the live search on craigslist.org as well as posts that have been recently deleted from
Craigslist. If you wanted to focus only on a specific regional area of Craigslist, changing the search to
"site:stlouis.craigslist.org laptop Edwardsville" would filter results. This example would only show listings from
the St. Louis section of Craigslist. You can use any region in your custom searches.
The results that are still current will link to the actual post and display all content of the post. If a search result
links to a post that has been deleted from Craigslist, a standard "page not found" error will be returned. You
can still get additional information from this deleted post by looking through the text supplied on this search
page. The brief description will often disclose an email address or telephone number. Some listings may have a
cached view, but lately this has been rare. In a scenario where thousands of search results are presented by
Google or Bing, you can add search terms to filter to a more manageable number of posts. Adding the make or
model number of the product may quickly identify the stolen property.
You can also search by terms other than the product of interest. Many people that use Craigslist do not want to
communicate through email sent from the website. Most users will include a telephone number in the post as a
preferred method of communication. The overwhelming majority of these telephone numbers belong to the
cellular telephone of the user submitting the post. This can be a huge piece of intelligence for an investigator
attempting to identify a person associated with a telephone number. It is common that a criminal will purchase
a cellular telephone with cash and add minutes to it as needed. This makes it difficult for someone to identify
the criminal from the phone number. Ironically, the same criminal will post the telephone number as well as a
name on a public internet site for the world to see. Sometimes, a person will post both a cellular and a landline
telephone number on the same post. This allows an investigator to associate these two numbers, and a quick
internet search should identify the owner of the landline telephone number.
Another way to search Craigslist posts is to identify screen names. Craigslist discourages inserting a screen name
or email address within a post; however, most people have figured out how to bypass this limitation. Instead of
someone typing their email address within their posts, they will insert spaces between the first portion of the
email address (username) and the second portion of the email address (domain name). For example, instead of
the user typing their email address as JohnDoe911@gmail.com, he or she may identify the account as
"JohnDoe911 at gmail com". This would be enough to prevent Craigslist's servers from identifying the text as
an email address and prohibiting the post. Fortunately for the investigator, this information is indexed by
Craigslist and other search engines to be retrieved.
You can search any keyword on either the official Craigslist site or on Google and Bing using the "site" operator.
In my experience, Bing offers more results of archived Craigslist posts than Google. If you do not have success
with Bing, Google should be searched as well. Many private investigators used to find the "personals" section
of interest. The "Casual encounters" area was well known for extramarital affairs, but was shut down due to

288 Chapter 22

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

rampant exploitation. If you want to only search all live Craigslist posts, regardless of which geographical area it
exists, you can use sites such as searchcraigslist.org, adhuntr.com, and searchalljunk.com.
Craigslist has a few advanced search operators that may be of interest. It supports a phrase search with quotation
marks such as "low miles". It accepts the hyphen (-) operator to exclude terms such as honda black -red. This
search finds postings that have 'honda' and 'black' but not 'red'. A pipe symbol (|) provides "OR" searches such
as honda | toyota. This search finds postings that have 'honda' or 'toyota' (or both). You can group terms
together in parentheses when queries are complicated. A search of red (toyota | honda) -2000 -2001 finds listings
that have 'red' and either 'honda' or 'toyota' (or both) but do not have 2000 or 2001. Wildcards are as follows.
Hond* civ* (match "honda civic", "honda civil", etc.)
wood floo* (matches "wood floors", "wood flooring", etc.)
iphone* (matches "iphone", "iphones", "iphone5", etc.)
Craigslist's email alert feature has made third-party tools for this purpose unnecessary. After logging in to your
account, you can customize alerts to send an email to you when specific search terms are located.
Real World Application: Many thieves will turn to the internet to unload stolen items. While eBay requires
banking information or a credit card to use their services, most thieves prefer Craigslist's offer of anonymity.
My local police department successfully located a valuable stolen instrument this way and set up a sting to arrest
the thief. Often, the thief will be willing to bring the item to you in order to get some quick cash. Another tip
that has helped me during investigations is to look for similar backgrounds. When I had a group of gang
members stealing iPhones from vehicles and pockets, they would sell them right away on Craigslist. Since there
were hundreds of legitimate iPhones listed, identifying the stolen units can be difficult. By looking for similarities
in the backgrounds, I could filter the list into interesting candidates. Finding unique backgrounds, such as tables
or flooring, within several posts can be suspicious. Additionally, I have found posts that include "hurry", "must
sell today", and "I will come to you" to be indicators of illegal activity.
eBay Auctions (ebay.com)
eBay is an online auction site. Since the site requires a user's financial information or valid credit card to post
items for sale, many thieves have moved to Craigslist to unload stolen goods. eBay offers an advanced search
that will allow filters that limit to auctions from a specific location, or specified distance from the location. On
any search page, there is an "Advanced" button that will display new options. Of these options, there is a category
titled "Item Location". The second option in this category is titled "Items within". Here, you can select a zip
code and filter results to a minimum of 10 miles from the zip code selected. This will now allow you to search
for any item and the results will all be from sellers near a specific zip code. This location option will remain
active as you search for different keywords. These searches will only search current auctions that have not
expired. In order to search past auctions, select the "Completed listings" option under the category of "Search
including". If you want to conduct your searches directly from a URL, or if you want to bookmark queries that
will be repeated often, use the following structure. Replace TERMS with your search keywords and USER with
your target's username. Visibility of some results may require that you be logged into an eBay account.
Keyword: ebay.com/dsc/i.html?&LH_TitleDesc=1&_nkw=TERMS
Sold: ebay.com/sch/i.html?_from=R40&_nkw=TERMS&LH_Sold=1&LH_Complete=1
Complete: https://www.ebay.com/sch/i.html?_from=R40&_nkw=TERMS&LH_Complete=1
Username: https://www.ebay.com/usr/USER
User Feedback: https://feedback.ebay.com/ws/eBayISAPI.dll?ViewFeedback2&userid=USER
User Items: https://www.ebay.com/sch/USER/m.html
User: http://www.ebay.com/sch/ebayadvsearch/?_ec=104&_sofindtype=25&_userid=USER

Online Communities 289

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Flippity (flippity.com)
An alternative to the location feature on the official eBay site is Flippity. This site performs the same function
as mentioned previously, but with less work on the user's part. The results of your search will appear on a map
with the ability to minimize and expand the radius as desired. This is a quick way to monitor any type of items
being sold in a specific community.
GoofBid (goofbid.com)
Not everyone uses spellcheck. Some people, especially criminals, will rush to list an item to sell without ensuring
that the spelling and grammar are correct. You could conduct numerous searches using various misspelled
words, or you can use GoofBid. This site will take your correctly spelled keyword search and attempt the same
search with the most commonly misspelled variations of the search terms. Another alternative to this service is
Fat Fingers (fatfingers.com).
Search Tempest (searchtempest.com)
If you find yourself searching multiple geographical areas of Craigslist and eBay, you may desire an automated
solution. Search Tempest will allow you to specify the location and perimeter for your search. It will fetch items
from Craigslist, eBay, and Amazon. You can specify keywords in order to narrow your search to a specific area.
Advanced features allow search of items listed within the previous 24 hours, reduction of duplicates, and filtering
by categories. While I encourage the use of these types of services, I always warn people about becoming too
reliant on them. These tools could disappear. It is good to understand the manual way of obtaining data.
OfferUp (offerup.com)
This service is steadily stealing the audience currently dominated by Craigslist. OfferUp claims to be the simplest
way to buy and sell products locally. A search on their main page allows you to specify a keyword and location.
The results identify the usual information including item description and approximate location. OfferUp follows
the eBay model of including the seller's username and rating. The unique option with OfferUp is the ability to
locate the approximate GPS coordinates associated with a post instead of a vague location. This information is
not obvious, but can be quickly obtained. While on any post, right-click and choose to view the page source.
Inside this new tab of text should be two properties titled place:location:latitude and place:location:longitude.
You can search for these in your browser by pressing "Ctrl" + "F" (Windows) or "command" + "F" (Mac).
Next to these fields should display GPS coordinates. In my experience, these precise identifiers will either
identify the exact location of the target, or a location in the neighborhood of the suspect. I would never rely on
this all the time, but I have had great success getting close to my targets through this technique.
Amazon (amazon.com)
Amazon is the largest online retailer. Users flock to the site to make purchases of anything imaginable. After the
receipt of the items ordered, Amazon often generates an email requesting the user to rate the items. This review
can only be created if the user is logged in to an account. This review is now associated with the user in the user
profile. An overwhelming number of users create these product reviews and provide their real information on
the profile for their Amazon account. While Amazon does not have an area to search for this information by
username, you can do it with a search engine. A search on Google of site:amazon.com followed by any target
name may link to an Amazon profile and several item reviews. The first link displays the user profile including
photo, location, and the user's review of products purchased.
This technique of using Google or Bing to search for profiles on websites that do not allow such a search can
be applied practically everywhere. Many sites discourage the searching of profiles, but a search on Google such
as "site:targetwebsite.com John Doe" would provide links to content matching the criteria. The difficulty arises

290 Chapter 22

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

in locating all of the sites where a person may have a profile. By now, you can search the major communities,
but it is difficult to keep up with all of the lesser-known networks.
FakeSpot (fakespot.com)
There is an abundance of fake reviews on Amazon, which can make it difficult to determine which reviews
accurately describe a product and which are provided by employees associated with the seller. FakeSpot attempts
to identify products that are likely misrepresented by the review community. During a search for a remotecontrolled drone, I found that the Amazon "Best Seller" possesses over 53% fake reviews, and top reviewers
"tri nguyen" and "EUN SUN LEE" appear to be automated reviewers based on other products. This service
also supports analysis of reviewers on Yelp and Trip Advisor. FakeSpot now requires you to install a browser
extension. If this service is valuable to your investigations, I find this service effective. If you rarely need this
type of data, I would avoid any unnecessary extensions.
Pinterest (pinterest.com)
Pinterest is an online "pinboard" where users can share photos, links, and content located anywhere on the
internet. It is a way to rebroadcast items of interest to a user. People that follow that user on Pinterest can keep
updated on things that the user is searching and reading. The search feature on the main website is useful for
keyword searches only. It will search for any term and identify posts that include those words within the
description. A search of my last name displayed several photos of people. Clicking each of these links will present
the full-page view of the photo and any associated comments. This page will also identify the full name of the
person that uploaded the content and the original online source. Clicking on the full name of the user will open
the user profile which should include all "pinned" content. Unfortunately, you cannot search a person's full
name or username on Pinterest and receive a link to their profile page. To do this, you must use Google. The
following direct search URLs will identify the usernames (bill) and keywords (CRAFTS) present on Pinterest.
Username: https://www.pinterest.com/bill/
User Pins: https://www.pinterest.com/bill/pins
Created Boards: https://www.pinterest.com/bill/_created/
Saved Boards: https://www.pinterest.com/bill/_saved/
Pins Search: https://www.pinterest.com/search/pins/?q=CRAFTS
Boards Search: https://www.pinterest.com/search/boards/?q=CRAFTS
Google Search: https://www.google.com/search?q=site:pinterest.com+CRAFTS
BugMeNot (bugmenot.com)
This utility may violate your departmental policies about online research. BugMeNot allows users to share their
logins for various websites with the world. Technically, users of this service are giving the public consent to use
their credentials in order to access data behind a login. However, this could violate the terms of service for a
specific website. I once needed to access a private web forum which was hidden behind a login portal. This
forum was not accepting new members. Searching the URL on BugMeNot revealed a username and password
shared by a member of the forum for public use. This allowed me to access the site and find my desired data.
IntelTechniques Communities Tool
Similar to the previous search tools, this option attempts to simplify the various search techniques presented
within this chapter. The entire tool is quite large, and could not fit into a graphical representation on a single
page here. This tool should replicate all of the specific URLs cited within this topic. While the chances of your
target appearing here are lower than large social networks, this resource should not be ignored. In my experience,
the details obtained about a target from online communities are usually much more intimate and personal than
the public blasts on the larger sites. The online version is updated often and can always be accessed on my site
at https://inteltechniques.com/tools/Communities.html.

Online Communities 291

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
EMAIL ADDRESSES

Searching by a person's real name can be frustrating. If your target has a common name, it is easy to get lost in
the results. Even a fairly unique name like mine produces almost 20 people's addresses, profiles, and telephone
numbers. If your target is named John Smith, you have a problem. This is why I always prefer to search by email
address when available. If you have your target's email address, you will achieve much better results at a faster
pace. There may be thousands of John Wilsons, but there would be only one john.wilson.77089@yahoo.com.
Searching this address within quotation marks on the major search engines is my first preference. This should
identify web pages which include the exact details within either the content or the source code. This is the "easy
stuff" which may present false positives, but should provide immediate evidence to the exposure of the target
account. I then typically search the username portion of the email address by itself in case it is in use within
other providers, such as Gmail, Hotmail, Twitter, LinkedIn, etc. Let's conduct an example assuming that
"john.wilson.77089@yahoo.com" is your target. You could place this email within quotes and execute through
each service manually, or use the following direct search URLs to expedite the process.
Google Email: https://google.com/search?q="john.wilson.77089@yahoo.com"
Google Username: https://google.com/search?q="john.wilson.77089"
Bing Email: https://bing.com/search?q="john.wilson.77089@yahoo.com"
Bing Username: https://bing.com/search?q="john.wilson.77089"
Yandex Email: https://yandex.com/search/?text="john.wilson.77089@yahoo.com"
Yandex Username: https://yandex.com/search/?text="john.wilson.77089"
The custom search tools presented at the end of this chapter and the next will automate this entire process.
Next, you should verify the target email address.
Emailrep.io (emailrep.io)
This is an email verification service with many additional features. Below is an actual search result, and I provide
an explanation after each detail [within brackets]. As you will see, this is an impressive free search, and at the
top of my list for every investigation.
"email": "redacted@gmail.com",
"reputation": "high",
"suspicious": false,
"references": 20,
"blacklisted": false,
"malicious_activity": false,
"malicious_activity_recent": false,
"credentials_leaked": true,
"credentials_leaked_recent": false,
"data_breach": true,
"first_seen": "07/01/2008",
"last_seen": "02/25/2019",
"domain_exists": true,
"domain_reputation": "n/a",
"new_domain": false,
"days_since_domain_creation": 8795,
"spam": false,
"free_provider": true,
"disposable": false,

[Email address provided]
[Likelihood to be a real email address]
[Indications of spam or malicious use]
[Number of online references]
[Blocked by spam lists]
[Known phishing activity]
[Known recent phishing activity]
[Password present within data leaks]
[Password present within recent leaks]
[Address present within known breaches]
[Date first seen online]
[Date last seen online]
[Whether domain is valid]
[Reputation of domain]
[Domain recently registered]
[Days since the domain was registered]
[Marked as spam]
[Free provider such as Gmail]
[Disposable provider such as Mailinator]

292 Chapter 23

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

"deliverable": true,
"accept_all": false,
"valid_mx": true,
"spf_strict": true,
"dmarc_enforced": false,
"profiles": "youtube","google","github","twitter"

[Inbox able to receive mail]
[Address is a catch-all]
[Domain possesses an email server]
[Domain email security enabled]
[Dmarc email security enabled]
[Profiles associated with email]

This provides detail we cannot find anywhere else. In this example, I now know that my target email address
has been in use for at least twelve years and appears within at least one data breach. This encourages me to
explore the breach search methods explained in a moment. The following "explainer" which was included at the
end of my result provides even more value.
"Not suspicious. This email address has been seen in 3 reputable sources on the internet, including Twitter. It
has been seen in data breaches or credential leaks dating back to 07/18/2017, but not since 02/25/2019. SPF
and DMARC are strictly enforced, so this email address is not spoofable. We've observed no malicious or
suspicious activity from this address. "
If the result had reported no identifiable history, that can be an indication that we are dealing with a burner
email address. I often see this type of result when investigating addresses used to deliver threats or extortion
emails. I now know to expect limited success with further queries on the address and I am able to report back
to my client that we are likely dealing with an email account setup specifically for the purpose of the crime
committed. Email address history and reputation can also be brought to light using breach data, which we will
discuss in detail later in this book.
An additional email verification option is Email Hippo (tools.verifyemailaddress.io). This service provides
minimal data, but may identify something missing from the previous superior option. When I searched each of
my Gmail accounts, I received "OK" as a response. When I changed one character, I immediately received
"BAD" as a result. As you validate your target addresses through Email Hippo, the responses appear at the
bottom as a collection. Choosing the Export option allows you to download all results. This service limits free
daily usage by IP address and browser cookies.
Email Assumptions
You may know about one address, but not others. It can be productive to make assumptions of possible email
addresses and use the verifiers to see if they exist. For example, if your target's name is Jay Stewart and he has
an email address of jay112003@yahoo.com, you should conduct additional searches for the addresses of
jay112003@gmail.com, jay112003@hotmail.com, jay112003@live.com, and others. If you already know your
target's username, such as a Twitter handle, you should create a list of potential email addresses. If I had no
email address or username for my target (Jay Stewart), but I knew that he worked at the Illinois Medical District
Commission (medicaldistrict.org), I may start searching for the following email addresses.
jstewart@medicaldistrict.org
jay.stewart@medicaldistrict.org
j.stewart@medicaldistrict.org
stewartj@medicaldistrict.org
These are merely assumptions of potential addresses. Most, if not all, of them do not exist and will provide
nothing for me. However, if I do identify an existing address, I now have a new piece of the puzzle to search.
These addresses can be verified against the previous three tools.

Email Addresses 293

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Email Format (email-format.com)
If the previous email assumption techniques were unproductive or overkill for your needs, you may want to
consider Email Format. This website searches a provided domain name and attempts to identify the email
structure of employee addresses. When searching medicaldistrict.org, it provided several confirmed email
accounts under that domain and made the assumption that employee emails are formatted as first initial then
last name. Our target would have an email address of jstewart@medicaldistrict.org according to the rules. I use
this service to help create potential email lists from names collected from Facebook, Twitter, and other social
networks. I can then verify my list with the services previously mentioned.
Gravatar (gravatar.com)
This service is responsible for many of the small image icons that you see next to a contact in your email client.
You may notice that some incoming emails display a square image of the sender. This is configured by the
sender, and this image is associated with any email address connected. You do not need to wait for an incoming
message in order to see this image. While the Gravatar home page does not offer an email address search option,
we can conduct a query directly from the following URL, replacing the email address with your target
information. This image can then be searched with a reverse image query as explained later.
https://en.gravatar.com/site/check/test@test.com
Compromised Accounts
Email addresses are compromised regularly. Hacker groups often publicly post databases of email addresses and
corresponding passwords on websites such as Pastebin. Manually searching for evidence of compromised
accounts can get complicated, but we will tackle this later in the book. Several online services now aid this type
of investigation. These services provide one minimal piece of information about any email address entered. They
disclose whether that address appears within any publicly known hacked email databases. While most will never
disclose the owner, any email content, or passwords, they will confirm that the target's email account was
compromised at some point. They will also identify the service which was targeted during the breach.
This helps us in two ways. First, it confirms an email address as valid. If your suspect account is
todd007@gmail.com, and that address was compromised in a breach in 2015, you know the address is valid, it
was active, and is at least a few years of age. Second, you know the services which need to be investigated. If
todd007@gmail.com was included in the Dropbox and LinkedIn breaches, you should attempt to locate those
profiles. Compromised account data is absolutely the most beneficial technique I have used within my
investigations in the past five years. We will dive much deeper into data sets later, but let's focus on online
services first. These are also good websites to check your own address in order to identify vulnerabilities.
Have I Been Pwned (haveibeenpwned.com)
This is a staple in the data breach community. This site allows entry of either a username or email address, but
I find only the email option to be reliable. The result is a list and description of any public breaches which
contain the provided email address. The descriptions are very helpful, as they explain the type of service
associated and any details about the number of users compromised. In a test, I searched an old email of mine
that was used to create several covert accounts many years prior. The result was notification that the email
address had been compromised on six websites, including Bitly, Dropbox, LinkedIn, Myspace, River City Media,
and Tumblr. The data present here is voluntarily contributed to the owner of the site. Cyber thieves steal various
credential databases and allow Have I Been Pwned (HIBP) to confirm the legitimacy. HIBP then makes the
content searchable and credits the thief by name. The thief can then charge more money for the stolen goods
as HIBP has vetted the content. It's a weird game. Searching content within the HIBP website is straightforward.

294 Chapter 23

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Some "white hat" hackers eagerly share the data leaks and breaches which they discover in order to receive
acknowledgement from the site. Once HIBP has verified the legitimacy and source of the data, it becomes much
more valuable in the black markets. Many researchers have accused this website of encouraging data theft, as it
can be sold for a higher amount once the owner has vetted the content. Many criminals who deal with stolen
credentials dislike this site and its owner. They do not share their goods and try to keep them off of the radar of
the security community. Therefore, we must always utilize every resource possible.
Dehashed (dehashed.com)
While Have I Been Pwned is often considered the gold standard in regard to breached account details, we cannot
ignore Dehashed. It takes a more aggressive approach and seeks breached databases for their own collection.
Using the same email address provided during the previous test, I received two additional breach notifications.
These included lesser-known breaches which had not yet publicly surfaced on HIBP. When combining results
from both of these services, you would now know that this target email address was likely a real account (you
received results); it had been used online since 2012 (the date of the oldest breach according to HIBP); it is
connected to an employment-minded individual (LinkedIn); and it exists in spam databases as a U.S. consumer
(River City Media).
I believe that Have I Been Pwned and Dehashed complement each other, and one should never be searched
without the other. This search alone often tells me more about a target email address, even if it never identifies
the owner. Dehashed allows unlimited search once you create a free account, but will not disclose passwords
without a premium account. They advertise the ability to see all associated passwords for a small fee. I have tried
this service in the past, and it worked well. However, I believe that paying a company to disclose stolen
passwords might exceed the scope of OSINT. It may also violate your own employer's policies. Please use
caution. Unfortunately, Dehashed now requires you to be logged into a free account in order to conduct any
queries, even at a free access level.
Spycloud (spycloud.com)
This service is a bit different. They are extremely aggressive in regard to obtaining fresh database breaches. They
possess many data sets which are not present in HIBP. However, they do not display details about accounts
which you do not own. We should not manually query addresses through the main Spycloud landing page as
this will result in the target address receiving an email from Spycloud. Our only option is general details through
their free API. The following URL submits a query for test@email.com.
https://portal.spycloud.com/endpoint/enriched-stats/test@email.com
The results are in JSON format, which may appear like pure text within your browser. The following result was
presented to me when I searched an email address within my own domain. They basically tell you that the email
address queried is present within multiple database breaches, but the identity of each is not available. I use this
service to simply verify an email address.
"discovered": 7,
"records": 8,
"discovered_unit": "Months"
"company": {
"discovered": 1,
"records": 11,
"discovered_unit": "Month",

Email Addresses 295

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Hudson Rock (hudsonrock.com)
When searching an email address, Hudson Rock identifies whether it has been seen within stealer log data.
Stealer logs are explained much later in the book, but presence within them indicates that the email owner's
computer has been compromised by a virus. We can query their API with the following URL.
https://cavalier.hudsonrock.com/api/json/v2/preview/search-by-login/osint-tools?email=test@email.com
Cybernews (cybernews.com/personal-data-leak-check)
This service only provides a "true" or "false" identifying the presence of the email within a breach. The following
URL submits a text-only query. This could verify an email address exists.
https://check.cybernews.com/chk/?lang=en_US&e=test@test.com
Passwords
The previous options only display the services which are associated with a target email account due to that data
being stolen and publicly released. Passwords are not visible unless you pay a premium to Dehashed or Spycloud.
Other sites present more robust options for displaying redacted and unredacted passwords for billions of
accounts without any fees. I believe this is OSINT data, but your employer's policies may disagree. Let's
approach cautiously with some demonstrations.
Leak Peek (leakpeek.com)
The benefit of this service is that it displays a partial view of passwords associated with email addresses within
a breach. It possesses a decent data set of 8 billion credentials. This consists of a "Combo List", which will be
acquired later. The following examples identify the masking protocol used to block portions of each password.
test@email.com:55Ji*******
test@email.com:Big6****
Note that Leak Peek allows query by email address, username, password, keyword, and domain. We will use this
resource again within upcoming chapters.
Breach Directory (breachdirectory.org)
The results here seem very similar to Leak Peek, but redundancy is always valuable. However, full passwords are
available if you are willing to do some work. Consider the following results for test@email.com.
Ex7l****
dc3245ecdcf2e40b140e121a014cc37f70239f41
Exig***
7e39ea215613a23a6b33f1dabc340ccf65dfa243
The left column displays the typical redacted passwords and the right column displays SHA-1 hash values of the
full passwords. I will explain much more detail about hash values later in the book. For now, this is a
representation of the entire password, but we must decrypt the has to reveal the true password. There are several
online options, and I will explain my recommended approach with the data breaches chapter. For demonstration,
I will use MD5 Decrypt (md5decrypt.net/en/Sha1). I entered dc3245ecdcf2e40b140e121a014cc37f70239f41
into this website and received the following response.
dc3245ecdcf2e40b140e121a014cc37f70239f41 : Ex7layer
I now know the full password without creating any account or downloading any breach data. These services are
only an introduction into breach data. We have a lot more to discuss later in the book.

296 Chapter 23

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

PSBDMP (psbdmp.ws)
Up to this point, all of these services display content received directly from known data breaches. PSBDMP
takes a different approach. It monitors Pastebin for any posts including email addresses and/or passwords.
There is no reliable search option, but their free API presents detailed results with the following URL structure.
https://psbdmp.ws/api/search/test@test.com
The following is an actual result.
"id": "69yKWrZE",
"length": 25004,
"time": "2019-07-05 14:30",
"text": "$contact->setEmail('test@test.com');
The "id" is the Pastebin identifier. We can access the original file with the following URL.
https://pastebin.com/69yKWrZE
By visiting the Pastebin URL, we can see the full data, including the following excerpt.
$contact->setFirstName('John');
$contact->setLastName('Doe');
$contact->setEmail('test@test.com');
$contact->setEmail('example@mail.com');
$contact->setPhoneCountryCode('123');
$contact->setPhone('12345678');
If this had not been intentional test data, the results could have been very valuable for an investigation. We can
also use this service to search for exposed password details. If I wanted to know if "password1234" had ever
appeared within current or deleted Pastebin files, I would navigate to the following.
https://psbdmp.ws/api/search/password1234
The following is an actual result, displaying the Pastebin file, date, and credentials.
"id": "fEV4hrbe",
"length": 189357,
"time": "2016-12-12 19:34",
"text": "rd123 sketches5973:password1234 sketches5973:passw"
We can also sort through their archives with the following Google query.
site:psbdmp.ws "test@gmail.com"
The first result is https://psbdmp.ws/WjwCkNL4. Clicking that link presents a dead page. However, modifying
the URL as follows presents the original content.
https://pastebin.com/WjwCkNL4
I once had an investigation where Google had indexed a PSBDMP Pastebin hit, but searching the Pastebin site
through Google did not reveal the data. I also once investigated a Pastebin link to a client doxing at
https://pastebin.com/qbkWTxCW. Pastebin had already removed the data and it was no longer accessible. A
URL of https://psbdmp.ws/api/search/qbkWTxCW contained the full text file archived from Pastebin by

Email Addresses 297

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

PSBDMP. I believe the free version of PSBDMP provides great value for online investigators. Their paid API
can be more beneficial if you have a need for that service. I have only used it a few times, and still have a few
free trial credits remaining. More details can be found at https://psbdmp.ws.
IntelligenceX (intelx.io)
You can search IntelligenceX for free and receive partial results, or create a free trial to see everything. In my
experience, you are only limited to the number of burner "trial" email addresses with which you have access.
While I have used this site for the free tier and an occasional free trial, I do not recommend any of the paid
services. We will replicate the same results for free throughout the book and within our own tools. In fact, many
of the tools on their site were copied verbatim without attribution from the tools which are included free here.
LeakIX (leakix.net)
This service indexes various areas of the internet looking for data leaks which may contain sensitive information.
We can query through the site or directly via the following URL structure, which identifies an email address
associated with a website owner's WordPress account.
https://leakix.net/search?scope=leak&q=%22test@test.com%22
The following is a partial result.
Japan GMO Internet,Inc 2022-06-21 01:45 2022-11-06 01:55 https://www.houyoukai.sai-net.work
ASN: 7506, Open ports: 443, Certificate domains: www.houyoukai.sai-net.work, houyoukai.sai-net.work
Found Wordpress users (CVE-2017-5487):
User #1 testtest-com Name: test@test.com
Email Reputation
When I am investigating an email address, I want to know its reputation or spam score. If the address has been
blacklisted or reported as spam, I won't waste too much time attempting to identify the true owner. The
following is a reliable service which we can query with the following URL.
https://cleantalk.org/email-checker/michael@inteltechniques.com
An example record may appear as follows.
Record
spam@gmail.com

Sites
14

Blacklisted
True

Real
Fake

Disposable
True

Updated
Nov 14, 2022 22:52:42

Hunter (hunter.io/email-verifier)
This service advertises the ability to display email addresses associated with a specific domain. However, the
"Verifier" tool can also be valuable. This URL allows query of an individual email address. It immediately
provides details similar to the first two services mentioned in this chapter, such as the validity of the address.
From there, it sometimes displays internet links which contained the email address within the content at some
point. This appears to be sourced from their own database, as many links are no longer present on the internet,
and not indexed by Google. I once searched my target email address here and confirmed that it was present
within a forum associated with terrorism. The forum had recently been removed, but this evidence was
permanent. Hunter.io accepts URL queries with the following structure.
https://hunter.io/verify/test@gmail.com

298 Chapter 23

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

OCCRP (data.occrp.org)
Self-identified as "The global archive of research material for investigative reporting", this service possesses an
amazing amount of data. We will dig into this resource within a later chapter, but we should acknowledge the
email options here. A query of any email address immediately displays documents associated with the account.
Additionally, any keyword search which provides results can be filtered by email address. Let's conduct an
example. When I search for "inteltechniques", I receive two results, both of which appear to be PDF files from
a journalism conference in 2017. I could download and read the documents, or click the filters to the left. When
I click on the "Email" option, I am notified that the following email addresses are included within these
documents. This is great way to find additional email addresses which may be associated with your target.
jaimi.dowdell@gmail.com
james.grimaldi@wsj.com
mark.maremont@wsj.com
A manual query of the address test@test.com on their website resulted in 42 results and a URL structure of
https://data.occrp.org/search?limit=30&q=test%40test.com. We can edit this URL and resubmit it in the
following format to receive additional results.
https://data.occrp.org/search?test@test.com
Spytox (spytox.com)
This is a "White Pages" style of query and you will potentially see a name, city, and telephone number associated
with the account. The paid options are never worth the money.
XLEK (xlek.com)
I often find email addresses of my targets within this service (which is now called USA-Official), but it does not
allow you to query by email address. We will need to rely on Google to assist. Assume your target is
"mike@gmail.com". I receive better results if I split up the search terms in my query. The following Google
queries produce over 200 results.
site:xlek.com "mike" "gmail.com"
site:usa-official.com "mike" "gmail.com"
These results include the actual target email address queried and anything else which also matches, such as
"johnson.mike@gmail.com" and "smith.mike@gmail.com". This overall strategy should apply toward any
people search websites which display email addresses but do not provide a specific email search field.
That's Them (thatsthem.com)
The majority of email addresses and usernames I have searched through this service returned no results.
However, on occasion I received detailed results such as full name, address, phone number, and vehicle
information. Although this is rare, I believe That's Them should be on your list of email and username search
resources.
Search People Free (searchpeoplefree.com/cyberbackgroundchecks.com)
This data set is suspected to be generated from various marketing database leaks. Because of this, we usually
receive much more complete results. Most results include full name, age, current home address, previous
addresses, telephone numbers, family members, and business associations.

Email Addresses 299

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Proton Mail (protonmail.com)
Proton Mail provides arguably the most popular secure and encrypted email service. Because of this, many
criminals flock to it. In 2020, at least half of my criminal email investigations were associated with a Proton Mail
account. When this happens, I want to know the date of account creation. The following steps should be
conducted while logged in to a free Proton Mail account.
•
•
•

Create a new "Contact", add the target email address, then save it.
Access the contact and click the "Email Settings" icon.
Click the "Show advanced PGP settings" link.

The result should display the creation date of the "Public key". This is usually the creation date of the email
account, but not always. If your target generated new security keys for an account, you will see that date instead.
Fortunately, this is very rare. Figure 23.01 displays the result when searching the email address of a colleague. I
now know he has had this account since at least March 10, 2016. If the result displayed a recent date, I would
suspect it was a new "burner" account created for a malicious purpose.

Figure 23.01: A Proton Mail public key announcing account creation date.
This technique requires you to possess a free or paid Proton Mail account. It provides the easiest way to generate,
view, and document the details. However, we can replicate this entire process without a requirement to log in
to an account, but the results are not as reliable. Assume your target email is notmyemail@protonmail.com.
First, we must query it to determine if it is present within the Proton Mail system with the following URL.
https://api.protonmail.ch/pks/lookup?op=get&search=notmyemail@protonmail.com
If your browser prompts you to download a file titled "pubkey.asc", this indicates that the address exists. If you
receive a message of "No Key Found", then it does not. If the address exists, navigate to the following URL.
https://api.protonmail.ch/pks/lookup?op=index&search=notmyemail@protonmail.com
That URL currently provides the following response.
info:1:1
pub:74ecf3959bac5eba2bd636e204fac101b757d18f:1:2048:1623879788::
uid:notmyemail@protonmail.com <notmyemail@protonmail.com>:1623879788::

The last set of digits (1623879788) represents an Epoch Unix timestamp, which was explained in Chapter Twelve
during the source code review of Instagram profiles. We can convert that number into a date and time at
https://www.unixtimestamp.com/index.php. This tells me that the account was created on or before
Wednesday, June 16, 2021 at 21:43:08 GMT. Be warned that I have experienced false positives with both of
these URLs if you are connected to a VPN server which is abusing this process or you conduct multiple queries
within a few seconds. Technically, they should obtain the same data from the same source, but I have had many
failures. This is why I prefer the manual method explained at the beginning of this section.
If your target has an email address associated with their own domain and hosted through Proton Mail, you may
want to know if the address was created within Proton Mail or if it is simply a catch-all address which forwards
to a single inbox. This can help you determine if your target email address might be used across multiple sites
(created address) or if it was supplied for a single purpose knowing that any email sent to it would be forwarded

300 Chapter 23

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

(catch-all). The following URL queries an email address hosted at Proton Mail and discloses whether the address
forwards to another address.
https://mail-api.proton.me/pks/lookup?op=index&search=test@michaelbazzell.com
In this scenario, Proton reports the following, which tells you the email address receiving the inbound emails.
uid:office@michaelbazzell.com <office@michaelbazzell.com>:1609097370::
Domain Connections
Every domain name registration includes an email address associated with the site. While many people will use
a privacy service to hide personal details, this is not always the case. Fortunately, many free services have been
collecting domain registration details and offer queries of current and archived domain registration data. They
will identify domain names that were registered with the target email address entered. This is beneficial when
you have a tech-savvy target that may have registered websites of which you are not aware. This also works on
domains that no longer exist. As a test, I provided an email address of brad@notla.com. The following results
identify the details found by each service. The use of affiliate IDs obtained by services such as Analyze ID will
be explained during the domain instruction presented later.
Whoxy (whoxy.com/reverse-whois)
Full Name & Mailing Address
Telephone Number
Nine Owned Domain Names
Registrar and Host Details
Whoisology (whoisology.com)
Full Name & Mailing Address
Telephone Number
Twenty Owned Domain Names
Registrar and Host Details
AnalyzeID (analyzeid.com)
Amazon Affiliate ID
AdSense Affiliate ID
Five Owned Domain Names
Imitation
The assumptions of email addresses can be valuable in discovering potential valid accounts, as mentioned earlier.
Imitation of any target email addresses can reveal more details, and confirm association with online activities.
Consider the following example. Your target email address is bill@microsoft.com, and you want to know if he
is a Mac or Windows user. You could first navigate to account.apple.com and attempt to make an Apple account
with that address. If allowed to proceed past the first screen, then that user does not already have an account
associated with the target address. If you are informed that the email address is already in use, then you know
that your target is an Apple user, and that specific address controls the account. You could navigate to
signup.live.com and attempt to create an account with the address. If denied, you know that your target is already
a Windows user and that address controls the account.
This method can be replicated across practically all websites and services. I have used this technique to confirm
that target email addresses are associated with services from Yahoo, Gmail, Facebook, Twitter, and many others.
I have also identified real-world services in use by my target by attempting to create accounts with local cable,
power, and water companies, supplying the target email account and being notified that the address was "already

Email Addresses 301

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

in use". Knowing the local cable provider of a suspect can seriously limit the geographical area where he or she
could be residing. Be sure not to fully execute any account creations with your target email address. This method
should only be used on an initial account creation screen, and never submitted.
Email Provider
If your target's email address ends in gmail.com or yahoo.com, the identity of the email provider is quite obvious.
However, business addresses and those with custom domain names do not notify you of the service that hosts
the email. A domain's email provider is the company listed in the domain's MX record. The email provider may
be the same as the domain's hosting company, but could also be a separate company. You may need to know
the email provider in order to issue a court order for content or subscriber data. You may simply want to
document this information within your investigation for potential future use. Regardless of your needs, the
following will obtain the email provider from almost any address.
Navigate to MX Toolbox (mxtoolbox.com) and enter the domain of the email address, such as phonelosers.org.
The result should include a hostname and IP address. These identify the email provider for the target domain.
In this example, the host is mx1.mailchannels.net. This tells me that Mail Channels is likely the email host. This
technique helps me identify the email providers or hosts behind business email accounts. If I am trying to
connect an individual to a shell company, this may associate the same small provider with each target. I believe
every thorough OSINT report should include a brief mention about the domain email provider. This should be
checked as the investigation continues. Changing providers could be a sign of paranoia or intent to conceal
evidence. Law enforcement can use this information in order to secure a proper search warrant.
OSINT Rocks (osint.rocks)
This newer service attempts to recreate several Linux utilities we discussed in previous chapters but through a
web browser. It currently allows email address and username queries through Ghunt, Sherlock, Holehe, and
others. However, this requires you to submit your target data to a third party instead of relying on your own
locally-installed tools. You can also use Gmail OSINT (gmail-osint.activetk.jp) to replicate the features of
Ghunt, but the previous warning still applies. If these services are no longer online, you can also use the email
search feature at Castrick (castrickclues.com).
IntelTechniques Email Addresses Tool
Similar to the previous IntelTechniques search tools, I have created a custom email address search tool as
previously explained in Section I. This is my most used tool, and the option which requires the most updates.
As you find new or updated resources, you will likely want to keep this tool functioning 100 percent.

302 Chapter 23

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
USERNAMES

Once you have identified a username for an online service, this information may lead to much more data. Active
internet users often use the same username across many sites. For example, the user "amanda62002" on Myspace
may be the same "amanda62002" on Twitter and an unknown number of other sites. When you identify an email
address, you may now have the username of the target. If a subject uses mpulido007@gmail.com as an email
address, there is a good chance that he or she may use mpulido007 as a screen name on a number of sites. If the
target has been an internet user for several years, this Gmail account was probably not the first email address
used by the target. Searches for potential addresses of mpulido007@yahoo.com, mpulido007@hotmail.com,
and mpulido007@aol.com may discover new information. Manual searching of this new username information
is a good start. Keeping up with the hundreds of social websites available is impossible.
Prior to 2024, this book contained a handful of username query websites. In the past two years, we have been
bombarded with new username search resources. I will no longer explain any of the sites, as usage is simple.
Instead, I will focus on services which allow username query directly from a URL. This will be beneficial for our
custom search tools. Visiting the following services will allow you to search usernames across several websites,
and will report links to profiles that you may have missed. Replace "inteltechniques" with your target to avoid
dealing with an unnecessary home page. If a service says that a username is "taken" "exists" or "unavailable",
then you know that someone possesses that username on a specific service and you should conduct manual
research.
https://www.idcrawl.com/u/inteltechniques
https://instantusername.com/?q=inteltechniques
https://www.namechecker.org/#inteltechniques
https://namechk.com/namechk-plugin-search-results/?n=inteltechniques
https://namevine.com/#/inteltechniques
https://profilediscover.com/inteltechniques/
https://www.social-searcher.com/search-users/?q6=inteltechniques
https://usernamechecker.checkistan.com/#inteltechniques
https://usersearch.org/results_normal.php?URL_username=inteltechniques
https://usersearch.org/results_advanced.php?URL_username=inteltechniques
https://usersearch.org/results_advanced1.php?URL_username=inteltechniques
https://usersearch.org/results_advanced2.php?URL_username=inteltechniques
https://usersearch.org/results_advanced4.php?URL_username=inteltechniques
https://usersearch.org/results_advanced5.php?URL_username=inteltechniques
https://usersearch.org/results_advanced6.php?URL_username=inteltechniques
https://usersearch.org/results_advanced7.php?URL_username=inteltechniques
https://usersearch.org/results_dating.php?URL_username=inteltechniques
https://usersearch.org/results_forums.php?URL_username=inteltechniques
https://usersearch.org/results_crypto.php?URL_username=inteltechniques
Manual Query
You may desire a quick peek into the profile associated with a username across the most common networks. I
added the following options to the Username Tool, assuming "inteltechniques" is the target username.
https://x.com/inteltechniques
https://facebook.com/inteltechniques
https://instagram.com/inteltechniques
https://www.tiktok.com/@inteltechniques

Usernames 303

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

https://tinder.com/@inteltechniques
https://inteltechniques.tumblr.com
https://www.snapchat.com/s/inteltechniques
https://medium.com/@inteltechniques
https://youtube.com/inteltechniques
https://www.reddit.com/user/inteltechniques
Search Engines
As previously explained, we can query search engines directly via URL as follows.
https://www.google.com/search?q=%22inteltechniques%22
https://www.bing.com/search?q=%22inteltechniques%22
https://yandex.com/search/?text=%22inteltechniques%22
Compromised Accounts
In the previous chapter, I explained how I use Have I Been Pwned (haveibeenpwned.com) and Dehashed
(dehashed.com) in order to identify online accounts associated with a target email address. While HIBP does
not always work with usernames, Dehashed performs well. Similar to the previous instruction, enter your target's
username with the intent to discover any data breaches which include these details. The custom search tool
contains multiple breach queries, as I find that information to be the most valuable at the beginning of an
investigation. If my target username is "inteltechniques", I find the following direct query URL to be most
beneficial for username search, although they now require the use of a burner account to show results on
Dehashed. This should look familiar to the options presented in the previous chapter.
https://dehashed.com/search?query="inteltechniques"
While we cannot submit queries via direct URL through all data breach sites, the following allows manual entry
of usernames. All of these were explained in the previous chapter.
https://haveibeenpwned.com
https://leakpeek.com/
https://breachdirectory.org
https://psbdmp.ws
Gravatar (gravatar.com)
This service was explained in the previous chapter in regard to email addresses, but can also apply to usernames.
The following URL would search my own information and display any email account images associated with my
username.
https://en.gravatar.com/inteltechniques
Link Tree (linktr.ee)
This popular link aggregation service allows members to announce all of their networks on one page. We can
also take advantage of this via direct URL, such as the following.
https://linktr.ee/ambermac

304 Chapter 24

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Email Assumptions
We can also make assumptions in order to identify target accounts. Assume that your suspect is IntelTechniques
on Twitter. A search of the email addresses of IntelTechniques@gmail.com, IntelTechniques@hotmail.com,
and IntelTechniques@yahoo.com at HIBP or Dehashed might reveal an active account that appears within a
compromised database. Unfortunately, this manual search is time consuming and takes a lot of redundant effort.
Therefore, consider using this option within the custom search tools.
These tools contain two search fields near the bottom of the page. Each queries a provided username through
HIBP and Dehashed. The code appends the most popular email domains after the supplied username, and
conducts a search within a new tab for each. If you provide IntelTechniques as the target username, the following
email addresses are queried within independent browser tabs.
IntelTechniques@gmail.com
IntelTechniques@yahoo.com
IntelTechniques@hotmail.com
IntelTechniques@protonmail.com
IntelTechniques@live.com
IntelTechniques@icloud.com
IntelTechniques@yandex.com
IntelTechniques@gmx.com
IntelTechniques@mail.com
IntelTechniques@mac.com
IntelTechniques@me.com
Any positive results indicate that an address exists matching the search criteria, and that address was present
within a breach. If you look at the code behind the tools, it appears as follows.
setTimeout(function(){window.open('https://dehashed.com/search?query=%22' + all3 + '@gmail.com%22',
'1leak3window' );},1000);
The Timeout function places a short pause in between searches. This ensures that we do not upset the server
by conducting too many automated queries at once. If desired, you could replace "gmail.com", or any other
options, with an email provider more appropriate for your investigations. If you are outside the U.S., you may
want to replace several of these. You could also add more at the end. If I were to add "qq.com" after the last
option, it would appear as follows. The 35000 is the next Timeout option to ensure that we have 3000
milliseconds in between each search execution.
setTimeout(function(){window.open('https://dehashed.com/search?query=%22' + all3 + '@qq.com%22',
'13leak3window');},35000);
Similar to how compromised database searches are the most powerful email search option that I use, querying
usernames in this manner can be equally important. This search tool eliminates any laborious process and
removes any excuses not to conduct this type of search every time.
The previous option made assumptions about usernames within email addresses which may appear on breach
search sites. We can replicate that method within a standard search engine. The following URL populates a
search on Google of the target username with the addition of the most popular email address domains, including
quotation marks and the OR operator, as previously discussed. If your target username is IntelTechniques, you
could manually conduct the following Google search.

Usernames 305

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

"IntelTechniques@gmail.com"OR"IntelTechniques@yahoo.com"OR"IntelTechniques@hotmail.com"OR"In
telTechniques@protonmail.com"OR"IntelTechniques@live.com"OR"IntelTechniques@icloud.com"OR"Inte
lTechniques@yandex.com"OR"IntelTechniques@gmx.com"OR"IntelTechniques@mail.com"OR"IntelTechn
iques@mac.com"OR"IntelTechniques@me.com"
If desired, you could copy this query and paste it into Bing and Yandex, but I have found the results to be very
unreliable. Your custom search tool makes this much easier. Enter your username in the "Email Search" option
at the end in order to replicate this search. It will usually generate the most results the fastest.
Skype Username (web.skype.com)
Identifying a Skype username can be an important lead. It could direct you toward additional searches of the
newly found data. Unfortunately, usernames are not obviously available when researching a real name on Skype.
However, a quick method will reveal any Skype username when searching by name or email address. While
logged in to a Skype account within the website or application, navigate to the search area. This section allows
you to enter a real name or email address, and then conducts a search of the Skype user directory. Any results
will appear immediately below. Clicking on these results displays the user's basic profile details including a photo.
If the user chose not to include a photo, a silhouette graphic appears. Right-click on either image format and
choose to "Open image in a new tab" (Chrome) or "View image" (Firefox). The new tab will contain the image
that was already available. However, the address in the URL will reveal the Skype username of the target.
University Homepages
These automated searches for usernames can be very productive. However, they will not locate accounts within
all online communities. One large untapped resource is the massive presence of university personal web pages
and usernames. Most universities issue each student a university email address. These usually follow a standard
naming convention such as the following.
lastname.firstname@university.edu
If you can identify the convention that the school uses and know the full name of the target, you can often
determine the email address of the student. This address can be searched in order to identify any social networks
that may have been missed. Furthermore, the first part of that address is usually the username that would have
been issued to the student for a homepage. The target may have never used this email address online and a
search result may appear empty. That does not mean there is not data available. The chance that the target
created some type of homepage while attending the university is high. Finding the content is easy.
Hopefully, the searches explained earlier have helped in identifying a university that the target attended. A search
for the university's website will reveal the domain name that the university uses. For example, Southern Illinois
University at Edwardsville's website is siue.edu. We can now take that information and conduct a specific search
for any personal pages on their domain. The search should be similar to site:siue.edu laura.
I picked the name of Laura at random just to identify any student or employee personal website on the SIUE
domain. One of the results was a link to a personal website belonging to "Laura Swanson". The link was similar
to www.siue.edu/~lswanso/.
This indicates that the naming convention for personal websites is a tilde (~) followed by the first initial and
then the first six letters of the last name. If the target of interest was "Scott Golike", the personal website would
probably be at www.siue.edu/~sgolike/.
We can also assume the possibility of his school issued email account to be sgolike@siue.edu. A few searches
using previously discussed techniques should confirm if this address belongs to the target. A search using the
email to Facebook profile technique may identify an abandoned profile. We can now navigate to this personal

306 Chapter 24

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

school page and see if there is any content. If there is, we can collect the data and conduct an analysis for
intelligence and further research leads. If there is no page at this address, it does not mean that there has never
been data there. This only indicates that there is no current content on this website. When students graduate,
universities will usually remove all of the personal content from the servers. As discussed previously, this is
never an excuse to stop looking. You can now take the URL of a target and conduct a search on The Wayback
Machine (wayback.archive.org).
As an example, I can navigate to the first personal link for "Laura Swanson". Figure 24.01 (first) displays a
portion of the live page at www.siue.edu/~lswanso/. If this page did not exist and the site contained no content,
you could check on The Wayback Machine. Figure 24.01 (second) shows the search results for this personal
page and identifies numerous archives dating back to 1997 for this site. Checking all of these options presents
the many different versions of the site including one from 2005, as seen in Figure 24.01 (third), and the first
capture from 1997, as seen in Figure 24.01 (fourth). This presents new data that would not have been uncovered
with conventional searches. When a personal website is located, earlier versions should be archived.
Real World Application: While assisting another agency, information had developed in regard to a suspect in
a priority investigation. After all online search attempts revealed nothing of value in locating the subject, a deleted
student personal page was located using this method. It contained a list of friends, roommates, family members,
and interests that were not previously known. This information helped locate the individual within hours.
It should be noted that some institutions will not follow a standard naming convention for all students and
faculty. Additionally, there will be occasions when two or more students will have a name similar enough to
create the same username. Usually, there is a plan in place to thwart these duplications. Sometimes it is as simple
as adding the number "2" after the username. Universities are not the only places that create personal web pages
based on a member name. Several internet service providers allow each subscriber a personal space online as
part of the provider's main website. Comcast provides 25 MB of storage in a folder with the title of the
subscriber's username. For example, if the email address of the customer was crazycheetah70@comcast.net, the
username for the service would be crazycheetah70. The URL to view the personal web page would be as follows.
home.comcast.net/crazycheetah70
The following is a sample list of personal web page addresses from additional internet providers, using
"crazycheetah70" as a username example. You should also search for internet providers in the target's area and
attempt to find deleted pages on The Wayback Machine, Google Cache, Bing Cache, Yandex Cache, and the
other services discussed in Chapter Nine.
360.yahoo.com/crazycheetah70
crazycheetah70.webs.com
crazycheetah70.weebly.com
webpages.charter.net/crazycheetah70
sites.google.com/crazycheetah70
about.me/crazycheetah70
angelfire.com/crazycheetah70
geocities.com/crazycheetah70
reocities.com/crazycheetah70
crazycheetah70.tripod.com
home.earthlink.net/~crazycheetah70
home.comcast.net/~crazycheetah70

Usernames 307

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Ghunt Gmail Verification (gmail-osint.activetk.jp)
You can confirm a username is associated with a Google (Gmail) account with this resource. It can also identify
the profile image, last edit date, Gaia ID, the type of account, any gaming connections, and any mapping or
reviews information. This service relies on Ghunt, which we previously installed within our VM. We can query
with the following URL by replacing inteltechniques with your target data.
https://gmail-osint.activetk.jp/inteltechniques
IntelTechniques Usernames Tool
Similar to the custom email search tool, this page assists with an automated search of some of the techniques
mentioned previously. This page allows you to execute manual queries or use the option to attempt all search
possibilities. As a reminder, you must allow pop-ups for these pages if you want to use the "Submit All". An
online version exists at https://inteltechniques.com/tools/Username.html.

308 Chapter 24

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE
PEOPLE SEARCH ENGINES

Just as Google and Bing specialize in searching content on the internet, people search engines specialize in
finding content about a particular person. Many of these sites utilize search engines such as Google and Bing to
help compile the data, and then present a summary style interface that is easy to consume. The sites listed here
each have their own strengths and weaknesses. Standard searches are free on all of them; however, each site
generates revenue in some form. Usually, this is by displaying advertisements that often appear to be a report
function within the site. I do not recommend purchasing any of the premium paid services until all free options
have been exhausted.
These details are often focused on targets in the United States, but many services are starting to reach past North
America. Searching a target's real name often leads to the discovery of home addresses, telephone numbers,
email accounts, and usernames. The following resources are presented in order of most beneficial within my
investigations to least. Please note that many of these sites are now blocking access from IP addresses associated
with VPNs. This is due to malicious "scraping" behavior by competing sites. If you receive an "access denied"
error, it is likely your VPN is being blocked by the service.
True People Search (truepeoplesearch.com)
This service has provided the most comprehensive and consistent free report based on real name. The results
usually include current address, previous addresses, telephone numbers (including cellular), email addresses,
relatives, and associates. There are no blatant ads, but the "Background Reports" links forward you to a paid
service which will likely return the same details. This is my first stop when trying to locate an individual in the
U.S. The direct search URL is as follows.
https://www.truepeoplesearch.com/results?name=michael%20bazzell
Fast People Search (fastpeoplesearch.com)
This service appears to rely on the exact same database as True People Search. However, it possesses one huge
advantage. True People Search gained a lot of media attention as a "stalking" assistant, which resulted in
numerous articles instructing individuals to remove their profiles with an opt-out link. Many people have
removed their information, but practically none of them replicated the procedure on Fast People Search. If your
target removed his or her profile from the previous option, it might still be present here. The direct search URL
is as follows.
https://www.fastpeoplesearch.com/name/michael-bazzell
Nuwber (nuwber.com)
A newcomer in 2017 was Nuwber. I first learned about this service from various members of the privacy forum
at my website. They were discussing the importance of removing their own personal details from this site
through various opt-out procedures available at the time. I found my own information to be quite accurate.
Therefore, this makes for a great OSINT resource. The default landing page allows search of a first and last
name. The results are presented by location, and each profile often includes full name, age range, home address,
telephone number, and neighbors. The direct search URL is as follows.
https://nuwber.com/search?name=michael-bazzell

People Search Engines 309

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Open Data USA (usa-official.com)
This was another service that surprised many privacy-conscious people. A typical entry contains a target's full
name, current home address, current home telephone number, email addresses, previous home addresses,
additional telephone numbers, possible relatives, and age. I recently located a target's email address from this
service, which was not present on any other site. Using the techniques mentioned in previous chapters, I was
able to create a full dossier. The default page does not present a direct URL, but the inspector presents following.
https://usa-official.com/Michael-Bazzell
Family Tree Now (familytreenow.com)
In 2016, this website emerged and launched an uproar online. This site is targeted toward those who want to
conduct family history research, and its specialty is connecting a person to his or her relatives. The results do
not display home addresses, but simply the age of the target and a large list of family members. After gaining a
lot of online popularity, many people started complaining about the availability of this sensitive information.
While this type of service is nothing new, people were outraged at this violation of their privacy. Since Family
Tree Now sources all of their data from public databases, they defended their product, which is still available
today. This attention may have been the inspiration for this company to take things to another level with True
People Search. The direct search URL is as follows.
https://www.familytreenow.com/search/genealogy/results?first=Michael&last=Bazzell
Cyber Background Check (cyberbackgroundchecks.com)
I suspect this site is associated to the first two entries in this chapter. However, I have located unique data.
Therefore, it should be included in our tools. The direct search URL follows.
https://www.cyberbackgroundchecks.com/people/michael-bazzell
Intelius (intelius.com)
Intelius is a premium service that provides reports about people for a fee. Most of the information is from public
sources, but some of it appears to come from private databases. Searching for any information on the main
website will always link you to a menu of pricing options. The information will never be displayed for free.
However, the page that lists the report options does possess some interesting information. This free preview
identifies an exact age, possible aliases, cities lived in, previous employers, universities attended, and relatives. If
the subject is married, this will usually identify the spouse. In most situations, it will identify the maiden name
of the person's wife. Anything that you do not see on this main screen, you must pay a fee. I never recommend
purchasing any of this data. Users are usually disappointed with the results. The direct search URL is as follows.
https://www.intelius.com/people-search/Michael-Bazzell
Radaris (radaris.com)
This service has many similarities to Intelius. However, the data set is unique. The business model is to entice
you into purchasing an entire profile. I only use the service for the limited free content available in the preview.
After searching a name, select the most appropriate target and choose "Full Profile" in the lower right of the
result. This will open the full view of any free information. This will often include the target's middle name, age,
current address, previous address, landline telephone number, and links to social networks. The Background
Check options forward you to a premium website which I do not recommend. The direct URL follows.
https://radaris.com/p/Michael/Bazzell/

310 Chapter 25

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Spytox (spytox.com)
This service provides limited data during a free search, but the records are often updated from premium
resources. In my experience, the free option only provides city, state, and phone. The direct URL follows.
https://www.spytox.com/michael-bazzell
Search People Free (searchpeoplefree.com)
This database looks awfully familiar to True People Search and Fast People Search, but I occasionally locate an
individual present here and nowhere else. One benefit here is that the email addresses identified within the
results are hyperlinks. They connect to additional names on occasion. The direct search URL is as follows.
https://www.searchpeoplefree.com/find/michael-bazzell
That's Them (thatsthem.com)
In late 2014, a new website quietly entered the crowded scene of people search services. On the surface, it was
just another service that aggregated publicly available information. Consequently, a closer examination revealed
That's Them to contain information that is not available anywhere else for free. This service has many options,
and most will be discussed in this book. For the purposes of this chapter, I will focus on the "Name and Address"
search option in the top menu of the website. Entering a full name with city and state is preferred, but not
required. Results often display the person's age range, cell phone number, landline number, full address, religion,
financial details, home IP address and any associated email addresses. I searched my own name to test the
accuracy of the results. My profile correctly identified similar information as well as the exact VIN number of a
previous vehicle. This type of data is impressive without any fees. I have found their details of religion and
financial information to be unreliable. Note that the options to purchase additional information are
advertisements from third-party companies, and should be avoided. The direct search URL is as follows.
https://thatsthem.com/name/Michael-Bazzell
Spokeo (spokeo.com)
Spokeo is probably the most well-known of all the people search engines. There are two very distinct versions
of this service, free and premium. The premium service will provide a large amount of accurate data, but at a
cost. The free version provides an interface that is easy to navigate. The results from a target name search will
be presented after choosing a state and city. Only the states and cities where the target name has a presence will
be shown. Choosing this target will display a profile with various information. Within this data will be several
attempts to encourage you to purchase a premium account. Basically, anything that you do not see within this
profile will cost you money. Any links from the profile will present a membership plan with pricing. The profile
will often display full name, gender, age, and previous cities and states of residency. However, it no longer
presents the actual current address. Spokeo is one of many sites which present an animate gif file while you wait
on the results. This is unnecessary and is in place to make you believe data is being queried in real time. The
following static search URL bypasses this annoyance.
https://www.spokeo.com/Michael-Bazzell?loaded=1
Advanced Background Checks (advancedbackgroundchecks.com)
This is another service which includes advertisements for premium options. It appears to present data very
similar to Intelius. Surprisingly, the majority of their data archive is free without any payment. The main search
results appear redacted and entire addresses and telephone numbers are masked. With many other services,
clicking these details prompt the user for payment. Instead, this service opens a new page revealing the entire

People Search Engines 311

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

record. This often includes home address, home landline telephone number, age, and relatives. Clicking the "See
full info" button reveals previous addresses, additional telephone numbers, and aliases. Overall, this service is
extremely useful for U.S. targets. The direct search URL is as follows.
https://www.advancedbackgroundchecks.com/names/michael-bazzell
Yasni (yasni.com)
On the surface, Yasni appears to be another standard people search engine. Much of the content received will
be duplicate data, but there are a few areas where Yasni works differently. The home page will give three search
options. For most OSINT purposes, the last option is the desired search. It will accept a real name or username
and forward you to a results page. Real name search will present a large number of links associated with your
target's name. As with other engines, many of these results will be about a person other than your target. The
first box on the results page will include a "lives/works in" option that will display the cities of the users identified
with the search. Clicking on a location that looks appropriate for your target will load a new results page that
will provide all search results about your specific target. Yasni will identify news articles, websites, and social
networks related to your target. By default, the search is conducted internationally. Yasni is a German site and
searching outside of the United States is one of the strengths of the service. The search bar includes an option
to filter the results by specific countries, but the United States is not listed as an option. If you have a target that
lives in another country, Yasni is a great tool. The direct search URL is as follows.
https://www.yasni.com/jason+edison/check+people
Zaba Search (zabasearch.com)
This site appears to have several search options at first glance. Unfortunately, all but one will forward to an
Intelius site, which will require a fee. There is one very specific free option on this page. Providing any real name
and state of residence will provide a results page with full name, date of birth, address, and phone number. In
my experience, this often includes unlisted telephone numbers and addresses. Clicking on practically anything
else on this results page will take you to a sponsored link. When I use this resource, I only rely on the information
obtained on the first result page. The direct search URL is as follows.
https://www.zabasearch.com/people/michael+bazzell/
People Search Now (peoplesearchnow.com)
This database appears to have the same parent company as True People Search, and possesses the same data.
However, this search should be included in the event that a target has removed details from other related
websites. Due to increased awareness of exposed personal information, I am seeing many people request
removal of personal online data. The direct URL is as follows.
https://www.peoplesearchnow.com/person/michael-bazzell
WebMii (webmii.com)
This service emphasizes information associated with social networks. I have never located any home addresses
or telephone numbers, but I have found online images that were not available on any other search engine. This
is not the most productive option, but one to consider when desperate for details. The direct search URL is as
follows.
http://webmii.com/people?n="Michael%20Bazzell"

312 Chapter 25

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Social Searcher (social-searcher.com)
I explained this service within the username chapter, but it also applies here. It focuses on social media presence,
including mentions within posts. The direct search URL is as follows.
https://www.social-searcher.com/search-users/?q6=Michael+Bazzell
Truth Finder (truthfinder.com)
There is nothing very special about this service, as it will likely have data similar to the other sites already
mentioned. However, there is one major annoyance. When you search this site, you are bombarded by fake
progress meters that insinuate that a huge report is being prepared about your target. On average, a real name
search takes over 14 minutes due to these constant "please be patient while we find more details" notifications.
The solution to this is to submit a direct URL as follows.
https://www.truthfinder.com/results/?firstName=Michael&lastName=Bazzell&state=ALL
People By Name (peoplebyname.com)
The title of this site is misleading. It only allows the query of a telephone number, which is not beneficial when
searching by name. However, the following URL structure displays all profiles associated with the name.
http://www.peoplebyname.com/people/Bazzell/Michael
White Pages (whitepages.com)
This is the official White Pages website that will conduct a reverse name or address search. The results often
include known residents and neighbors. This data is pulled from public information and is rarely complete. The
direct search URL is as follows.
https://www.whitepages.com/name/Michael-Bazzell
Clustr Maps (clustrmaps.com)
There is nothing too exciting here, as it is more of the same. Since this service offers a direct URL query, we
should add it to our arsenal. The URL structure follows.
https://clustrmaps.com/persons/Michael-Bazzell
Public Records (publicrecords.directory)
This service displays a few unique details about an individual. It taps into various voter registration databases,
campaign contribution disclosures, and vehicle registration data. None of these categories appear consistently
within search results, but a search here is always justified. There is no direct URL submission option, so a manual
search is your only option.
Rocket Reach (rocketreach.co)
This impressive site does not identify home addresses. Instead, it focuses on business details likely scraped from
LinkedIn and online resumes. Conducting a search on the website only presents a login form and an account is
mandatory. However, Google can help us. I conducted the following search.
site:rocketreach.co "michael bazzell"

People Search Engines 313

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

This resulted in three Rocket Reach profiles, all of which could be viewed without an active account. The first
was someone else with my name. It disclosed the following details.
Location: Baltimore, Maryland, United States
Work: Senior Artist @ Firaxis Games, Senior Artist @ MicroProse Software, Artist @ Innerprise Software
Education: Maryland Institute College of Art, Bachelor Of Fine Arts (Communication, Illustration), 1985 - 1989
Michael Bazzell's Email: @firaxis.com @kryptotoyz.com @erols.com
Michael Bazzell's Phone Numbers: 410667XXXX 410726XXXX
The site then teases the ability to uncover the redacted results for free. However, this requires a free account.
Official USA (officialusa.com)
While many targets will not be present within this data set, those who are will be quite exposed. A typical result
includes full name, home address, email address, phone number, and home sale records. This service works best
when queries are submitted manually. Submit your target's name in the "Search for all governments" field on
the main page and doing so will open a results page which will allow you to filter and refine your query.
Addresses (addresses.com)
This service appears to be using other public datasets, but the redactions of details seem to be less than the other
premium sites. It is common to see full telephone numbers, addresses, and family connections. The URL
structure follows.
https://www.addresses.com/people/michael-bazzell
ID Crawl (idcrawl.com)
This service attempts to build a full online profile from a name. Results are hit or miss, but the following direct
URL access makes for an easy query.
https://www.idcrawl.com/michael-bazzell
Classmates (classmates.com)
Classmates is a very underrated resource for the internet searcher. Unfortunately, you must create a free account
to take advantage of the worthy information inside the site. This free account can contain fictitious information
and it is necessary to complete a profile on the site to access the premium features. After you are logged in, you
can search by first and last name. If you know the school that was attended, the results will be much more
accurate. This should provide the school attended as well as the years the target attended the school. My new
interest in this site is due to the availability of scanned yearbooks. The collection is far from complete, but there
are a surprising number of complete yearbooks available to browse. Analyzing this content can be very time
consuming, as the yearbook must be manually browsed one page at a time. The information obtained should be
unique from any internet search previously conducted.

314 Chapter 25

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Rebate Tracking
I find this technique more "interesting" than valuable to an investigation, but you might locate a nugget of
information which assists you. As an example, let's look at the store Menards. Menards is an American home
improvement company which pushes rebates in order to make products appear low-priced. When you buy a
product, you can retrieve a rebate slip and mail it off. In a few weeks, numerous checks in small amounts begin
arriving at your home. This game provides small discounts, but at what risk? This is where the online rebate
center comes in. Let's start with a visit to https://rebateinternational.com/RebateInternational/tracking.do.
This page allows you to enter a first initial, last name, numeric portion of an address, and postal code of your
target. This result appears similar to Figure 25.01.

Figure 25.01: A Menards rebate tracking screen.
We now see the purchased items, purchase dates, rebate amounts, and payment details. This gives us a glimpse
into the shopping habits of the target and could lead to patterns of behavior which might expose someone's
routines. It could also provide pretext value. I could initiate an email phishing attack focused on a specific
purchased item announcing a problem with the rebate. That would be so targeted that the recipient would
probably click whatever link I sent. This rebate service even stores all purchases within a static URL which is
prone to abuse. If my name were Michael Smith and I lived at 1212 Main Street in Houston, Texas, my URL
would be the following.
https://rebateinternational.com/RebateInternational/trackResults/M/Smith/1212/77089
Note that this URL does not require any credentialing and is open to brute-force scraping. Next, let's take a look
at Lowe's home improvement. They offer a rebate confirmation website at https://lowes-rebates.com/enus/RebateStatus which allows entry of a cellular number or home address, as seen in Figure 25.02.

Figure 25.02: A Lowe's rebate tracking entry.
This allows us to potentially translate an unknown cell number into a name and address or vice-versa, as well as
obtain shopping history of the target. These two examples are only a small selection of the possibilities. You will
find online portals for Micro Center, Budweiser, Miller, Kohls, Auto Stores, and other retail establishments. I
have found the following three Google searches to assist with finding companies which offer similar options.

People Search Engines 315

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

https://www.google.com/search?q=intitle:"rebate center"
https://www.google.com/search?q="track+my+rebate"
https://www.google.com/search?q="track+your+rebate"
Utility Inquiries
If you know your target's telephone number and postal code, you may be able to uncover an entire home address.
Consider the following example with the home telephone and internet service provider CenturyLink. The
following address connects to their internet troubleshooting page.
https://www.centurylink.com/home/help/internet/test-your-internet-at-the-network-interface.html
Clicking "Open Troubleshooter" in the lower right area opens a query page asking for the telephone number
and postal code. Submitting this data then presents a confirmation screen which includes the customer's name,
full address, and telephone number. I have found many local utilities which offer similar search portals.
IntelTechniques Names Tool
The abundance of free person search tools can get overwhelming. They each have strengths and weaknesses,
and none of them are consistent on accurate results. In years past, I would manually visit each site and enter my
target information. This would usually result in small, yet valuable, pieces of information from each service.
Today, I use a custom search tool that I created to search all possible sites simultaneously. This free tool is in
your offline downloads and online at https://inteltechniques.com/tools/Name.html. You can either enter
the first and last name of your target within the search fields of each service, or enter this information only once
at the final set of search fields. This latter option will launch several new tabs and conduct your search across
each service. During my live training courses, I am often questioned about the absence of the ability to enter a
middle initial or name. While I could make this an option, I find that a lot of people search websites do not
always possess a middle name. Entering this data could harm an investigation by omitting valuable results.
Resumes
Resume searching was mentioned earlier. Those methods will identify many documents, especially if the word
"resume" is inside the file or file name. These results are only a portion of available content that could be
extremely valuable to your investigation. I believe that resumes are an ideal target since they usually contain
sensitive information that is not posted anywhere else. Many people will include a cellular number and personal
email address on a resume, but would never consider placing these details on a social network. If the resume is
publicly available, regardless of whether the target realizes this, we can gather good intelligence. The following
techniques aim to assist in locating this valuable data. Detailed searches within Google or Bing will identify many
resumes hosted publicly on websites and cloud-based document storage services. If my target's name is Michael
Bazzell, I have found the following exact searches valuable on Google, Bing, and Yandex.
"Michael Bazzell" "Resume"
"Michael Bazzell" "Curriculum Vitae"
"Michael Bazzell" "CV"
"Michael Bazzell" "Resume" filetype:doc
"Michael Bazzell" "Curriculum Vitae" filetype:doc
"Michael Bazzell" "CV" filetype:doc
"Michael Bazzell" "Resume" filetype:pdf
"Michael Bazzell" "Curriculum Vitae" filetype:pdf
"Michael Bazzell" "CV" filetype:pdf
"Michael Bazzell" "Resume" site:docs.google.com
"Michael Bazzell" "Curriculum Vitae" site:docs.google.com
"Michael Bazzell" "CV" site:docs.google.com

316 Chapter 25

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

While these queries will likely locate any resumes with text, they will fail on many resume images. Numerous
resume hosting websites have realized that various data scraping engines scour their resume collection and
"steal" their content. This has encouraged some services to store images of resumes that do not contain text
that can be easily searched. While this is a decent layer of protection, it is not enough to keep out of Google
results. Since Google scans images for Optical Character Recognition (OCR), it knows what words are within
an image. After conducting the previous queries within traditional search engines, attempt them through Google
Images (images.google.com). A search of "Mary Johnson" "Resume" on Google Images revealed hundreds of
images of resumes. A manual inspection of each identified many pieces of sensitive information.
Indeed (resumes.indeed.com)
Indeed has a powerful collection of resume data. Because the term "resume" is not present in any of the content
pages, you will likely not obtain this data during your standard searches. Entering your target name on Indeed
under the "Find Candidates" option may present new results. Contact information is usually redacted. However,
detailed work experience, education, and location are commonly present.
Ripoff Report (ripoffreport.com)
If your target conducts any type of business with the public, he or she will likely upset someone at some point.
If your target regularly provides bad service or intentionally commits fraud within the business, there are likely
many upset victims. Ripoff Report is a user-submitted collection of complaints about businesses and individuals.
I have had investigations into shady people and businesses where these reviews were beneficial.
Gift Registries
Decades ago, people were surprised at the gifts presented to them after a wedding or birth. Today, we create
online registries identifying the exact products desired, and within moments someone can purchase and ship the
"thoughtful" gift with very little effort. As an investigator, I have always enjoyed the plethora of personal details
within these registries, which tend to stay online long after the related event. Before identifying the best
resources, let's take a look at the types of details we can acquire from some random targets.
•

•

•

•

Partner Name: When I am investigating someone, that person usually knows they are under a
microscope. He or she tends to stop posting to social media and starts scrubbing any online details.
However, their partner tends to ignore the threat of investigation and continues to upload sensitive
information applicable to the target. Therefore, online wedding and baby registries help me identify the
most lucrative target aside from the original suspect. In an example from the wedding registry website
theknot.com, I received over 200 results for Michael Wilson, which also includes the name of the future
spouse.
Maiden Name: In the example above, the results only identified future weddings. However, modifying
the year in the search menu allows us to view past weddings. This will divulge a woman's maiden name.
This can be beneficial in order to better locate a Facebook page or other family members that may be
off my radar. I can also use this to then search old yearbooks, criminal details, and previous addresses.
Date / State: Many counties will only share marriage certificates if the requestor knows the exact names
of each party and the exact date of the event. We have everything we need in order to file a request.
Marriage certificates often include full details of all parents, witnesses, and the officiant. Furthermore,
I now have their anniversary date which can be helpful during a phishing attack or social engineering
attempt. You might be surprised at the number of people that use their anniversary as a security question
to an online account.
Ceremony Details: The Knot and other wedding registry sites offer the couple a free website to
announce details about the upcoming (or past) event. This usually includes an embellished story about
how they met, fell in love, and he proposed. While this could be good knowledge for social engineering,
I am usually more interested in the wedding party. This will usually include the closest friends of my
target, which will be next on my investigation list.

People Search Engines 317

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•

•

Items: While it may be fun to look at the items desired by a couple, there is much we can learn about
their lives based on these details. In an example from Figure 25.03, I now know that a random Michael
Wilson, who is getting married in San Antonio, will be going to his honeymoon in Maui (#2), snorkeling
(#3), at the airport carrying a Lowepro backpack (#4), checking red/black suitcases (#5), capturing
everything on a Canon HD camcorder (#6), dining at the Lahaina Grill (#7), and staying at a fancy
nearby hotel (#8). Other recent examples associated with actual targets identify the types of phones
used, vehicles driven, and subjects of interest. While The Knot requires both a first name and last name
to conduct a search, providing two asterisks (**) as the first name will present every entry online
including the provided last name.
Children: The items within a baby registry will usually provide little to no value. Knowing the brand of
diapers preferred or favorite crib style has never helped me in the past. However, knowing a due date
and location of the target can be beneficial for future searching. Unfortunately, The Bump only allows
searching of upcoming births, and not any past profiles. Fortunately, Google has our backs. A Google
search of site:registry.thebump.com "Michael Wilson" revealed multiple baby registries associated with
Michael Wilson.

The most fruitful registries in regard to identifying personal preferences of a target are the various gift registries.
Of all these, Amazon is the most popular. The following are the most common wedding, baby, and gift registries,
with direct links to the most appropriate search pages. I highly encourage you to conduct a detailed Google
"Site" search after attempting the proper method.
The Knot: https://www.theknot.com/registry/couplesearch
The Bump: https://registry.thebump.com/babyregistrysearch
Amazon Baby: https://www.amazon.com/baby-reg/homepage/
Amazon Wedding: https://www.amazon.com/wedding/
Walmart Wedding: https://www.walmart.com/lists/find-wedding-registry
Walmart Baby: https://www.walmart.com/registry/baby/search
Target Wedding: https://www.target.com/gift-registry/
Target Baby: https://www.target.com/gift-registry/baby-registry
Ikea Wedding: https://info.ikea-usa.com/giftregistry
Bed Bath & Beyond Wedding: https://bedbathandbeyond.myregistry.com/
Macy's Wedding: https://www.macys.com/registry/wedding/registrysearch
Registry Fi
My Registr

Figure 25.03: A search result from a gift registry website.

318 Chapter 25

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Find a Grave (findagrave.com)
While I assume that your goal is to find living targets, you should also have a resource for locating proof of
deceased individuals. I have used this website numerous times to locate the graves of recently deceased people.
While not necessarily "proof" of death, it provides a great lead toward locating a death certificate and living
family members. In 2021, I began finding better results at People Legacy (peoplelegacy.com).
Addresses
The target of your investigation may be an address of your suspect. You may want to know who else lives at a
residence. The name search websites which were previously discussed allow search of a residential address.
Voter Registration (www.blackbookonline.info/USA-Voter-Records.aspx - voterrecords.com)
Many people will have their address and telephone number unlisted in public telephone books. This prevents
their information from appearing on some websites. If any of these people are registered voters, their address
may still be public. In order to locate this data, you will need to connect to the county clerk of the county of
residence. The link here will display a list of all fifty states. Clicking the state of the target will present all of the
counties with known online databases of voter registration content. These will often display the full name of the
voter and full address. This can be sorted by name or address depending on what information you have about
the target. Later chapters present additional voter registration search options.
Unclaimed Property
Every state in the U.S. possesses an unclaimed property website. Common forms of unclaimed property include
savings or checking accounts, stocks, uncashed dividends, online payments, refunds, and leftover utility balances.
Most of these pages only require a last name to conduct a search. The results almost always include full name,
home address, property type, and amount owed. This can provide a great search resource, and a possible pretext
for a phone call. A complete collection of these sites with easy access to each state is at Unclaimed
(unclaimed.org).
Google (google.com)
If all else fails, or you believe you are missing something, check Google. Searching the address should identify
any leftover information about your target address. When searching, place the street address in quotes excluding
the city. An example search may appear similar to "1234 Main" "Bethalto" IL. This chapter is heavily focused
on U.S. targets. If you have a subject of interest outside of America, I have found the following to be beneficial.
Australia: www.peoplesearch.com.au
Canada: www.canadapages.com
Canada: www.infobel.com/en/Canada
France: www.infobel.com/en/France
Germany: www.infobel.com/en/Germany

Spain: www.infobel.com/en/Spain
UK: www.192.com
UK: www.peopletraceuk.com
UK: www.gov.uk/government

Premium Search Option: Skopenow (Skopenow.com/IntelTechniques)
The previous resources are free to use. However, your result accuracy will vary. Many free sites will present
outdated information which was scoured from unreliable resources. If you are looking for a paid provider which
can display current home addresses, telephone numbers, email addresses, associates, and much more
information, I highly recommend Skopenow. You will need to create an account and be vetted, but the results
are way better than any free resources. Pricing for this service varies, but connecting via the previous URL
informs Skopenow that you learned about them through this book, and they will know that you crave OSINT
information from them.

People Search Engines 319

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
TELEPHONE NUMBERS

There are hundreds of websites that claim the ability to search for information on telephone numbers and
addresses. These vary from amazingly accurate results to sites that only include advertisements. If I have a target
telephone number, there are three phases of my search. First, I want to identify the type of number and provider.
The type could be landline, cellular or internet, and the provider could be the company supplying the service.
Next, I want to identify any subscriber information such as the name and address associated with the account.
Finally, I want to locate any online web content with a connection to the target number. This can all lead to
more intelligence and additional searches. The majority of cellular numbers can now be identified if they are
registered in someone's name. If you have an address, you will want to identify any associated people or
telephone numbers. This chapter will highlight the sites which can assist with these tasks.
Carrier Identification
Ten years ago, I often queried telephone number porting websites to identify the provider of my target's
telephone number. This would identify the cellular company that supplied service to my suspect. I would use
that information within my court order to demand subscriber data about the target. Knowing the provider was
essential as to not waste time requesting records from companies that had no data to provide. The websites used
back then have either disappeared, or now charge a substantial fee for access. Five years ago, I noticed that an
overwhelming amount of my target telephone numbers were connected to Voice Over Internet Protocol (VOIP)
services such as Google Voice and Twilio. This would often be indicated by a result of "Broadband" or
"Internet" instead of something obvious such as "Verizon". Until recently, the absence of a specific provider
was a hurdle during investigations. Today, we have more sophisticated services that can identify exact provider
details on practically any number.
Free Carrier Lookup (freecarrierlookup.com)
I begin with this option because it has been the most stable and does not limit searching as others do. This site
requests any domestic or international telephone number and produces a report which includes the country,
type of service, and provider associated with the number. While many online services can identify the provider
of a cellular or landline number, this option provides the best details about VOIP numbers. I submitted several
telephone numbers associated with various providers that I could personally confirm. The following identifies
the results of these searches. The first column represents the provider as I knew it, the second column is the
type, and the third is the provider displayed by Free Carrier Lookup. This is far from complete, but I wanted to
demonstrate the ability to convert internet-based numbers into identifiable companies.
Verizon
AT&T
Google Voice
Sudo
Blur
TextNow
On/Off

Mobile
Mobile
VOIP
VOIP
Landline
VOIP
VOIP

Verizon Wireless
AT&T Wireless
Google/Level 3
Twilio/Level 3 (SMS-Sybase) (MMS-SVR)
Twilio/Level 3 Communications
Enflick/Bandwidth.com (SVR)
Peerless Network

If this service cannot provide the data you need, or if you want another source to provide more confidence in
the result, you should also consider the sites Carrier Lookup (carrierlookup.com) and Phone Carrier Check
(phonecarriercheck.com). If both of these services disappear by the time you need them, a Google search of
"carrier lookup" should provide new alternatives.

320 Chapter 26

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

NANPA (nationalnanpa.com)
This site is dedicated to the North American Number Plan for switched telephone networks for the US, Canada,
and the Caribbean. An advantage of this service is that the data is being provided by the number authority
themselves and not an untrusted third party. NANPA allows us to identify the original carrier by searching the
number block (the first six digits of the 10 digit phone number) from their Central Office Code Utilized Report
which is available at https://nationalnanpa.com/reports/reports_cocodes.html. Although this will only identify
the provider of the number block, those in law enforcement can call 877-416-6551 to find out if the number
has been recently ported to an alternate carrier. While other carrier identification services can be useful, this
service tends to be the most accurate.
Scout (scout.tel/phone-number-lookup)
This newer service provides a few pieces of information about a telephone number which I have not seen
available anywhere else. The following is a partial result of a target telephone number query.
administrative_area_level_3
administrative_area_level_2
administrative_area_level_1
operating_company_name
line_type
ported
risk_rating
risk_level

Alton Township
Madison County
Illinois
AT&T
mobile
false
unlikely
28

We now know that this number was not ported from another carrier; it is a mobile number; and it possesses a
low risk rating. These ratings increase for VOIP, forwarding, and masked numbers, and might indicate that the
number you are searching is not assigned to any specific individual. A free API key from RapidAPI is required.
Caller ID Databases
Once you have identified the provider, you should focus on the subscriber data associated with the number. We
will tackle this in several different ways, as many things changed in 2019. First, we should focus on the most
reliable options, which often require registration for a free trial. This chapter becomes quite technical quickly,
but the tools at the end will simplify everything.
In 2013, I began experimenting with reverse caller ID data. These are the same databases that identify a
telephone number on your landline caller ID display. Often, this will include the name associated with the
number. Until recently, this was something that only appeared on landline numbers, but that has changed. Now
many cellular telephone numbers have name information associated with them. This name information is usually
extracted from the cellular telephone service provider. I was immediately shocked at the accuracy of these results
while searching cellular telephone numbers that were otherwise untraceable. On many of my investigations, this
technique has eliminated the need to obtain court subpoenas to discover subscriber information.
The reason we can access this data is because it is necessary for telephone systems that do not already possess
caller ID options. New systems that operate over the internet, referred to as VOIP systems (Voice Over Internet
Protocol), do not receive caller ID data natively. This is something that we have taken for granted while it was
provided by our telephone companies. Today, many businesses must purchase access to this data from resellers.
This presents us with an opportunity.
I scoured the internet for every business that provides bulk caller ID data to private companies. Some offer a
free website for testing; some require you to submit queries through their servers; and others make you register
for a free trial. I have tested all of them and identified those that are easy to access and give the best results.

Telephone Numbers 321

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

First, I will focus only on easy and reliable ways to search an individual number through specific web addresses.
I explained more robust options via APIs, including an automated script, within Section One.
Twilio (twilio.com/lookup)
This company was briefly discussed in Section One. A feature of their internet-based phone service is the ability
to identify incoming calls through caller ID. Fortunately for us, they provide a page on their site that allows
queries against their database, but it requires you to register for a free trial account. Locate the "Sign up" button
and create a free account. Click the confirmation link in the email and you should be all set. If you are required
to verify a telephone number, Google Voice numbers are accepted. You should be presented with a $15 credit
within Twilio. This should provide numerous searches.
Once you are logged in to an account, click "Explore Products" in the left menu. Scroll down to the "Lookup"
feature on the right. This is the screen which allows querying of numbers, and you may want to bookmark this
page. I usually only select the "Include caller name" unless I want confirmation of the carrier. These searches
are $0.01 each, which means you should be able to conduct 1500 queries on this single trial. While a bit of an
annoyance to set up the first time, the work is justified. Make sure you have a valid email and Google Voice
account ready before registering. If Twilio demands to know why you created an account, I would not mention
OSINT or this book. They often cater to people who own a "small businesses which wants to transition from
landlines to VOIP telephone service". That was a hint. If pushed further, tell them you are a developer who has
been asked to review their API, and explain you will only need internal testing without an outside number.
On the Lookup search page, insert the target number and allow the page to generate a result, which will appear
directly below. The result will include the type of provider and any name associated with the billing. If I only
had one website to search, this would be it. Below is an actual redacted result.
PHONE NUMBER
+16180000000
NATIONAL FORMAT (618) 000-0000
COUNTRY CODE
US
CALLER NAME
M Bazel
CALLER TYPE
null
CARRIER NAME
Google (Grand Central) - Level3 - SVR
CARRIER TYPE
voip
There are many other caller ID services, but they all require usage of API keys via Terminal commands. I
explained more on this in Section One.
Apeiron (apeiron.io/info)
This service possesses data similar to Twilio, but is completely free and available through a traditional website.
The results are not as comprehensive as the previous option, but could be valuable if cannot use Twilio.
Truecaller (truecaller.com)
This service stands alone as the most creative telephone number lookup service. True Caller is an app for smart
devices that displays caller ID information of incoming calls. If you receive a call on your phone, and the number
is not in your contacts, True Caller searches its database and provides any results on your screen. You can then
choose to accept or deny the call. This is fairly standard and is not the interesting aspect of this service. The
fascinating part to me is the source of their caller database. It is mostly crowd-sourced.
When you install the app, you give it permission to collect all of your contacts and upload them to the original
database. Basically, millions of users have uploaded their contact lists for the world to see. The next amazing
thing to me is the ability to search within this data on the True Caller website. You must connect to the service

322 Chapter 26

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

via a covert Microsoft or Google account, but that is not difficult. The first time you sign in make certain that
"Enhanced Search" is not checked and "I reside in California" is selected. Doing so will reduce the amount of
data collected from you by Truecaller during your session. When I first found this service, I was skeptical. I
entered the cellular number of my government issued cellular telephone expecting to see no results. The
response was "Mike Bazell". My jaw dropped. My super-secret number was visible to the world. This means that
someone in my circle, likely another government employee, installed True Caller on his or her phone and had
my information in their contacts. Until someone else populates data for this number, it will always be present in
the database. Until someone else populates data for this number, it will always be present in the database.
Real World Application: During my final year of government investigations, I queried a target number
associated with a homicide through this service. The result was "Drug Dealer Matt". One of the target's
customers must have installed True Caller. One of three potential suspects was named Matt, who earned our
spotlight, and later an arrest.
Spy Dialer (spydialer.com)
This service offers a typical telephone number search tool, which also appears to extract data from crowdsourced databases. I suspect that much of this data was acquired many years ago, but this can still be beneficial.
Sometimes, I want historical data about a number, even if it is no longer issued to the target.
Caller ID Test (calleridtest.com)
This site was designed to input a telephone number and test the Caller ID display feature. It is nothing more
than a standard lookup service, but I have found the data to be unique from other sources on some occasions.
Unfortunately, I have also found the availability of this service to be unreliable. While the site is usually present,
the results don't always populate. However, this resource should be checked when others have failed.
Telephone Search Websites
In previous editions of this book, I summarized a handful of people search websites which allowed the query of
a telephone number. These sites all possess unique data sets and each should be searched. Most of the results
originate from sources such as property tax data, marketing leaks, phonebooks, and various data breaches.
Instead of explaining each site, which becomes quite redundant, I will display the static URL of a search
submission. Many of these links avoid unnecessary loading screens and advertisements. This will help us with
the automated tool at the end. Overall, we cannot control the results, and telephone search is mostly "what you
see is what you get". Replace the demo number (618-462-0000) with your target number.
411 https://www.411.com/phone/1-618-462-0000
800 Notes https://800notes.com/Phone.aspx/1-618-462-0000
Advanced Background Checks https://www.advancedbackgroundchecks.com/618-462-0000
America Phonebook http://www.americaphonebook.com/reverse.php?number=6184620000
Caller Smart https://www.callersmart.com/phone-number/618-462-0000
Cyber Background Checks: https://www.cyberbackgroundchecks.com/phone/618-462-0000
Dehashed https://dehashed.com/search?query=6184620000
Fast People Search https://www.fastpeoplesearch.com/618-462-0000
Info Tracer https://infotracer.com/phone-lookup/results/?phone=6184620000
Numpi https://numpi.com/phone-info/6184620000
Nuwber https://nuwber.com/search/phone?phone=6184620000
OK Caller https://www.okcaller.com/6184620000
People Search Now https://www.peoplesearchnow.com/phone/618-462-0000
Phone Owner https://phoneowner.com/phone/6184620000
Search People Free https://www.searchpeoplefree.com/phone-lookup/618-462-0000
Spytox https://www.spytox.com/reverse-phone-lookup/618-462-0000

Telephone Numbers 323

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Sync.me https://sync.me/search/?number=16184620000
That's Them https://thatsthem.com/phone/618-462-0000
True People Search https://www.truepeoplesearch.com/results?phoneno=(618)462-0000
US Phonebook https://www.usphonebook.com/618-462-0000
White Pages https://www.whitepages.com/phone/1-618-462-0000
WhoseNo https://www.whoseno.com/US/6184620000
Yellow Pages https://people.yellowpages.com/whitepages/phone-lookup?phone=6184620000
Zabasearch https://www.zabasearch.com/phone/6184620000
Google https://www.google.com/search?q=618-462-0000
Bing https://www.bing.com/search?q=618-462-0000
Yandex https://yandex.com/search/?text=618-462-0000
Search Engines
Google and Bing were once a great place to find basic information about a target phone number. These sites
can still provide valuable information, but the amount of spam that will display in the results is overwhelming.
Many of the links presented will link to sites that will charge a fee for any information associated. This
information is usually the same content that could have been located with an appropriate free search. I do not
recommend giving in to these traps. While we can't ignore a traditional search of telephone numbers, we can
customize the queries in order to achieve the best results. Before explaining advanced telephone owner
identification, we should take a look at appropriate search engine structure.
Most people use traditional search engines as a first step toward identifying the owner of a telephone number.
The number is usually provided in a standard format such as 202-555-1212. This can confuse some search
engines because a hyphen (-) is often recognized as an operator to exclude data. Some engines might view that
query as a search for 202 but not 555 or 1212. Additionally, this search might identify a website that possesses
202-555-1212 within the content but not one that contains (202) 555.1212. If this is your target number, all of
the following should be searched in order to exhaust all possibilities. The quotation marks are important to
prevent the hyphen from being seen as an operator.
"2025551212"
"202-555-1212"
"202.555.1212"

"202 555 1212"
"(202) 5551212"
"(202) 555-1212"

"(202) 555.1212"
"(202)5551212"
"(202)555-1212"

"(202)555.1212"

This may seem ridiculous, but I am not done. Many websites forbid users to post a telephone number, such as
many auction sites, but people try to trick this restriction. They will type out a portion of their number to disclose
contact information. While not a complete list of options, the following should also be searched.
"two zero two five five five one two one two"
"two zero two five five five 1212"
"two zero two 555 one two one two"
"two zero two 555 1212"

"202 five five five one two one two"
"202 555 one two one two"
"202 five five five 1212"

This list would not capture a post that included (202) 555 twelve twelve, but you get the point. After submitting
these through Google, you should attempt each through Bing. In my effort to always provide search tools which
automate and simplify these techniques, I have added this feature to your telephone tools presented at the end
of the chapter. The right-middle portion of this page, displayed later in Figure 26.03, allows you to enter a
numerical and written target telephone number. Clicking the submit button launches a series of JavaScript
commands that launch eight new tabs within your browser. The first four are custom Google searches with the
target data and the last four repeat the process on Bing. The following four searches are conducted on both
services, using the example data entered previously.

324 Chapter 26

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

"2025551212"OR"202-555-1212"OR"202.555.1212"OR"202 555 1212"
"(202) 5551212"OR"(202) 555-1212"OR"(202) 555.1212"OR"(202)5551212"OR"(202)5551212"OR"(202)555.1212"
"two zero two five five five one two one two"OR"two zero two five five five 1212"OR"two zero two 555 one
two one two"OR"two zero two 555 1212"
"202 five five five one two one two"OR"202 555 one two one two"OR"202 five five five 1212"
Notice that these queries use quotation marks to obtain exact results and the OR operator to search multiple
options independently from each other. You will likely receive many false positives with this method, but you
are less likely to miss any relevant results.
Sly Dial (slydial.com)
This service contacts the cellular provider of the target telephone number and sends you straight to the outgoing
voicemail message. This can allow you to hear their voice and name without ringing the phone and hoping they
do not pick up. Sly Dial does not work through a website and you do not need to create an account to use the
service. Instead, you must call a general Sly Dial telephone number and follow the automated prompts. You
must listen to a brief advertisement before your call is placed. Finally, the service will play the target's outgoing
voicemail message through this audible telephone call. Since a website is not involved, there is no option to
download an audio file of the call.
Sly Dial does not usually ring the suspect's telephone. It will likely not show "missed call" or any other indicator
that a call occurred. In my testing, less that 5 percent of the attempts actually cause the target telephone to ring
only one time. Calling the missed call back reveals nothing about the identity of the number. Ultimately, there
is a very small chance that the target will know that someone attempted a call. In the rare occurrence that the
telephone rings, the target will never know the identity of the person making the calls. To use the Sly Dial service,
call 267-759-3425 (267-SLYDIAL) from any telephone service including landlines, cellular lines, or VOIP.
Follow the directions during the call. If this number does not work, visit slydial.com for updates. I want to stress
the following one additional time. Use these services at your own risk. If accidentally notifying your target that
you are conducting these types of activities could compromise your investigation, avoid this technique.
Old Phone Book (oldphonebook.com)
I first noticed this niche service in late 2018. It provides historical White Pages landline listings from 1994-2014.
The sources are official databases collected from many years of telephone CD-ROMs. These were purchased
by various companies throughout several decades as a more convenient option than traditional phone books.
The data is quite impressive, and the following direct URLs allow us to add these to our tools. Results include
historic addresses attached to each year. Figure 26.01 displays an actual redacted result from the official website.
This provides an old address, and assumes that the target moved to a new address between 1998 and 2001. This
search is vital for background checks.
http://www.oldphonebook.com/searchphone2.php?syear=1994&sphone=6184620000
http://www.oldphonebook.com/searchphone2.php?syear=1995&sphone=6184620000
http://www.oldphonebook.com/searchphone2.php?syear=1996&sphone=6184620000
http://www.oldphonebook.com/searchphone2.php?syear=1997&sphone=6184620000
http://www.oldphonebook.com/searchphone2.php?syear=1998&sphone=6184620000
http://www.oldphonebook.com/searchphone2.php?syear=2001&sphone=6184620000
http://www.oldphonebook.com/searchphone2.php?syear=2002&sphone=6184620000
http://www.oldphonebook.com/searchphone2.php?syear=2003&sphone=6184620000
http://www.oldphonebook.com/searchphone2.php?syear=2007&sphone=6184620000

Telephone Numbers 325

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

http://www.oldphonebook.com/searchphone2.php?syear=2008&sphone=6184620000
http://www.oldphonebook.com/searchphone2.php?syear=2013&sphone=6184620000
http://www.oldphonebook.com/searchphone2.php?syear=2014&sphone=6184620000

Cra
Crai
Man
ofte
grea
to b

led.
will
be a
ber
list

o
scrapers
via text messages. Either way, the solution that most users apply to bypass this hindrance is to spell out the
phone number. Instead of typing "314-555-1212", the user may enter "three one four five five five one two one
two". Some will get creative and post "314 five five five 1212". This is enough to confuse both Craigslist's servers
as well as the spammers. This can make searching difficult for an analyst. The hard way to do this is to conduct
several searches similar to the following.
site:craigslist.org "314-555-1212"
site:craigslist.org "314" "555" "1212"
site:craigslist.org "three one four" "five five five" "one two one two"
site:craigslist.org "314" "five five five" "1212
This list can get quite long if you try to search every possible search format. One search that will cover most of
these searches in a single search attempt would look like the following.
site:craigslist.org "314"|"three one four" "555"|"five five five" "1212"|"one two one two"
The "|" symbol in this search is the same as telling Google "OR". In essence, we are telling Google to search
"314" or "three one four", then "555" or "five five five", and then "1212" or "one two one two". With this
search, you would receive a result if any combination of the following was used.
314-555-1212
3145551212
314 555 one two one two
three one four 555-1212
This search will not catch every possible way to post a phone number. For example, if the user had typed "314
555 twelve twelve", the above technique would not work. The researcher must consider the alternative ways that
a target will post a number on a website. It may help to imagine how you would post the target number creatively
on a site, and then search for that method. Additionally, searching for only a portion of the number may provide
results. You may want to try searching only the last four digits of the number. This may produce many unwanted
results, but your target may be within the haystack. An automated option is included in the search tools.

326 Chapter 26

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Grocery Reward Cards / Loyalty Cards
Most grocery chains have adopted a reward/loyalty card system that mandates the participant to enroll in their
program. The consumer completes an application and receives a plastic card to use during checkout for
discounts. Many of these stores only offer a sale price if you are a member in the program. Most consumers
provide a cellular telephone number to the program and use that number during checkout. This eliminates the
need of possessing a physical card in order to receive the discount. Instead, they type their cell number into the
card swiping machine to associate the purchase with their membership. These programs contain a huge database
of telephone numbers and the registered users. There is no online database to access this data. However, you
can obtain this data if you are creative.
Assume your target telephone number is 847-867-5309. If you have tried every technique mentioned at this
point to identify the owner and failed, you may consider a query with a local grocery chain. The easiest method
is to enter the store, purchase a pack of gum, and enter the target telephone number as the reward/loyalty
program number. You will likely receive a receipt with the target's name on the bottom. Figure 26.02 (left)
displays a portion of the actual receipt that I received when using this number. If you prefer to avoid entering a
store, drive to the company's gas statio
nI
received when entering this same numbe
een
registered at practically every grocery stor
ase.

Figure 26.02: A receipt (left) a
The Other Board (theotherboard.com)
NSFW! If you have any suspicion that th
related activity, The Other Board should
aggregates all of the prostitution classifie
from all online classified pages and allo
examples identified 37 online photos, 20
known location, and locations visited bas
number that is likely involved in criminal

any
site
bers
ing
last
one

https://theotherboard.com/escort-reviews?phone=6185551212
Another option for this type of query is The Erotic Review (theeroticreview.com), with the following structure.
Notice that the area code is separate from the number.
https://www.theeroticreview.com/reviews/newreviewsList.asp?Phone=5551212&AreaCode=618
Contact Exploitation
I mentioned this technique previously during the Android emulation chapter. If I receive no valuable
information about a target telephone number with the previous options, I proceed to my Android emulator. I
add the number as a friend named "John" in the contacts of the device. I then open any applicable application,
such as Twitter, Instagram, and dating apps, and ask them to "find my friends". More often than not, an app
links me to a social network profile which is associated with the only number in my contact list.

Telephone Numbers 327

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Real World Application: I was asked to assist an attorney in a child custody and divorce case. He provided the
cellular telephone numbers of the suspected cheating husband and an unknown number of a potential mistress
identified from telephone records. I added both numbers to the contacts list in my Android emulator and
checked every app daily. This method identified a dating profile which included the husband's photo, but with
a different name. On the same day which he was served divorce papers, I observed both numbers show up in
the encrypted communications app Signal. While it did not identify the person on the other end of the
communication, the coincidence of the two numbers joining Signal on the same day is revealing. While writing
this chapter, I successfully identified the owner of a "burner" number because he connected it to his WhatsApp
account. I added the number to my Contacts within my Android emulator; Opened WhatsApp; and asked it to
find any "friends". It immediately displayed an image of a face associated with the number. A reverse image
search (explained later) identified a social network in my target's true name. I have also used this technique to
identify Skype profiles associated with a cellular number.
Calls.ai (sync.ai/calls-ai)
This Android application is impressive. It queries a large database of crowd-sourced contact details from
unknown sources. Most telephone number search results reveal only a first name, but I find them to be highly
accurate. Conduct the following to use this app.
•
•
•
•
•
•

Launch your Android virtual machine through Android Studio.
Launch the Google Play Store or Aurora Store and search "Calls.ai".
Install Calls.ai from Sync.ai.
Launch the Calls.ai app and allow default permissions.
When prompted, associate with the Google account within the VM.
Click the search option in the lower left and input any number.

As a test, I searched three cellular numbers which were assigned to me when I worked for the government. All
three returned with positive results displaying "Mike", Michael" and "Bazzel". None of these phones were
publicly attached to my name until someone shared their contact details with the world. While it is a nuisance
to open an Android VM each time I need to conduct a search, the results from Calls.ai, Truecaller, and others
justifies the time.
WhatsApp Mobile Tools (whatsapp.checkleaked.cc)
WhatsApp requires a telephone number to use the service, which can be a cell or VoIP number. This service
attempts to query a number to provide details about the user. I tested this with a VoIP account and added a
name and description to my WhatsApp profile. I received the following response, which I found impressive.
"isUser": true,
"isGroup": false,
"localized_display_name": "OSINT Training"
"isBlocked": false,
"about": "My Test Description",
"Public Name": "MB",
We can also submit via URL with the following structure: https://whatsapp.checkleaked.cc/12025551212
IntelTechniques Telephone Tool
Of all the automated search tools, this one may save the most time. You can submit an area code, prefix, and
number and execute all queries. The number and word area on the search tool replicates the techniques
mentioned previously which attempt to search both the numbers and words of a target telephone number within
Google, Bing, and Craigslist.
328 Chapter 26

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN
ONLINE MAPS

The presence of online satellite images is not news anymore. Most of you have already "Googled" your own
address and viewed your home from the sky. This view can get surprisingly detailed when using the zoom
feature. Alleys, sheds, and extended driveways that are hidden from the street are now visible thanks to this free
service. Many tactical units will examine this data before executing a search warrant at a residence. Aerial maps
are helpful for viewing the location of exiting doors, escape routes, stairs, and various obstructions. The rapidly
growing availability of the Street View option now gives us more data. This chapter explains detailed use of
Google, Bing, and other mapping services. At the end, I present my custom maps tool which provides an
automated solution to collecting every possible view associated with your target of interest.
Google Maps (maps.google.com)
Google constantly makes changes to their online Maps service, attempting to streamline the entire Maps
experience to make everything easier to use. Over the past two years, we have witnessed features come and go,
only to randomly re-appear. The following basics of Google Maps are now default for all users.
Search Bar: The Google Maps search bar can now accept practically any type of input. A full address, partial
address, or GPS coordinates will immediately present you with a mapped view. Company names and types of
businesses, such as "café" will highlight locations that may be of interest. This search field is the first stop.
Attempt any search relevant to your investigation and you may be surprised at how accurate Google is. You can
collapse this entire menu by clicking the left arrow next to the search field. This will return you to a full screen
view of the map.
Satellite View: The lower left area of any map will offer a satellite view. The satellite view is a direct view from
the sky looking almost straight down. A satellite view of your target location is always vital to every investigation.
Globe View: The Globe view (click "More" under layers and select the option) is similar, but usually offers a
unique view from a different date. It also presents a rotation option. While in the Globe view, click on the "3D"
icon and then the small "rotation" icon to the right of the map. This will shift the view 45 degrees and a second
click will shift an additional 45 degrees. This presents new angles of your target.
Street View: If the Street View option is available, Google has been in the area and captured a photo of the
location from the street. Dragging and dropping the small orange person in the lower right menu will open a
street view from ground level at the area specified. You can navigate through this view by clicking forward,
clicking and dragging, or scrolling and zooming. This view can be zoomed in by double-clicking and panned left
and right by dragging the mouse while holding a left click. Double-clicking an area of the street will refresh the
window to the view from that location. Clicking the map in the lower left will return you to the standard map
view.
Historic Street View: In late 2014, Google began offering the ability to view all stored street view images for
any single location. This option is available within the standard street view layout within the search area of the
upper left corner. Click on "See more dates" in order to launch a new menu in the lower area. This new view
will allow you to select from several street view captures which each present different views. The month and
year of image capture will also appear for documentation. Figure 27.01 displays this method which presents
additional views from an area. Additional options include views from several years prior. This can often reveal
additional vehicles or missing structures associated with an investigation.

Online Maps 329

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Figure 27.01: Historic Street View options from Google Maps.
Distance Measurement: Google Maps reintroduced the distance measurement tool after completely disabling
the classic maps interface in 2015. While in map or satellite view, right-click on your starting point and choose
"Measure distance". Click anywhere on the map to create a path you want to measure. Further clicks add
additional measuring points. You can also drag a point to move it, or click a point to remove it. The total distance
in both miles or kilometers will appear under the search box. When finished, right-click on the map and select
clear measurement.
GPS Coordinates: Clicking on any point will load a small window in the bottom center that identifies the exact
GPS coordinates of the chosen location. If this is not visible, right-click any point and select "What's here".
Searching via GPS will be more precise than other queries.
URL Queries: For the purposes of the search tool, which is explained at the end of the chapter, we always
want to identify the GPS coordinates of our target. In my examples throughout the chapter, 41.947242 is the
latitude coordinate and -87.65673 is the longitude. The static search URLs I explain throughout this chapter will
assist us in quickly querying multiple services once we identify a target location. The static URL displaying
various Google Maps views of our target location is as follows.
Google Standard Map View:
https://www.google.com/maps/@?api=1&map_action=map&center=41.947242,-87.65673&zoom=18
Google Map View with Terrain:
https://www.google.com/maps/@?api=1&map_action=map&center=41.947242,87.65673&zoom=18&basemap=terrain
Google Satellite View:
https://www.google.com/maps/@?api=1&map_action=map&center=41.947242,87.65673&zoom=18&basemap=satellite
Google Street View
Google Street Views possess multiple options, including a 360-degree horizontal scope and vertical pitch. I have
created the following URLs which we will use in our custom tools. These offer a view of north, east, south, and
west with no pitch. After each URL loads, you can use the cursor to drag the view to fit your needs.
Google Street View (Down):
https://www.google.com/maps/@?api=1&map_action=pano&viewpoint=41.947242,87.65673&heading=0&pitch=-90&fov=100
Google Street View (North):
https://www.google.com/maps/@?api=1&map_action=pano&viewpoint=41.947242,87.65673&heading=0&pitch=0&fov=90

330 Chapter 27

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Google Street View (East):
https://www.google.com/maps/@?api=1&map_action=pano&viewpoint=41.947242,87.65673&heading=90&pitch=0&fov=90
Google Street View (South):
https://www.google.com/maps/@?api=1&map_action=pano&viewpoint=41.947242,87.65673&heading=180&pitch=0&fov=90
Google Street View (West):
https://www.google.com/maps/@?api=1&map_action=pano&viewpoint=41.947242,87.65673&heading=270&pitch=0&fov=90
Bing Maps (bing.com/maps)
Similar to Google Maps, Bing offers a map view, satellite view, angled view, and street view. In my experience,
the imagery provided by Bing will always be unique to the images available in Google Maps. A side-by-side
comparison can be seen in a few pages with the custom maps tool. Bing does not always present the various 3D
view options, which they call "Bird's Eye View". Fortunately, we can replicate all views with the following custom
URLs.
Bing Standard Map View:
https://www.bing.com/maps?cp=41.947242~-87.65673&lvl=20
Bing Satellite View:
https://www.bing.com/maps?cp=41.947242~-87.65673&lvl=20&sty=a
Bing Satellite View (North):
https://www.bing.com/maps?cp=41.947242~-87.65673&lvl=20&sty=o&w=100%&dir=0
Bing Satellite View (East):
https://www.bing.com/maps?cp=41.947242~-87.65673&lvl=20&sty=o&w=100%&dir=90
Bing Satellite View (South):
https://www.bing.com/maps?cp=41.947242~-87.65673&lvl=20&sty=o&w=100%&dir=180
Bing Satellite View (West):
https://www.bing.com/maps?cp=41.947242~-87.65673&lvl=20&sty=o&w=100%&dir=270
Bing Street View (North):
https://www.bing.com/maps?cp=41.947242~-87.65673&lvl=20&dir=0&pi=0&style=x
Bing Street View (East):
https://www.bing.com/maps?cp=41.947242~-87.65673&lvl=20&dir=90&pi=0&style=x
Bing Street View (South):
https://www.bing.com/maps?cp=41.947242~-87.65673&lvl=20&dir=180&pi=0&style=x
Bing Street View (West):
https://www.bing.com/maps?cp=41.947242~-87.65673&lvl=20&dir=270&pi=0&style=x

Online Maps 331

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Zoom Earth (zoom.earth)
This multiple satellite imagery website presents views from NASA, Bing, and ArcGIS. Occasionally, the ArcGIS
data is more recent than Google or Bing. The smooth interface will easily provide a comparison of the available
images for any location. One advantage of Zoom Earth is the ability to view satellite images in true full-screen
mode. This allows creation of full-screen captures without branding, menus, or borders. This could be more
appropriate for live demonstration instead of a standard Google or Bing window. The static URL with satellite
view is as follows. The "20z" is the maximum zoom level.
https://zoom.earth/#view=41.947242,-87.65673,20z
Here (wego.here.com)
This service has experienced a lot of transformation over the past ten years. Originally a Nokia company with a
unique set of satellite imagery, it now mostly contains identical images to Bing Maps. However, I find unique
images on occasion, and we should always consider every resource. The static URL with satellite view is as
follows.
https://wego.here.com/?map=41.947242,-87.65673,20,satellite
Yandex (yandex.com/maps)
Satellite views from Yandex are often poor quality and low resolution when focused on the U.S. However,
international locations tend to possess clearer results. The static URL with satellite view is as follows.
https://yandex.com/maps/?l=sat&ll=-87.65673%2C41.947242&z=20
Apple Maps (beta.maps.apple.com)
In 2024, Apple released their mapping service via web browser instead of forcing people to use their apps. The
following direct URLs access standard, satellite, and hybrid maps. The zoom feature (z=1) has been unreliable
in this beta version, but I anticipate it to improve.
https://beta.maps.apple.com/?t=m&z=1&ll=41.9479061%2C-87.6558203
https://beta.maps.apple.com/?t=k&z=1&ll=41.9479061%2C-87.6558203
https://beta.maps.apple.com/?t=h&z=1&ll=41.9479061%2C-87.6558203
https://beta.maps.apple.com/?t=r&z=1&ll=41.9479061%2C-87.6558203
Dual Maps (data.mashedworld.com/dualmaps/map.htm)
This website provides a satellite view of a location on both Google Maps and Bing Maps simultaneously. The
Google view on the left will also contain a search field in the upper right corner. Searching an address in this
field will center both maps on the same address. This will provide a comparison of the satellite images stored
on each service. This can quickly identify the service that has the better imagery. While this can provide a quick
side-by-side comparison, upcoming automated solutions are preferred.
Historic Imagery
Researching different satellite views of a single location can have many benefits. These views are all of the
current content stored within each service. However, these mapping services continuously update their offerings
and usually present the most recent option. You may want to view the previous content that was available before
an image was updated.

332 Chapter 27

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Historic Aerials (historicaerials.com)
If you need satellite imagery from several years prior, you can visit Historic Aerials. The quality will often be
poor, especially as you view imagery from previous decades. After you enter an address, you will be presented
all available options on the left side of the page. Figure 27.02 displays several results of the same location over
a twenty-year period. These views will be unique from all of the previously mentioned services.
World Imagery Wayback (livingatlas.arcgis.com/wayback)
I began using this site in 2018 as an alternative to Historic Aerials. The quality is superior, the number of satellite
views is higher, and the functionality is smoother. Figure 27.03 displays four images acquired from the service
of a specific location. Each provides a unique view from 2014, 2015, 2016, and 2017.
https://livingatlas.arcgis.com/wayback/#active=20337&mapCenter=-87.65673%2C41.94782%2C18
Old Maps Online (oldmapsonline.org)
If you simply need road maps from the past 100 years, this service has you covered. There are no images or
satellite views, but street details from previous decades could be useful. You might learn that a target location
possessed a different street name in the past or identify the approximate year when a specific road was built.
Real World Application: Combining several satellite views can provide much information about a target's
residence. Before the execution of a search warrant, it is beneficial for police to collect as much map information
as possible. This will give updated views of a drawn map, satellite imagery directly above the house, four angled
views from the sky, and a complete view of the house and neighboring houses from the street, including vehicles.
This can be used to identify potential threats such as physical barriers, escape routes, and video surveillance
systems in place.
In 2020, I assisted a former colleague with a missing person investigation. Google and Bing maps were queried,
but nothing helpful was found. However, a search on Mapillary (explained next) revealed a vehicle parked
outside the victim's residence which was otherwise unknown to investigators. This clue opened a new path of
investigation which ultimately led my colleague to the victim. We must always thoroughly check every resource.

Figure 27.02: Multiple views of a location through Historic Aerials.

Online Maps 333

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

ery Wayback
Crow
Street View maps from services such as Google and Bing are nothing new. Most of you can view the top and
front of your home from multiple online websites. With street view options, these services are fairly responsible
and block most faces and license plates. This makes it difficult for investigators trying to identify a suspect
vehicle parked at a home or present at a crime scene prior to the incident. We have two services that offer unique
street-level views that may remove these limitations.
Mapillary (mapillary.com/app)
This service appears similar to other mapping websites when first loaded. You see a typical map view identifying
streets, landmarks, and buildings. Enabling the satellite view layer displays images from the Open Street Map
project. The real power is within the crowd-sourced street view images. While in any map view, colored lines
indicate that an individual has provided street-level images to Mapillary, usually from a GPS-enabled smart
phone. This is actually quite common, as many people record video of their driving trips which could be used
in case of an accident. These services make it easy and automated to upload these images. The sites then embed
these images within their own mapping layers for the public to see. Clicking these colored lines reveals the street
view images in the lower portion of the screen. Expanding these images allows you to navigate through that
individual's images similar to the Google Street View experience. Figure 27.04 displays a street view layered over
a satellite view. The username of the Mapillary member and date of image capture appears in the lower left.
In some of these images, the services appear to be redacting license plates with a typical "Blur Box" as seen in
Figure 27.05 (left). A few feet later, the box disappears and a partially legible license plate is revealed, as seen in
Figure 27.05 (right). It seems like these services are attempting to determine when a license plate is legible, and
then blurring it. When the plate is farther away and more difficult to read, it is ignored. This can work in our
favor. In Figure 27.06 we can use selective cropping and photo manipulation to obtain the registration. The left
image appears unaltered as it is difficult to read. The right image was cropped; inverted with Photoshop;

334 Chapter 27

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

brightness turned down to 0%; and contrast heightened to 100%. The result is a legible license plate. I believe
most registration plates can be made visible within these services. The following URL conducts a query for our
target location.
https://www.mapillary.com/app/?lat=41.947242&lng=-87.65673&z=18
Karta (kartaview.org)
After exhausting your options on Mapillary, continue to Karta, previously called Open Street Cam. The site
functions in the same way, but possesses unique images. These sites allow you to identify the uploader's
username, mapping history, number of posted images, and profile image. You can also select to watch all of the
captured images from a specific user as he or she travels daily. I can't begin to imagine the amount information
available about a user's travel habits if he or she were to become a target of an investigation. While there is not
coverage of every area like we see with Google Maps, the databases are growing rapidly, and should be included
when using other mapping tools. We will use the following URL structure for our automated tools.
https://kartaview.org/map/@41.947242,-87.65673,18z
Land Viewer (eos.com/landviewer)
This resource will not present detailed views of your target's home. The images here are often generated from
weather satellites, and restrict zoom levels to a city view. Most locations offer four active satellites that constantly
retrieve images and five inoperative satellites that store historic imagery dating back to 1982. I have only used
this resource to document potential weather at a crime scene (clouds, rain, or clear). The static URL follows.
https://eos.com/landviewer/?lat=41.947242&lng=-87.65673&z=11
Landsat Look (landsatlook.usgs.gov/explore)
This is very similar to Land Viewer, but with additional historic images. Each map view possesses several unique
satellite view options ranging from 1972 to present.

Figure 27.04: A crowd-sourced street view from Mapillary.

Online Maps 335

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Figure 27.06: An illegible registration plate (left) and manipulated view (right).
Acre Value (acrevalue.com)
This site relies on Mapbox for aerial imagery, but offers a unique service unavailable in other mapping
applications. It attempts to identify property boundaries for an address. Figure 27.07 displays an example. Acre
Value requires a paid account in order to see property owner details. However, we can extract this information
from the site with a few steps. First, right-click the page and launch the Inspector, as previously discussed, and
click the "Network" tab. Next, click on the property of interest, as visible in Figure 27.07. You should see a
"xhr" entry within the Inspector, which should appear similar to the following.
https://www.acrevalue.com/map/api/plot/?id=1673576598
You can open this link in a new tab or click the "Response" tab on the right to view the data. This will potentially
display the property owner.

Figure 27.07: An Acre Value map listing.

336 Chapter 27

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

"owner": "ELDRIDGE, CHARLES D & SANDRA J",
"county_fips": "06087",
"id": "1673576598",
"plot_type": "parcel",
"prediction": null,
"soil_label": "NCCPI",
"soil_value": 15.220648845321122,
"apn": "06028118000",
"acreage": 0.9311936516181484,
"slope": 25.73647948663312,
"fema": 0,
"easements": 0,
Apple Maps Alternative (satellites.pro)
While not an official Apple product, Satellite Pro provides Apple Maps aerial views during search queries. A
direct URL of our target location follows.
https://satellites.pro/USA_map#41.94721,-87.656502,18
Real Estate (zillow.com, trulia.com, realtor.com, etc.)
These websites display information about homes which are currently available for sale or have previously sold.
I usually search this option in hopes of locating interior images of a suspect home. This can often identify
personal belongings, interests, and family information. It can be a long-shot, but has been vital to several of my
investigations. Figure 27.08 displays the interior of a home near our target location from Zillow. The following
direct-access URLs are available for quick viewing and will be used for our search tool.
https://www.zillow.com/homes/for_sale/?searchQueryState={"isMapVisible"%3Atrue%2C"mapBounds"%
3A{"west"%3A-87.6558203%2C"east"%3A87.6558203%2C"south"%3A41.9479061%2C"north"%3A41.94790612}%2C"filterState"%3A{"sort"%3A{"v
alue"%3A"globalrelevanceex"}%2C"ah"%3A{"value"%3Atrue}}%2C"isListVisible"%3Atrue%2C"mapZoom
"%3A11}
https://www.trulia.com/for_sale/41.947242,41.947242,-87.65673,-87.65673_xy/

Online Maps 337

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

IntelTechniques Maps Tool (https://inteltechniques.com/tools/Location.html)
The first portion of this tool allows entry of a physical address in traditional format which can execute several
searches previously mentioned. The first field presents a mapping API page which includes the GPS coordinates
is area
GPS coordinates

338 Chapter 27

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

,
South, and West, and Bing Bird's Eye view of North.

Online Maps 339

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Figures 27.29 through 27.32: Zoom Earth, Here, Yandex Satellite, and Apple.

Online Maps 341

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

342 Chapter 27

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Map Shadows
If you look closely at the previous images, you can see many shadows. We can use these to make a guess at the
date and time of capture. In fact, analyzing shadows within any images, even those which do not originate with
satellite imagery, can help identify the date and time of capture. There is no exact science to this (yet), but we
have online tools available to assist our efforts. Consider the image in Figure 27.33. The shadow of Wrigley Field
is due west of the building and does not appear to project north or south of the building. We can use Shade
Map (shademap.app) to identify the most likely date and time of this satellite capture. After loading the site,
search for Wrigley Field and allow the location to load. Next, we can begin manipulating the map.
Click the date in the lower-left and drag the month bar until the shadows seem to match the horizontal position
within our target image in Figure 27.33. In my attempts, the month of March displayed shadows which did not
extend north or south of the building at an angle. This month displayed shadows which extended directly east
and west. Next, choose the time of day which matches the position of the shadows. My attempts identified 6:28
am Mountain (7:28 am Central) as the ideal match. Therefore, my best guess is that the satellite image captured
in this example was approximately 7:30 am local time in late March. Figure 27.37 displays my result. I would
never document an assumption of an exact date and time, but a range could be appropriate. Documenting that
the shadows indicate capture between February and April from 7:00 to 8:00 am could suffice.
While this book may be printed with black ink, hopefully you can match the overall shadows. Replicate this on
your own computer to see the true value. This technique could also be used when you identify a photograph
posted to social media. If you know the approximate location and time of year, it should be fairly easy to establish
the approximate time of capture.

Figure 27.37: A Shade Map result.

Online Maps 343

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Scribble Maps (scribblemaps.com)
The default view of mapping services such as Google and Bing may be enough for your situation. Occasionally,
you may want to modify or customize a map for your needs. Law enforcement may want to create a map to be
used in a court case; a private investigator may want to customize a map to present to a client; or a security
director may want to use this service to document the inappropriate Tweets that were found during the previous
instructions. Scribble Maps offers one of the easiest ways to create your own map and add any type of visual
aids to the final product.
The default view of your new map at Scribble Maps will display the entire world and a menu of basic options. I
close this menu by clicking the small "x" in the upper right corner. You can then manually zoom into an area of
interest or type in an address in the location bar at the top of the map. This will present you with a manageable
area of the map. The lower right corner will allow you to switch from a traditional map view to a satellite or
hybrid view.
The menu at the top of the map will allow you to add shapes, lines, text, and images to your map. Practicing on
this map can never be replaced with any instruction printed here. Mastering the basics of this application will
make occasional use of it easy. Figure 27.38 displays a quick sample map that shows a title, a line, a marker, and
graphics. The menu can be seen in the upper left portion. When finished, the "Menu" button will present many
options to print, save, or export your map. I also highly recommend Free Map Tools (freemaptools.com). This
service provides multiple advanced options such as mapping a radius around a point of interest.

344 Chapter 27

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT
DOCUMENTS

The open source intelligence discussed up to this point has focused on websites which include valuable
information about a target. A category of intelligence that is often missed during OSINT research is documents.
This type of data usually falls into one of three classes. The first is documents that include information about
the target within the contents of the file. These can include online PDF files that the target may not know exist.
The second class is documents that were actually created by the target. These files can make their way into public
view unintentionally. Finally, the third class includes the metadata stored within a document that can include
vital information about the true source of the document. The following techniques explain manual searching
and retrieving of these documents and automated software solutions for analysis of found content.
Google Searching (google.com)
A very basic way of locating documents that are publicly available on a specific website, or related to a specific
topic, is to use Google. The "filetype:" (or easier "ext:") search operators previously explained can be used for
this task. An example of search queries for all Microsoft Word documents stored on the domain of
inteltechniques.com would be the following.
site:inteltechniques.com ext:doc
site:inteltechniques.com ext:docx
If you wanted to locate all documents that reference a specific topic, you can use the filetype operator without
a specific website listed. An example of a search query for all Excel spreadsheets that contain the acronym
OSINT would be the following.
ext:xls "OSINT"
ext:xlsx "OSINT"
If you wanted to search for a specific person's name within any spreadsheets, such as John Doe, you would type
the following single query.
ext:xls OR ext:xlsx "John Doe"
The following table includes the most common document file types and the associated file extensions. As
previously explained, both Google and Bing are capable of searching any file type regardless of the file
association. Remember that Bing demands "filetype" while Google seems to prefer "ext". Please note that this
is a partial list, and I identify new possibilities constantly.
Microsoft Word
Microsoft Excel
Microsoft PowerPoint
Adobe Acrobat
Text File
Open Office

DOC, DOCX
XLS, XLSX, CSV
PPT, PPTX
PDF
TXT, RTF
ODT, ODS, ODG, ODP

If you wanted to search all of these file types at once, the following string in Google or Bing would find most
documents on the topic of OSINT. You could change that term to anything else of interest.
"OSINT" filetype:pdf OR filetype:doc OR filetype:xls OR filetype:xlsx OR filetype:docx OR filetype:ppt OR
filetype:pptx OR filetype:txt

Documents 345

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

This query basically tells the search engine to look for any reference to the term OSINT inside of a PDF,
Microsoft Word, and other documents, and display all of the results. The Google Custom Search Engine (CSE)
described in Chapter Seventeen is a great resource for this exact type of search. However, I highly recommend
having an understanding of the manual search process. It will give you much more control than any automated
solution. Additionally, Google CSEs limit the number of results. Therefore, I no longer recommend exclusively
relying on it for a Document search. It simply cannot compete with a properly structured Google or Bing query.
The custom search tools presented at the end of the chapter will further simplify all of this.
Google Docs (docs.google.com)
The idea of storing user created documents on the internet is gaining a lot of popularity. Keeping these files "in
the cloud" eliminates the need for personal storage on a device such as a CD or flash drive. In addition, storing
files on the internet allows the author to access and edit them from any computer with an internet connection.
A common use of these document-hosting sites is to store them only during the editing phase. Once the
document is finished and no longer needed, the user may forget to remove it from public view. Google is one
of the most popular document storage websites. It allows users to embed the stored documents into their own
websites if desired. Searching the site is relatively easy.
Many Google Mail (Gmail) users take advantage of Google's free service for document storage called Google
Docs or Google Drive. When a document is created, it is private by default and not visible to the public.
However, when people want to share documents with friends or coworkers, the sharing properties must be
changed. While it is possible to privately share files with individual Google users, many people find it easier to
make the documents public. Most of these users probably assume that the files will not be seen by anyone other
than the intended recipients. After all, who would go out searching for other people's documents? We will.
The Google Docs and Google Drive websites do not offer the option to search these public files, but you can
do this using Google search. Now that Google allows search engines to index most of the public files, you
should be able to find them with some specific search methods. The following search examples will explain a
few of the options that would be conducted on google.com. The exact search is listed with the expected result.
These should be used as a starting point for the many possibilities of document searching.
site:docs.google.com "resume" - 29,800 online resumes
site:docs.google.com "resume" "Williams" - 985 resumes with the name Williams
site:docs.google.com "Corey Trager" - 1 document (resume) belonging to the target
site:docs.google.com 865-274-2074 - 1 document containing the target number
Google categorizes the documents that are created by the user. The examples below identify searches that would
display documents by type.
site:docs.google.com/presentation/d - 325,000 PowerPoint presentations
site:docs.google.com/drawings/d - 18,600 Google flowchart drawings
site:docs.google.com/file/d - 945,000 images, videos, PDF files, and documents
site:docs.google.com/folder/d - 4,000 collections of files inside folders
site:docs.google.com/open - 1,000,000 external documents, folders, and files
In 2013, Google began placing some user generated documents on the "drive.google.com" domain. Therefore,
any search that you conduct with the method described previously should be repeated with "drive" in place of
"docs". The previous search for the telephone number would be the following.
site:drive.google.com 865-274-2074

346 Chapter 28

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Microsoft Docs (docs.microsoft.com)
Similar to Google Drive, Microsoft Docs offers that ability to store and share documents. The service is not as
popular as Google Drive. However, there are thousands of publicly visible documents waiting to be found. The
shared files are stored on the docs.microsoft.com domain. A query for resumes would be as follows. This search
could be conducted on Google or Bing. The result on Google was 63,400 resume files with personal information.
site:docs.microsoft.com "resume"
Amazon Web Services (amazonaws.com)
Amazon Web Services (AWS) is a large collection of servers that supply storage and internet application hosting
in "the cloud". Instead of purchasing expensive hardware, many companies and individuals rent these servers.
There are numerous documents available for download from these servers when searched appropriately. I
cannot overstate the value of searching Amazon's servers. This is where most of the voter data that was heavily
discussed during the 2016 election originated. I have personally located extremely sensitive documents from this
source on numerous occasions. The following structure will identify files indexed on google.com.
site:amazonaws.com
The following search examples will explain a couple of the options. The exact search is listed with the expected
result. These should be used as a starting point for the many possibilities of document searching.
site:amazonaws.com ext:xls "password" - 114 Excel spreadsheets containing "password"
site:amazonaws.com ext:pdf "osint" - 260 PDF files containing "osint"
Another option is the Amazon CloudFront servers. CloudFront is a content delivery network (CDN) offered
by Amazon Web Services. Content delivery networks provide a globally-distributed network of proxy servers
which cache content, such as web videos or other bulky media. These are provided more locally to consumers,
thus improving access speed for downloading the content. We can apply the same previous search techniques
on this domain. The following search yielded 129 results on various CloudFront servers containing "OSINT".
site:cloudfront.net OSINT
Refseek (refseek.com)
Refseek is a search engine singularly focused on document search and claims to search over five billion sites,
books, journals, and newspapers. We can structure queries with https://www.refseek.com/documents?q=osint.
Searcholic (searcholic.com)
Searcholic primarily returns results for PDFs and video content such as YouTube channels with the added
benefit of displaying thumbnails for most results.
Core (core.ac.uk)
Core is a UK based search engine specializing in searching for research papers and other academic documents.
We can structure queries with https://core.ac.uk/search/?q=osint.
Base (base-search.net)
Base boasts the ability to conduct queries across 400 million documents and twelve thousand content providers.
We can structure queries with https://www.base-search.net/Search/Results?lookfor=osint.

Documents 347

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Gray Hat Warfare (buckets.grayhatwarfare.com)
AWS hosts more than simple documents. Many companies host large databases and data sets within "buckets"
on AWS servers. Custom Google searches may locate some of this content, but never a full index of all data.
This is where Gray Hat Warfare excels. It has created a searchable database of over one billion files, all publicly
stored with AWS servers. Free users are limited to the first 350 million of these files, which is substantial. A
search of "OSINT" revealed only 11 results while "password" displayed over 41,000. The results are often large
files which must be opened carefully. A search of "password xls" provided three documents with active
credentials. A direct search URL is as follows.
https://buckets.grayhatwarfare.com/files?page=1&keywords=password
Google Cloud Storage (cloud.google.com)
This is Google's response to Amazon's AWS. It is a premium file storage web service for storing and accessing
data on the Google Cloud Platform infrastructure. It is heavily used by all types of businesses and tech-savvy
individuals. The number of publicly available sensitive documents is growing at an alarming rate. Below are a
few examples.
site:storage.googleapis.com ext:xlsx OR ext:xls - 2,310 Spreadsheets
site:storage.googleapis.com "confidential" - 9,502 Documents
site:storage.googleapis.com "confidential" ext:pptx - 11 PowerPoint files marked as confidential
Presentation Repositories
With unprecedented online storage space at all of our fingertips, many people choose to store PowerPoint and
other types of presentations in the cloud. Several free services have appeared to fill this demand. Of those, the
following have the majority of publicly available documents.
Slide Share (slideshare.net)
ISSUU (issuu.com)

Slidebean (slidebean.com)
Prezi (prezi.com)

Power Show (powershow.com)

Slide Share and ISSUU allow native searching within their websites. However, Prezi does not have this option.
For all, I recommend a custom Google search with the site operator. If I want to locate presentations including
the term OSINT from Prezi, I would use a query of site:prezi.com "osint".
Scribd (scribd.com)
Scribd was a leading cloud storage document service for several years. Since 2014, it has shifted its focus toward
e-book sales. However, the plethora of stored documents is still accessible. This can be valuable for historical
content posted, and likely forgotten, by the target. A search field is at the top of every page on the site within
their collapsible menu. Searching for your target name should produce any public books stored through this
service that includes the target name on any page of the publication. Clicking "Documents" in the menu will
present more relevant information.
Most of these documents are intentionally stored on the site and any evidence of criminal activity will not be
included. Instead, the primary use of the site for OSINT investigations is the large number of documents related
to businesses. Entering any large corporation name should display several pages of viewable documents related
to the company. Often, these include documents that the company's security personnel would not authorize to
be online. Searching for "FOUO", an acronym for "for official use only", produced hundreds of results. While
none of these appeared to be officially classified, they were not intended to be posted to a public website. If you
are presented with an unmanageable number of results, the filter options appear directly above the first
document result. These will allow you to search by language, size, file type, and date uploaded.

348 Chapter 28

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Identifying the user that uploaded a document is as easy as locating the document. In the left of any page
containing a document, there is an area that will identify the subject that uploaded the file. This also acts as a
link to this user's profile on the website. The profile will display any information that the user supplied as well
as a feed of recent activity of that user on the site. This can help identify other documents uploaded by a specific
user.
PDF Drive (pdfdrive.com)
This service scans the internet for new PDF files and archives them. This can be helpful when the original source
removes the content. The static URL of https://www.pdfdrive.com/search?q=osint queries the entire domain.
WikiLeaks (search.wikileaks.org)
Some websites are created for the sole purpose of leaking sensitive and classified documents to the public.
Wikileaks is such a site. When an Army soldier named Bradley Manning was arrested in 2010 for uploading
classified government information to the site, Wikileaks became a household name. People then began to flock
to the site to catch a glimpse of these controversial documents and videos. The official Wikileaks site finally
provides a working search option. It will allow you to enter any search terms and will provide results of any
leaked documents that contain these terms. Both the government and the private sector should be familiar with
this site and the information that is identified with their respective agency.
Cryptome (cryptome.org)
Another site that strives to release sensitive and classified information to the public is Cryptome. Most of the
information is related to freedom of speech, cryptography, spying, and surveillance. Much of the content could
be considered conspiracy theories, but several official documents get released daily. Cryptome does not provide
a search for their site and there are no third-party providers that cater to this service. Therefore, we must rely
on Google or Bing to find the documents. A query of site:cryptome.org "osint" should function well.
Paste Sites
Paste Sites are not technically storage services for documents. They are websites that allow users to upload text
for public viewing. These were originally designed for software programmers that needed a place to store large
amounts of text. A link would be created to the text and the user could share the link with other programmers
to review the code. This is still a common practice, but other users have found ways to abuse this technology.
Many hacking groups will use this area of the internet to store compromised account information, user
passwords, credit card numbers, and other sensitive content. There are dozens of sites that cater to this need,
and very few of them have a search feature.
Pastebin (pastebin.com)
Pastebin is the most popular paste site in the United States. Criminal hacker groups often use this site to release
illegally obtained data to the public. A previous release included the home addresses and personal information
of many police officers near Ferguson, Missouri during protests and riots. More recently, stolen bank records
and credentials from Venezuela were posted with encouragement to infiltrate the company. This is one of the
sites that will allow for a search from within the site. This function performs a search through Google in the
same way we could with the "site" operator. Typing in a target name, email address, or business name may reveal
private information not intended for the public. For law enforcement, typing in the last four digits of a stolen
credit card number may identify a link to the thief. If successful, the target is most likely outside of the country.
Regardless, this is a valuable piece to the case and an impressive explanation to the victim. Unfortunately, most
of the users leave a default username of "Guest". Pastebin no longer allows a direct URL search, but relies on
Google for indexing. A query of site:pastebin.com "osint" should work well.

Documents 349

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

New paste sites come and go monthly. There is no way to present a current and complete list. However, I will
focus on the most stable and prominent options which allow search. In a moment, I present a custom search
tool which queries all of these at once. The following sites can be individually queried with the site operator,
such as site:doxbin.org "osint". Please note that these sites come and go often.
0bin.net
cl1p.net
codepad.org
controlc.com
doxbin.org
dpaste.com
dpaste.de
dpaste.org
friendpaste.com

gist.github.com
hastebin.com
heypasteit.com
ideone.com
ivpaste.com
jsbin.com
justpaste.it
justpaste.me
p.ip.fi

paste.centos.org
paste.debian.net
paste.ee
paste.frubar.net
paste.lisp.org
paste.opensuse.or
g
paste.org
paste.org.ru

paste.ubuntu.com
paste2.org
pastebin.com
pastebin.fr
pastebin.gr
pastefs.com
pastehtml.com
pastelink.net
pastie.org

privatebin.net
slexy.org
snipplr.com
textsnip.com
tidypub.org
wordle.net
zerobin.net

Document Metadata
When an original document is found online, it is obviously important to analyze the visible content of the file.
This includes the file name, written text, and an original location of the document. Digging deeper will expose
more information. There is data embedded inside the document that cannot be seen by simply looking at the
content of the file. This data is called metadata and can be very valuable to any type of investigation. It can often
include the computer name on which the document was created, the username of the computer or the network,
the software version used, and information about the network to which the computer is connected. The best
way to view all of this information is to use software-based metadata viewers, but you can also view this "hidden"
information online through a web browser.
Several online sites will allow you to upload documents for analysis. To do this, click the "browse" button on
the pages detailed below. This will enable a file explorer that will allow you to select the document that you want
analyzed. The result often identifies a created and modified date, the original title, three applications used to
create the document, and a username. A further search of this username through the previously discussed
techniques could produce a wealth of information about the author of the document. The following websites
allow you to upload a locally stored document or submit a URL of a file for analysis. Please use caution with
this technique. If the document is already posted online, there is very little risk of allowing a URL analysis.
However, a locally stored file that has never been on the internet may require a second thought. If the content
is sensitive, you may not want to upload to any service. If the file contains classified information, you could be
jeopardizing your clearance. In these situations, use the methods discussed in a moment. If this is not a concern
the following websites work well.
Extract Metadata (extractmetadata.com)
Online Exif Viewer (onlineexifviewer.com)
Exifdata (exifdata.com)
ExifInfo (exifinfo.org)
Get Metadata (get-metadata.com)
Document Metadata Applications
If I need to analyze the metadata stored within documents, I prefer to do so locally on my machine. I do not
want to share any potential investigation details with an online resource. This is especially true if the documents
are not already online. You may possess a folder of files which were retrieved from a suspect computer or
emailed directly to you. In these scenarios, we should be cautious as to not distribute any evidence electronically
to any websites. I present two solutions, with a third unstable option.

350 Chapter 28

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

ExifTool (exiftool.org)
You already possess a document metadata viewer within your custom Linux virtual machine. It is called ExifTool
and we installed it during the previous chapters. This is a terminal-based solution, but the function is quite
simple. Assume that you have used the previous techniques to download several Word documents in .docx file
format onto your Desktop in a folder titled Evidence. The following steps within Terminal would navigate to
the proper folder, generate a spreadsheet with the metadata included within the documents, and title it
Report.csv on your Desktop in the Evidence folder.
cd ~/Desktop/Evidence
exiftool * -csv > ~/Desktop/Evidence/Report.csv

Let's conduct an example and take a look at the results. I performed the following Google search:
ext:docx "osint"
This provided 371 results, all of which were Microsoft Word documents. I downloaded the first four into the
Evidence folder on my Desktop. After executing the commands above, I launched the spreadsheet. Figure 28.01
displays a small portion of the interesting results. This tells me the names of the individuals who created and last
modified the documents; the companies involved; the software which was used; and even the amount of time
they spent editing the content. This is extremely valuable information which should be collected during every
investigation in which documents are obtained.

Figure 28.01: Document metadata results from ExifTool.
FOCA (github.com/ElevenPaths/FOCA)
You may desire a Windows-based solution which possesses a user-friendly interface. FOCA was once the
premier document metadata collection and extraction tool. It was created to search, download, and analyze
documents and their metadata in one execution. Unfortunately, Google and other search engines began blocking
the search and download behavior of the software. Fortunately, the analysis portion still works perfectly. The
following steps will download and install FOCA to your Windows VM or any other Windows device.
•
•
•
•
•
•

Install the "Basic" version of SQL server express which is available directly from Microsoft
(https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/sql-server/sql-server-downloads).
Navigate to https://github.com/ElevenPaths/FOCA/releases.
Click the hyperlink for the most recent "zip" file.
Double-click the .zip file and extract the contents.
Launch FOCA.exe.
If prompted, select "Download and install this feature" to install the .net framework.

FOCA should launch and present a window with many options. Today, the vast majority of the features no
longer work, but the document analysis is helpful. Assume you possess the same four documents mentioned
previously on the Desktop of your Windows VM.
•
•
•

Open FOCA and click the Metadata folder in the left menu.
Drag and drop the documents into the FOCA window.
Right-click any of the documents and choose "Extract all metadata".

Documents 351

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•

Right-click any of the documents and choose "Analyze metadata".

You can now click through the menus on the left to view any metadata details such as email addresses, names,
and computers associated with these files. The benefit of this method is the user interface, but you sacrifice a
reporting option. The previous ExifTool method is not as pretty, but the spreadsheet result is helpful. Ultimately,
I believe you should be familiar with both options and rely on the method most appropriate for you.
Real World Application: Dennis Lynn Rader, also known as the BTK killer, sent a floppy disk to the Wichita
Police Department containing a Microsoft Word document in reference to his killings. The police examined the
metadata of this document and determined that it was made by a subject named "Dennis". Links to a Lutheran
church were also located within this data. Conducting OSINT searches on these two pieces of information
helped to identify the suspect and make an arrest.
Manual Metadata Extraction
There are some documents which store much more metadata within the content than what is presented within
the official metadata associated with the file. I see this most commonly with PowerPoint files. Let's conduct a
demonstration. I searched ext:pptx "osint" within Google. The first result was a PowerPoint presentation, which
I downloaded. The previous methods announced all of the standard metadata we would expect to see. I then
changed the name of the PowerPoint presentation file from "OpenSourceIntelligence-OSINT.pptx" to
"OpenSourceIntelligence-OSINT.zip". This tells my computer that this file is now an archive.
I then decompressed the zip file which presented dozens of new files. These are the content behind the scenes
of the PowerPoint itself. They include all of the images inside the presentation, which can then easily be analyzed
for their own metadata, and text extraction of all words in the slides. The "app.xml" file confirms that the author
was using PowerPoint from Microsoft Office 2016 (AppVersion>16.0000) and several files include unique
identifiers for this user. Comparing these to other downloaded documents could prove that the authors of each
were the same.
In a bit of irony, this PowerPoint file randomly selected from the Google results included the OSINT flowcharts
which I present at the end of my books, but the owner claimed them as his own work with "Copyright of the
Cybersecmentorship.org". Apparently, this technique can also help expose copyright infringement and blatant
plagiarism.
Free OCR (free-ocr.com)
You may occasionally locate a PDF file that has not been indexed for the text content. These types of PDF files
will not allow you to copy and paste any of the text. This could be due to poor scanning techniques or to
purposely prohibit outside use of the content. You may desire to capture this text for a summary report. These
files can be uploaded to Free OCR and converted to text documents. OCR is an acronym for optical character
recognition. Basically, a computer "reads" the document and determines what the text is inside the content. The
result is a new document with copy and paste capability.
Text Archives (archive.org)
The Internet Archive possesses massive collections of text files, books, and other documents. These files can
be accessed with the "=TXT" parameter after a search. A direct URL for documents mentioning
"inteltechniques" within the title or content would be the following.
https://archive.org/search.php?query=inteltechniques&sin=TXT

352 Chapter 28

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Google Books (books.google.com)
Google has scanned most books printed within the past decade and the index is searchable. Many of these scans
also include a digital preview of the content. A direct URL query appears as follows.
https://www.google.com/search?tbm=bks&q=inteltechniques
Pirated Books (annas-archive.org)
I am hesitant to present this resource, but I have found it extremely valuable in my investigations. Many people
use a service called Library Genesis to download illegal pirated e-books. Library Genesis does not offer any type
of indexing of content, but Annas Archive acquires all of their content and provides a search interface. This
allows us to search within the content of millions of pirated books without actually downloading any content
and allows us to find references to specific targets within publications. While it may be tempting to download
the PDF of the book, please don't. This likely violates your laws, policies, or ethics. The following URL would
query "osint" within the entire collection.
https://annas-archive.org/search?q=osint
Additional resources such as File Pursuit (filepursuit.com) attempt to replicate this service.
Book Sales (amazon-asin.com)
I have never had an investigation rely on book sale information, but I find it interesting. Amazon offers a lookup
tool which displays details about the number of copies being sold of any book on their site. First, you must
identify the ASIN assigned to the book. This is typically visible within the details section of the book's listing
page or the page URL. The previous edition of this book is B0BRDR9P4Q. The following URL accesses all
available details, but supposedly will switch to a paid model soon.
https://amazon-asin.com/asincheck?q=B0BRDR9P4Q
By visiting this page, you can access the fee I pay to Amazon for each sale ($7.90); the fee I pay to Amazon for
fulfillment ($5.84); the fee I pay to Amazon for royalties (40%); the "Listing Quality" (Poor); Potential sales
(Low); Estimated Daily Sales (11-13 books); Estimated Daily Income ($447.00 - $528.00); Main Search
Keywords (open source intelligence techniques); and Amazon Buyer Keywords (100 techniques americas test
kitchen). As you can see with that last entry, these results are not all accurate. Well, maybe the Potential Sales
entry (Low). I never believe everything I see here, but it can be an indicator of sales versus a competing book.
Rental Vehicle Records
The details of rental vehicles are not technically documents, but the data seemed to fit this category the best.
The following options have been controversially received during training and may not be appropriate for
everyone. I present these methods to you as theories, and you should evaluate if the techniques are suitable for
your research. Several vehicle rental companies offer an option to access your receipts online. This is probably
designed for customers that leave a vehicle at the business after hours and later need a receipt. While the
processes to retrieve these documents are designed to only obtain your own records, it is easy to view others.
Enterprise (enterprise.com)
At the bottom of every Enterprise web page is an option to "Get a receipt". Clicking this will present a form
that must be completed before display of any details. Enterprise will need the driver's license number and last
name. Providing this information will display the user's entire rental history for the past six months to three
years. Testing with my own data provided two years' worth of results. Each document will link to the entire

Documents 353

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

receipt from that rental. These receipts include the start date and time, end date and time, vehicle make and
model, pick up location, total mileage, lease name, and form of payment. This information could be very
beneficial to any drug case or private investigation.
Hertz (hertz.com/rentacar/receipts/request-receipts.do)
Similar to Enterprise, Hertz has a link at the bottom of this page titled "Get a receipt". You can search by driver's
license number or reservation with last name. The receipt will be similar to the Enterprise demonstration.
Alamo (alamo.com)
Alamo titles their receipt retrieval link "Past Trips/Receipts" and it is located in the bottom portion of every
page. The process is identical to the previous two examples. The only difference is that you must choose a date
range. I usually select a start date of one year prior to the current date and the end date of the current date.
Thrifty (thrifty.com/Reservations/OnlineReceipts.aspx)
This service requires a last name and either a driver's license number or credit card number.
Dollar (dollar.com/Reservations/Receipt.aspx)
Similar to Thrifty, this service requires a last name and either a driver's license number or credit card number.
Government Document Archives
In additional to using search engines and third party document search sites, I will often seek out repositories of
government documents related to my target. This often involves searching for online repositories associated
with their specific city, county, and state. This will vary from target to target, but we can also use national
resources such as the National Archives which are available at https://www.archives.gov/. The following is a
sample URL query which results in dozens of PDFs, spread sheets, and other documents related to my keyword.
https://search.archives.gov/search?query=osint&submit=&utf8=&affiliate=national-archives
There are additional archive tools available at https://www.archives.gov/research/start/online-tools. An
alternative service for locating government documents is https://www.govinfo.gov/.
Gender Analyzer (uclassify.com/browse/uclassify/genderanalyzer_v5)
This tool attempts to identify the gender of the person who wrote the text. This can be very hit or miss, but I
have found it to be reliable in most of my testing. When supplied five blog posts I wrote within the past two
months, it believed that 72% of my words were written by a male person.
IntelTechniques Documents and Pastes Tools
If these resources seem overwhelming, consider my custom document search tools available online at
https://inteltechniques.com/tools/Documents.html or the file titled "Documents.html" in your download
from previous chapters. The first section queries documents by file types. It allows entry of any terms or
operators in order to locate PDF, DOC, DOCX, XLS, XLSX, CSV, PPT, PPTX, KEYNOTE, TXT, RTF,
XML, ODT, ODS, ODP, ODG, ZIP, RAR, 7Z, JPG, JPEG, PNG, MPG, MP4, MP3, and WAV documents.
The second section allows entry of any terms or operators in order to locate files stored within Google Docs,
Google Drive, Microsoft Docs, Amazon AWS, CloudFront, SlideShare, Prezi, ISSUU, Scribd, PDF Drive, and
others. The "Pastes" search tool at https://inteltechniques.com/tools/Pastes.html presents a Google
custom search engine (CSE) which queries all paste sites mentioned previously.

354 Chapter 28

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE
IMAGES

Thanks to cameras on every data cellular phone, digital photograph uploads are extremely common among
social network users. These images can create a whole new element to the art of open source intelligence analysis.
This chapter will identify various photo sharing websites as well as specific search techniques. Later, photo
metadata will be explained that can uncover a new level of information including the location where the picture
was taken; the make, model, and serial number of the camera; original uncropped views of the photos; and even
a collection of other photos online taken with the same camera. After reading this information, you should
question if your online photos should stay online.
Google Images (images.google.com)
During my live training sessions, I always encourage attendees to avoid individual searches on various photo
sharing websites such as Flickr or Tumblr. This is because most of these searchable sites have already been
indexed by Google and other search engines. Conducting a search for "Oakland Protest" on Flickr will only
identify images on that specific service that match. However, conducting the same search on Google Images
will identify photos that match the terms on Flickr and hundreds of additional services. Similar to Google's
standard search results, you can use the Search Tools to filter by date. Additionally, you can further isolate target
images by size, color, and type, such as photographs versus line drawings. I no longer conduct manual searches
across the numerous photo sharing sites. Instead, I start with Google Images.
Bing Images (bing.com/images)
Similar to Google, Bing also offers an image search. While it is not as beneficial as the Google option, it should
never be overlooked. On several occasions, I have located valuable pictorial evidence on Bing that was missing
from Google results. The function is identical, and you can filter search results by date, size, color, type, and
license type. When searching for relevant data about a target, I try to avoid any filters unless absolutely necessary.
In general, we always want more data, not less. The search techniques explained in Chapter Seventeen all apply
to queries on Google Images and Bing Images.
Reverse Image Search
Advancements in computer processing power and image analysis software have made reverse image searching
possible on several sites. While a standard search online involves entering text into a search engine for related
results, a reverse image search provides an image to a search engine for analysis. The results will vary depending
on the site used. Some will identify identical images that appear on other websites. This can be used to identify
other websites on which the target used the same image. If you have a photo of a target on a social network, a
reverse analysis of that photo may provide other websites on which the target used the same image. These may
be results that were not identified through a standard search engine. Occasionally, a target may create a website
as an alias, but use an actual photo of himself. Unless you knew the alias name, you would never find the site.
Searching for the site by the image may be the only way to locate the profile of the alias. Some reverse image
sites go further and try to identify other photos of the target that are similar enough to be matched. Some will
even try to determine the sex and age of the subject in the photo based on the analysis of the image. This type
of analysis was once limited to expensive private solutions. Now, these services are free to the public.
Google Reverse Image Search (images.google.com)
One of the more powerful reverse image search services is through Google. Rolled out in 2011, this service,
now called Google Lens, is often overlooked. On any Google Images page, there is a search field. Inside of this
field on the far right is a camera icon that appears slightly transparent. Figure 21.03 (first) displays this search

Images 355

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

field. Clicking on this icon will open a new search window that will allow for either a web address of an online
image, or an upload of an image file on your computer. In order to take advantage of the online search, you
must have the exact link to the actual photo online. Locating an image within a website is not enough. You will
want to see the image in a web browser by itself, and then copy the address of the image. If I want to view the
image from the actual location, I must right-click on the image and select "view image" with my Firefox browser.
Chrome users will see "open image in new tab" and Edge users will see "properties" which will identify the URL
of the image. This link is what you want in order to conduct a reverse image analysis.
In late 2022, I witnessed many changes to Google's reverse image search process. Today, if you paste a URL
into Google's reverse image search, the default result will be "Visual matches" within "Google Lens", which can
be seen in Figure 29.01. These are typically images similar to the target, but not a replica of the target. Clicking
the "Find image source" button takes you to a new tab with results matching your target image. Adding text
context to the search field in this new tab can improve accuracy. As an example, a reverse-search of a photo
from LinkedIn might produce many inaccurate results, but including the name or employer of your target will
often display only applicable evidence.
Another way to use this service is to search for target text details within the Google Images search page at
images.google.com. The images in the results will present additional options when clicked. A larger version of
the image will load inside a black box. The options surrounding the image will allow you to visit the page where
the image is stored; view the image in full size; crop a portion of the image; or cycle through similar images.
I miss the way Google handled these queries before Google Lens, but we are stuck with whatever they provide
us. Let's focus on each feature and identify exact URL submission options. I will start with the following image
of a friend of mine (sorry Marcos), which can be seen in Figure 29.01 (left). The original URL follows.
https://s.hdnux.com/photos/01/30/23/25/23147846/3/1200x0.jpg
I can submit this URL directly to Google Lens with the following URL.
https://lens.google.com/uploadbyurl?url=https://s.hdnux.com/photos/01/30/23/25/23147846/3/1200x0.jpg

If I have a name or keyword, and only want to search images through Google, the following URL applies
https://www.google.com/search?tbm=isch&q=Marcos+Pulido
Once within the Google Lens page, you can navigate to the image source or manipulate the current target photo.
In this example (Figure 29.01), I cropped the image using the embedded frame, and focused on the unknown
person in the lower-left of the image. The result can be seen in Figure 29.02. On occasion, this has been helpful
in identifying other people or objects within an image. It also provides an option to extract text from a photo,
but I have not needed that yet.
Bing Reverse Image Match (bing.com/images)
In 2014, Bing launched its own reverse image search option titled "Visual Search". This feature can be launched
from within any page on Bing Images by clicking the camera icon to the right of the search field. Figure 29.03
(second) displays this option. This service does not seem to be as robust as Google's. In my experience, I often
receive either much fewer results, although they do match. On a few occasions, I have received matched images
that Google did not locate.
TinEye (tineye.com)
TinEye is another site that will perform a reverse image analysis. These results tend to focus on exact duplicate
images. The results here are usually fewer than those found with Google. Since each service often finds images

356 Chapter 29

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

the others do not, all should be searched when using this technique. Figure 29.03 (third) displays the search
menu. The icon on the left prompts the user to provide a location on the hard drive for image upload while the
search field will accept a URL.
Yandex Images (yandex.ru/images)
Russian search site Yandex has an image search option that can conduct a reverse image search. Similar to the
other methods, enter the full address of the online image of interest and search for duplicate images on additional
websites. In 2015, Yandex began allowing users to upload an image from their computers. In 2020, I began
noticing accurate results from Yandex which were not visible in results from Google, Bing, or TinEye. Today,
Yandex may be your best reverse image search option. Figure 29.03 (fourth) displays the reverse image search
icon in the far-right portion.
Baidu Images (image.baidu.com)
Similar to Yandex, the Chinese search engine Baidu offers a reverse image search. Baidu currently offers no
English version of their website and only presents Chinese text. Navigating to the above website offers a search
box that contains a small camera icon to the right. Clicking this presents options for uploading an image (button
to left) or providing the URL of an online image within the search field itself. The results will identify similar
images on websites indexed by Baidu. Figure 29.03 (fifth) displays the search page only available in Chinese. In
m
custom
s

357

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Regardless of the services that you are executing, I urge you to use caution with sensitive images. Similar to my
view of analyzing online documents for metadata, I believe that submitting online photos within these engines
is harmless. If the photo is already publicly online, there is very little risk exposing it a second time. My concern
involves child pornography and classified photos. As a former child pornography investigator and forensic
examiner, there were several times that I wanted to look for additional copies of evidence online. However, I
could not. Even though no one would know, and the photos would never appear any place they should not,
conducting reverse image searches of contraband is illegal. It is technically distributing child pornography (to
Google). While working with a large FBI terrorism investigation, I had possession of ten photos on which I
wanted to conduct a reverse image search. The photos were part of a classified case, so I could not. Overall,
never submit these types of photos from your hard drive. It will always come back to haunt you.
Whenever I have any public images that call for reverse image searching, I always check all five of these services.
While I rarely ever get a unique result on Baidu, it only takes a few seconds to check every time. This diligence
has paid off in the past. These manual searches do not need to be as time consuming as one may think. We can
automate much of this process to save time and encourage thorough investigations. First, we should take a look
at direct URL submission. For the following examples, assume that your target image is the cover of my privacy
book from the web page at inteltechniques.com/book7.html. The actual target image is stored online at the
URL of https://inteltechniques.com/img/EP4-3D.png. The following direct addresses would conduct a reverse
image search at each service listed.
Google: https://www.google.com/searchbyimage?image_url=https://inteltechniques.com/img/EP43D.png&client=app
Google Lens: https://lens.google.com/uploadbyurl?url=https://inteltechniques.com/img/EP4-3D.png
Bing: https://www.bing.com/images/search?view=detailv2&iss=sbi&q=imgurl:https://
inteltechniques.com/img/EP4-3D.png
TinEye: http://www.tineye.com/search/?url=https://inteltechniques.com/img/EP4-3D.png
Yandex: https://yandex.com/images/search?rpt=imageview&url=https://inteltechniques
.com/img/EP4-3D.png
Baidu: https://graph.baidu.com/upload?image=https%3A%2F%2Finteltechniques.com%2F
img%2FEP4-3D.png

Figure 29.03: Reverse image search options from Google, Bing, TinEye, Yandex, and Baidu.

358 Chapter 29

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Cropped Reverse Image Searching
Beginning in 2018, I noticed that both Google Images and Bing Images were returning fewer results than in
previous years. It seemed as though each were trying to limit the number of matching photos, possibly with the
intent to present only relevant images based on previous search history or whatever they "think" we want from
them. In 2019, I had an investigation focused around an online image. When I conducted a reverse image search,
I received one result, which was a copy I already knew existed. When I cropped the image to only display my
target, I received more search results. I find this technique applicable to Google and Bing, but I believe it works
best with Yandex. The following is a demonstration of this method, using a public image posted to Twitter.
Figure 29.04 (left) is the original image obtained from Twitter. A reverse image search through Google, Bing,
and Yandex revealed numerous results, but none of them contained my target displayed on the far left. I cropped
the image, as seen in Figure 29.04 (right), to display only the target and resubmitted to Yandex. This immediately
identified numerous images of the target. Figure 29.05 displays one of these images. Both Google and Bing
displayed no results from this cropped image. I cannot stress enough the importance of reverse-searching images
through Yandex. I find their service superior to all others.

Figure: 29.04: An original image (left) and cropped version (right).

Figure 29.05: A reverse image search result from Yandex.
FaceCheck (facecheck.id)
While the major search engines will find most generic images, there are two services which stand out for faces
and vehicles. I will explain each. FaceCheck surfaced in 2022, and is currently a free alternative to the paid service
Pimeyes. It applies artificial intelligence to compare an online or uploaded image to a database of billions of
photos which were previously shared online. This is not exact pixel comparison and the matching images do
not need to be from the same place or time. This is a series of servers which analyze your target image and
attempt to identify any stored images of the same person. The results are creepy to say the least. The online
interface encourages you to upload an image, which I am cautious to do. This will likely add it to their collection.
Instead, I only submit images which are already online and have likely already been indexed by this service. Let's
revisit the following image from the Google Lens demonstration.
https://s.hdnux.com/photos/01/30/23/25/23147846/3/1200x0.jpg
The following URL submits this image, which is a feature otherwise hidden from their service.

Images 359

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

https://facecheck.id/#url=https://s.hdnux.com/photos/01/30/23/25/23147846/3/1200x0.jpg
This populated the image and began the analysis, as seen in Figure 29.06. Notice that it automatically determined
the face within the image and cropped out any unhelpful details. The final result was twelve images of my target,
all of which were captured on various dates with different clothing and background, as partially seen in Figure
29.07. I can click each to access the original location and details. This has uncovered the true identities of
countless people associated with my investigations. I suspect this will become a paid service someday, so take
advantage of the free version while it lasts.

Figure 29.06:

Figure 29.07: FaceCheck results identifying additional images of a target.
CarNet (carnet.ai)
This is another service which appeared in 2022, and has been extremely beneficial to my investigations. It allows
you to upload an image, or provide a URL, of a suspect vehicle, and it will use machine learning to identify the
year, make, and model when possible. Let's conduct a demonstration. As I wrote this, someone posted on Reddit
asking for assistance identifying the vehicle within the following link, as seen in Figure 29.08 (left).
https://i.redd.it/xf4m1q7t6d0a1.jpg
I uploaded the blurry image into CarNet, which immediately identified it as a 2013-2017 4th generation
Holden/Commodore, grey in color. That didn't sound familiar to me, so I assumed it was wrong. Someone
much more knowledgeable about vehicles was credited on Reddit as posting the correct answer, a rare
"Chevrolet SS built off the Australian Holden Commodore", as seen in Figure 29.08 (right). I have found this
service extremely valuable when trying to identify vehicles captured on video doorbells and dash cameras.

360 Chapter 29

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Figure 29.08: An image of an unknown vehicle.
Reddit Repost Sleuth (repostsleuth.com)
This service is a reverse image search engine that only provides positive results that appear on the website Reddit.
It was originally launched as a way for users to identify when someone reposted a photo that had previously
been posted on the website. The user could then "down-vote" the submission and have it removed from the
front page. We can use this in investigations to locate every copy of an individual photo on Reddit. You can
either provide a link to an image or upload an image from your computer. The following static URL submits
our target image for reverse analysis on Reddit.
https://www.repostsleuth.com/search?url= https://inteltechniques.com/img/EP4-3D.png
Root About (rootabout.com)
This is another specialized reverse image search utility which only queries against images stored on the Internet
Archive and within Open Library (also an Internet Archive product). Any results will likely contain public images
such as published photos and book covers. I have yet to receive any benefit to my investigations with this service,
but it should still be available in your arsenal of tools. Root About does not support search via a direct URL.
Wolfram Image Identification Project (imageidentify.com)
While this is not a traditional reverse image search, it does provide value. The goal of this service is to identify
the content of an image. If you upload a photo of a car, it will likely tell you the make, year, and model. An
upload of an image containing an unknown Chinese word may display a translation and history details. The site
prompts you to upload a digital file, but you can also drag and drop an image from a web page in another tab.
Real World Application: These reverse image search sites can have many uses to the investigator. In 2011, I
searched a photo of damage to a popular historic cemetery that was vandalized. The results included a similar
photo of the suspect showing off the damage on a blog. An arrest and community service soon followed. Later,
while working with a private investigator, I was asked to locate any hotels that were using the client's hotel
images on websites. A reverse image search identified dozens of companies using licensed photos without
authorization. This likely led to civil litigation. More recently, a federal agent asked me to assist with a human
trafficking case. He had a woman in custody who spoke little English. She was arrested during a prostitution
sting and was suspected of being a victim of trafficking. A reverse image search from one online prostitution ad
located all of her other ads which identified the regional areas that she had recently been working, a cellular
telephone number connected to her pimp, and approximate dates of all activity.
Pictriev (pictriev.com)
Pictriev is a service that will analyze a photo including a human face and try to locate additional images of the
person. The results are best when the image is of a public figure with a large internet presence, but it will work
on lesser-known subjects as well. An additional feature is a prediction of the sex of the target as well as age.

Images 361

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Twitter Images
For the first several years of Twitter's existence, it did not host any photos on its servers. If a user wanted to
attach a photo to his or her post, a third-party photo host was required. These have always been free and
plentiful. Often, a shortened link was added to the message, which forwarded to the location of the photo.
Twitter now hosts photos used in Twitter posts, but third-party hosts are still widely used. The majority of the
images will be hosted on Instagram, which was previously explained. If you have already identified your target's
Twitter page, you will probably have the links you need to see the photos uploaded with his or her posts. Many
Twitter messages have embedded images directly within the post. Twitter now allows you to search keywords
for photo results. After you conduct any search within the native Twitter search field, your results will include a
filter menu on the top. The "Photos" results will only include images which have a reference to the searched
keyword within the message or hashtag. You can also filter this search for people, videos, or news. The URL
query for all Twitter images associated with "osint" would be https://x.com/search?q=osint&f=media.
Facebook Images
Facebook also allows a query for images. The traditional method is to search a keyword and navigate to the
Photos filter. However, we can replicate this via URL at https://www.facebook.com/search/photos/?q=osint.
Tumblr Images
Tumblr blogs have a heavy emphasis on images, and search engines do not always index associated keywords
well. Therefore, we should consider a query specifically on the site. The URL query for images associated with
"osint" would be https://www.tumblr.com/search/osint. All of these options are included within the custom
search tools which are presented at the end of this chapter.
Photo-Sharing Sites
In order to find a photo related to a target, the image must be stored on a website. The most common type of
storage for online digital photos is on a photo-sharing site. These sites allow a user to upload photographs to an
account or profile. These images can then be searched by anyone with an internet connection. Almost all of
these hosts are free for the user and the files will remain on the site until a user removes them. There are dozens
of these services, many allowing several gigabytes worth of storage. While I mentioned earlier that a Google
Images or Bing Images search was most appropriate for all photo sharing hosts, Flickr deserves a mention.
Flickr (flickr.com)
Flickr, purchased by Yahoo and now owned by SmugMug, was one of the most popular photo-sharing sites on
the internet. Many have abandoned it for Twitter and Instagram, but the mass number of images cannot be
ignored. The majority of these images are uploaded by amateur photographers and contain little intelligence to
an investigator. Yet there are still many images in this "haystack" that will prove to be beneficial to the online
researcher. The main website allows for a general search by topic, location, username, real name, or keyword.
This search term should be as specific as possible to avoid numerous results. An online username will often take
you to that user's Flickr photo album. After you have found either an individual photo, user's photo album, or
group of photos by interest, you can begin to analyze the profile data of your target. This may include a username,
camera information, and interests. Clicking through the various photos may produce user comments, responses
by other users, and location data about the photo. Dissecting and documenting this data can assist with future
searches. The actual image of these photos may give all of the intelligence desired, but the data does not stop
there. A search for photographs related to the Occupy Wall Street protesters returned over 157,000 results.
Flickr Map (flickr.com/map)
Flickr attempts to geo locate all of the photos that it can. It attempts to identify the location where the photo

362 Chapter 29

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

was taken. It will usually obtain this information from the Exif data, which will be discussed in a moment. It can
also tag these photos based on user provided information. Flickr provides a mapping feature that will attempt
to populate a map based on your search parameters. I believe this service is only helpful when you are
investigating a past incident at a large event or researching the physical layout of a popular attraction.
Flickr API
There are three specific uses of the Flickr Application Programming Interface (API) that I have found helpful
during many online investigations. The first queries an email address and identifies any Flickr accounts associated
with it. The second queries a username, and identifies the Flickr user number of the connected account. The
final option queries a Flickr user number and identifies the attached username. Unfortunately, all of these
features require a Flickr API key. I have included a throwaway key within the search tools explained at the end
of the chapter. However, it may not function for long after the book is published. If the key should be terminated
by Flickr, simply request your own free key at https://www.flickr.com/services/api/. Once issued, replace my
test key (27c196593dad58382fc4912b00cf1194) within the code of the tools to your own. A demonstration may
help to explain the features. First, I submitted the following URL to Flickr in order to query my target email
address of test@test.com.
https://api.flickr.com/services/rest/?method=flickr.people.findByEmail&api_key=27c196593dad58382fc491
2b00cf1194&find_email=test@test.com
I immediately received the following result.
User id="8104823@N02" username>intellectarsenal
I now know that my target possesses a Flickr account associated with the email address, the username for the
account, and the unique user number which will never change. Next, assume that we only knew the username.
The following URL could be submitted.
https://api.flickr.com/services/rest/?method=flickr.people.findByUsername&api_key=27c196593dad58382f
c4912b00cf1194&username=intellectarsenal
The response includes the following.
User id="8104823@N02"
Once you have identified the user number, we can submit the following URL.
https://api.flickr.com/services/rest/?method=flickr.people.getInfo&api_key=27c196593dad58382fc4912b00
cf1194&user_id=8104823@N02
This returns the most details, including the following result from our target.
username>intellectarsenal
photosurl>https://www.flickr.com/photos/8104823@N02/
profileurl>https://www.flickr.com/people/8104823@N02/
Navigating to the profile displays details such as the join date, followers, and photo albums. This may seem like
a lot of work for a minimal number of details, but this is quite beneficial. There is no native email address search
on Flickr, but we can replicate the function within the API. You may not find young targets sharing images here,
but the massive collection of photos spanning the past decade may present new evidence which was long
forgotten by the target.

Images 363

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Exif Data
Every digital photograph captured with a digital camera possesses metadata known as Exif data. I have already
explained several applications which extract this data from documents and images, but we need to have a better
understanding of the technology. This is a layer of code that provides information about the photo and camera.
All digital cameras write this data to each image, but the amount and type of data can vary. This data, which is
embedded into each photo "behind the scenes", is not visible by viewing the captured image. You need an Exif
reader, which can be found on websites and within applications. Keep in mind that some websites remove or
"scrub" this data before storing it on their servers. Facebook, for example, removes the data while Flickr does
not. Locating a digital photo online will not always present this data. If you locate an image that appears full size
and uncompressed, you will likely still have the data intact. If the image has been compressed to a smaller file
size, this data is often lost. Any images removed directly from a digital camera card will always have the data.
This is one of the reasons you will always want to identify the largest version of an image when searching online.
The quickest way to see the information is through an online viewer.
Exifinfo (exifinfo.org)
Although offline Exif data analyzers are generally preferred, there are occasions where it is beneficial to have an
online option. For years this was Jeffrey's Exif Viewer, but that project has been recently discontinued. There
are many alternatives, but Exifinfo is easy to use and presents the data in a concise format. The site accepts both
image URLs and uploads, but as a reminder we should not upload sensitive photos to third party sites on the
internet if they do not already exist in publicly available resources. A good rule of thumb is that if you originally
located the image on the open web, then it likely okay to upload it to one of these services. We have an offline
Exif viewer in our virtual machine which is a more appropriate option for sensitive images.
Another consideration when pulling Exif data from files is that it is always possible that someone has tampered
with the original metadata. This is not a common occurrence but we should keep in mind that at some point in
our career we will no doubt run into an image where the Exif data has been purposefully changed from its
original state. Exifinfo boasts the following data results, although bear in mind that the data has to be present
in the file in the first place so photos from sites which scrub metadata, such as Facebook, will result in very
limited file information.
Capture and last edited date and time stamps (with varying precision)
GPS location coordinates (degrees of latitude & longitude)
A small thumbnail of the original image
The author's name and copyright details
Compass heading
Device information including manufacturer, and model
Capture information including lens type, focal range, aperture, shutter speed, flash settings
The original filename
An example of an Exifinfo result can be seen in Figure 29.09. For images with GPS data there is an option on
the Exifinfo interface to open the location in OpenStreetMap or you can paste the location coordinates into
your mapping service of choice. Exifinfo promises to delete uploaded files immediately after processing, and
the resulting analytical data is only stored for three days. This makes it one of the most transparent and privacy
respecting online options. The backend of this service utilizes the open source project https://exiftool.org/
which we can run locally if we want an additional offline option.

364 Chapter 29

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Figure 29.09: An Exifinfo result identifying location with map view.
Cropped Images
Another piece of information that we can look for inside the Exif data is the presence of a thumbnail image
within the photograph. Digital cameras generate a small version of the photo captured and store it within the
Exif data. This icon size image adds very little size to the overall file. When a user crops the image, this original
smaller version may or may not get overwritten. Programs such as Photoshop or Microsoft Photo Editor will
overwrite the data and keep both images identical. Other programs, as well as some online cropping tools, do
not overwrite this data. The result is the presence of the original and uncropped image within the Exif data of
the cropped photo. An example of this is seen in Figure 29.10. A cropped photo found online is examined
through an Exif analyzer. The cropped full-size large photo is seen on the left. The embedded smaller original
photo was not overwritten when cropped. We can now see what the image looked like before it was cropped.
This technique has been used by police to identify child pornography manufacturers. These pedophiles will crop
themselves out of illegal images to avoid identification. When photos of the children are found by police, an
original uncropped image may be enough to identify and prosecute a molester. This is not limited to law
enforcement. Some tech-savvy fans of television personality Catherine Schwartz examined a cropped photo on
her blog in 2003. Inside the Exif data was the uncropped version which exposed her breasts and quickly made
the rounds through the internet. We must remember this unfortunate lesson when we consider posting our own
content to the internet.
Real World Application: In a civil litigation, a subject claimed an injury that prohibited him from work, walking,
and a normal life. The suit claimed damages from pain and suffering and sought a monetary judgment for future
lack of ability to work. A brief scan of the subject's online photo album revealed fishing trips, softball games,
and family adventure vacations. With Exif information data intact, exact dates, times, locations, and cameras
were identified and preserved. The subject withdrew his lawsuit.

Images 365

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

ry
Stolencamerafinder (stolencamerafinder.com)
This site was designed to help camera theft victims with locating their camera if it is being used by the thief
online. For that use, you would find a photo taken with the stolen camera, and drop it into Stolen Camera
Finder. This analysis identifies a serial number if available based on the metadata of the image or you can enter
the serial number into the site manually. The service will search for that serial number within their database of
online photos and previous reports of stolen cameras. They also offer a map feature which displays the locations
of stolen devices in their database, although this function is less useful for my investigations as I am typically
starting with a specific photo or serial number. The website urges users to sign up for a premium service that
will make contact if any more images appear in the database, but I have never needed this.
Online Barcode Reader (online-barcode-reader.inliteresearch.com)
Barcodes have been around for decades. They are the vertical lined images printed on various products that
allow registers to identify the product and price. Today's barcodes are much more advanced and can contain a
large amount of text data within a small image. Some newer barcodes exist in order to allow individuals to scan
them with a cell phone. The images can provide a link to a website, instructions for downloading a program, or
a secret text message. I generally advise against scanning any unknown barcodes with a mobile device since
malicious links could be opened unknowingly. However, an online barcode reader can be used to identify what
information is hiding behind these interesting images.
Figure 29.11 displays the barcode search options from Online Barcode Reader. These include 1D, PDF417,
Postal, DataMatrix, QR, and ID barcodes. After selecting the type of barcode image, you can select any PDF,
TIFF, JPEG, BMP, GIF, or PNG file on your computer up to 12 MB in size. This could be a photo that
possesses a barcode in the content or a digital code downloaded from a website. Screen captures of codes also
work well. While sitting on a plane with Wi-Fi, I captured a photo of an abandoned boarding pass in the
magazine holder in front of me. The barcode reader identified text information stored inside the code that was
not present in text on the document.

Figure 29.11: Barcode input samples from Online Barcode Reader.
366 Chapter 29

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Additional barcode identification options are as follows.
Online Barcode (onlinebarcodereader.com)
Zxing (zxing.org)
Cognex (manateeworks.com/free-barcode-scanner)
Online Decoder (online-barcode-reader.com)
Image Manipulation
It is common to find images on the internet that have been manipulated using software such as Photoshop.
Often it is difficult, if not impossible, to tell if these photos have been manipulated by visually analyzing them.
A handful of websites use a technique to determine which portions of the photo have changed.
Foto Forensics (fotoforensics.com)
This site allows you to upload a digital image. After successful upload, it will display the image in normal view.
Below this image will be a darkened duplicate image. Any highlighted areas of the image indicate a possible
manipulation. While this site should never be used to definitively state that an image is untouched or
manipulated, investigators may want to conduct an analysis for intelligence purposes only. Figure 29.12 displays
original and manipulated images while Figure 29.13 displays the analysis of the images from Foto Forensics.
This site will provide an analysis of an image from the internet or a file uploaded from a computer. It is important
to note that any images uploaded become part of the website's collection and a direct URL is issued. While it
would be difficult for someone to locate the URL of the images, it could pose a security risk for sensitive files.

mpared to a manipulated photograph (right).

d manipulated image (right)

.

Forensi
Forensic
e collection of photo forensic tools that can be applied
to any u
l when image manipulation is suspected. Previous tools
have off
y offers, but this new option is an all
ution for
image analysis. Loading the page will present a demo image, which is used for this explanation. Clicking the
"Open File" link on the upper left will allow upload of an image into your browser for analysis. Images are NOT
uploaded to the server of this tool; they are only brought into your browser locally. Figure 29.14 (left) is the

Images 367

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

standard view of a digital photo. The various options within Forensically are each explained and example images
are included.
The Magnifier allows you to see small hidden details in an image. It does this by magnifying the size of the
pixels and the contrast within the window. There are three different enhancements available at the moment:
Histogram Equalization, Auto Contrast, and Auto Contrast by Channel. Auto Contrast mostly keeps the colors
intact; the others can cause color shifts. Histogram Equalization is the most robust option. You can also set this
to none.
The Clone Detector highlights copied regions within an image. These can be a good indicator that a picture
has been manipulated. Minimal Similarity determines how similar the cloned pixels need to be to the original.
Minimal Detail controls how much detail an area needs; therefore, blocks with less detail than this are not
considered when searching for clones. Minimal Cluster Size determines how many clones of a similar region
need to be found in order for them to show up as results. Block Size determines how big the blocks used for
the clone detection are. You generally don't want to touch this. Maximal Image Size is the maximal width or
height of the image used to perform the clone search. Bigger images take longer to analyze. Show Quantized
Image shows the image after it has been compressed. This can be useful to tweak Minimal Similarity and Minimal
Detail. Blocks that have been rejected because they do not have enough detail show up as black. Figure 29.14
(right) demonstrates this output.

Figure 29.14: A normal image view (left) and Clone Detector (right) in Forensically.
Error Level Analysis compares the original image to a recompressed version. This can make manipulated
regions stand out in various ways. For example, they can be darker or brighter than similar regions which have
not been manipulated. JPEG Quality should match the original quality of the image that has been photoshopped.
Error Scale makes the differences between the original and the recompressed image bigger. Magnifier
Enhancement offers different enhancements: Histogram Equalization, Auto Contrast, and Auto Contrast by
Channel. Auto Contrast mostly keeps the colors intact; the others can cause color shifts. Histogram Equalization
is the most robust option. You can also set this to none. Opacity displays the opacity of the Differences layer.
If you lower it, you will see more of the original image. Figure 29.15 (left) displays manipulation.
Noise Analysis is basically a reverse de-noising algorithm. Rather than removing the noise it removes the rest
of the image. It is using a super simple separable median filter to isolate the noise. It can be useful for identifying
manipulations to the image like airbrushing, deformations, warping, and perspective corrected cloning. It works
best on high quality images. Smaller images tend to contain too little information for this to work. Noise
Amplitude makes the noise brighter. Equalize Histogram applies histogram equalization to the noise. This can
reveal things but it can also hide them. You should try both histogram equalization and scale to analyze the
noise. Magnifier Enhancement offers three different enhancements: Histogram Equalization, Auto Contrast,
and Auto Contrast by Channel. Auto Contrast mostly keeps the colors intact; the others can cause color shifts.
Histogram Equalization is the most robust option. You can also set this to none. Opacity is the opacity of the
noise layer. If you lower it, you will see more of the original image. The result can be seen in Figure 29.15 (right).

368 Chapter 29

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Figure 29.15: Error Level Analysis (left) and Noise Analysis (right) in Forensically.
Level Sweep allows you to quickly sweep through the histogram of an image. It magnifies the contrast of certain
brightness levels. To use this tool simply move your mouse over the image and scroll with your mouse wheel.
Look for interesting discontinuities in the image. Sweep is the position in the histogram to be inspected. You
can quickly change this parameter by using the mouse wheel while hovering over the image, this allows you to
sweep through the histogram. Width is the amount of values (or width of the slice of the histogram) to be
inspected. The default should be fine. Opacity is the opacity of the sweep layer. If you lower it, you will see more
of the original image.
Luminance Gradient analyzes the changes in brightness along the x and y axis of the image. Its obvious use is
to look at how different parts of the image are illuminated in order to find anomalies. Parts of the image which
are at a similar angle (to the light source) and under similar illumination should have a similar color. Another
use is to check edges. Similar edges should have similar gradients. If the gradients at one edge are significantly
sharper than the rest it's a sign that the image could have been copied and pasted. It does also reveal noise and
compression artifacts quite well. Figure 29.16 (left) displays this view.
PCA performs principal component analysis on the image. This provides a different angle to view the image
data which makes discovering certain manipulations and details easier. This tool is currently single threaded and
quite slow when running on big images. Choose one of the following Modes: Projection of the value in the
image onto the principal component; Difference between the input and the closest point on the selected
principal component; Distance between the input and the closest point on the selected principal component; or
the closest point on the selected principal Component. There are three different enhancements available:
Histogram Equalization, Auto Contrast, and Auto Contrast by Channel. Auto Contrast mostly keeps the colors
i
ualization is the most robust option. You can also set this
t
ou lower it
e
2

) and PCA analysis (right) within Forensically.
s
taken, if it is stored in the image. Figure 29.17

.

Thumbnail Analysis shows any hidden preview image inside the original image. The preview can reveal details
of the original image or the camera used. Figure 29.18 displays the online image (left) while the original thumbnail
displays a different view (right).
The next time you identify a digital image as part of your online investigation, these tools will peek behind the
scenes and may display evidence of tampering.

Images 369

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Figure 29.18: An online image (left) and original thumbnail image (right) on Forensically.
Image Enlarging & Upscaling
There may be times when you have an image of poor quality which you may wish to enhance. Typically, this is
not advised since you may be manipulating evidence, but there are scenarios where this may be justified. A blurry
image of a license plate could warrant the manipulation of an image for clarity. Let's look at two options.
IMG Enlarger (imglarger.com)
This option requires a free account, and only magnifies the overall image. It simply doubles everything in size. I
have not found this extremely valuable.
IMG Upscaler (imgupscaler.com)
This option does not require an account and uses various software programming to truly enhance an image. In
2021, I uploaded a blurry vehicle with a license plate which barely identified half of the digits. This tool clarified
two additional digits which led to the discovery of the full registration.
Aperisolve (aperisolve.com)
This new service replicates some of the methods previously explained, but adds a few unique options. I uploaded
the image from the FaceCheck example and allowed the service to conduct a full analysis. It displayed the typical
file attributes and metadata, but then displayed the image with various superimposed values and attempted to
identify any steganography patterns. This allowed me to hunt for any hidden artifacts which may not have been
present within the previous utilities. Overall, I reserve this tool for situations when I suspect modification to a
file which may include hidden data.

370 Chapter 29

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

GeoSpy (geospy.ai)
This one gets creepy. It analyzes an image and tries to identify the location based on the image itself, and not
any metadata. I was skeptical, so I uploaded an image of a random stone bridge posted by someone I know on
Twitter. The result accurately declared "This image depicts a stone bridge over a creek in the Watchung
Reservation in Millburn, New Jersey."
Detecting AI Generated Images
The widespread increase in services offering "AI" generated images is drastically increasing the number of
inauthentic photos and images on the internet. Anytime I run across a questionable image, I complete a reverse
image search to potentially locate other instances or versions of the target file. Another step is to use one of the
metadata or error level analysis tools previously mentioned to reveal indications that the photo is not authentic.
In addition to these steps, there are multiple third party sites which boast the ability to detect artificially generated
content. Sightengine (sightengine.com) and Is It AI (isitai.com/ai-image-detector/) performed well in our

last and only on major investigations as it is time consuming. Visual analysis is simply closely inspecting the
images visually for leads displayed in the depictions themselves. I typically start with any photos shared by my
target in which they may have unintentionally disclosed location or identity information. Selfies and social media
photos tend to be a gold mine. These are often taken at one's home, workplace, or vehicle, potentially narrowing
down my target's residence, employer, and other details which might assist in identifying or locating them. Aside
from potential investigative leads, these images can be a gold mine should the case result in enforcement action.
On a child exploitation case, a series of photos the suspect posted to social media disclosed the presence, make,
and model of several computers which we were able to later seize only because the photos tipped us off that
they existed. When finally serving a search warrant, we were also able to provide a briefing on counter
surveillance and security measures in the suspect's residence prior to sending in tactical teams, which reduced
the risks involved and prevented the target from having the opportunity to destroy evidence.
IntelTechniques Images Tool
I have created an offline and online (https://inteltechniques.com/tools/Images.html) tool which
automates most techniques presented within this chapter. The first search options replicate the reverse-search
techniques explained for Google, Bing, and others. The "Submit All" option on this page executes keyword
searches across all popular networks into separate tabs on your browser.

Images 371

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER THIRTY
VIDEOS

Online videos may now be more common than online photographs. The cameras in smart data phones can act
as video cameras. In some situations, uploading a video to the internet is easier than a photograph. Most social
networks now act as independent video hosts for their platforms. Video sharing sites such as YouTube have
made video publication effortless. For investigations, a video can contain a huge amount of intelligence. When
any abnormal event happens, people flock to their phones and start recording. These videos may capture
criminal acts, embarrassing behavior, or evidence to be used in a civil lawsuit. Obtaining these videos is even
easier than creating them.
YouTube (youtube.com)
The most popular video-sharing site is YouTube. The official YouTube site declares that 500 hours of video are
uploaded every minute, resulting in nearly 80 years of content uploaded every day. It further states that over a
billion videos are viewed each day. These impressive statistics confirm the need to include videos as part of a
complete OSINT analysis. YouTube is easy to search from the main search field on every page. This field can
accept any search term and will identify video content or username. Users that upload videos to YouTube have
their own "channel". Their videos are uploaded to this channel, and locating a user's channel will identify the
videos uploaded by that user.
Many people use YouTube as a social network, leaving comments about videos and participating in discussions
about various topics. If you locate a video of interest, it is important to also retrieve this text information. Each
comment below a video will include the username that created the comment, which will link to that user's profile.
A search for "school bus fight" returned over 500,000 video links on YouTube. Adding a search term such as
the city or school name may help, but it may also prohibit several wanted videos from appearing. The "Filter"
option can be expanded to help limit the search scope. This button is above the first video result. This provides
additional filter options including the ability to sort by the upload date (date range), type (video vs. channel),
duration (short or long), and features (video quality). In the "school bus fight" example, the "uploaded this
week" option was chosen. This resulted in only 700 videos which could easily be examined for any intelligence.
The lower left portion of any video page includes a link to the profile of the user who submitted this video. This
profile page includes all of the videos uploaded by that user and additional profile information. Several YouTube
"hacks" have surfaced over the years. Many of these stopped working as YouTube made changes to the
environment. Of those still functioning, I find the following techniques helpful to my investigations.
Bypass Age and Login Restriction
Several YouTube videos have been tagged as violent, sexual, or otherwise inappropriate for young viewers.
Others demand that you log in to a Google account in order to view the content for unclear reasons. Either
way, this is an unnecessary roadblock to your investigation. As an OSINT investigator, I prefer to not be logged
in to any personal or covert account while I am researching. Any time you are searching through a Google
product while logged in to an account, Google is documenting your every move. This can be unsettling. One
easy technique should remove this restriction. Navigate to the following website and notice the inability to view
the video. If you are not logged in to a Google account with a verified age, you should see a warning about
mature content. This video cannot be played.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SZqNKAd_gTw
We can now append the beginning of this URL with "nsfw", as follows.

372 Chapter 30

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

https://www.nsfwyoutube.com/watch?v=SZqNKAd_gTw
You should be able to play the video through this page. Please be warned that the content in this example
contains very disturbing video, hence the blockage by YouTube. The download techniques explained in Chapter
Ten should also bypass this restriction.
Bypass Commercials with Full Screen
It seems lately that every long YouTube video I play possesses a 30 second commercial at the beginning. This
is very frustrating when analyzing a large number of videos. The same URL trick will bypass this annoyance.
Navigate to the following address and notice the commercial at the beginning.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IEIWdEDFlQY
Alter this address slightly in order to force the video to play in full screen in your browser. This will also bypass
any commercials. The URL should appear like the following.
https://www.youtube.com/embed/IEIWdEDFlQY
Display Thumbnails of Videos
When a user uploads a video, YouTube captures and displays a frame for that media. This is the still frame you
see when searching videos and before a video is played. These possess a static URL, which will be helpful when
we discuss reverse video searching. As an example, navigate to the following address to load a demo video.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1nm1jEJmOTQ
Using that same video ID, navigate to the following address to view the main still frame. This is the image visible
when a video is loaded within YouTube before playing.
https://i.ytimg.com/vi/1nm1jEJmOTQ/hqdefault.jpg
The address that displayed the main image is not your only option. An additional high-resolution image can
usually be extracted from this specific video with the following address.
https://i.ytimg.com/vi/1nm1jEJmOTQ/maxresdefault.jpg
Furthermore, we can extract four unique frames with the following URLs.
https://img.youtube.com/vi/1nm1jEJmOTQ/0.jpg
https://img.youtube.com/vi/1nm1jEJmOTQ/1.jpg
https://img.youtube.com/vi/1nm1jEJmOTQ/2.jpg
https://img.youtube.com/vi/1nm1jEJmOTQ/3.jpg
In a moment, our tools will query all of these images for download and reverse image searching.
Identify and Bypass Country Restriction
Many videos on YouTube are allowed to be viewed in some countries and blocked in others. If you encounter
a video that will not play for you because of a country restriction, you have options. We will use the following
video as a demonstration.
http://youtube.com/watch?v=cgEnBkmcpuQ

Videos 373

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Visiting this URL from a U.S. IP address should present " Video unavailable - The uploader has not made this
video available in your country". Before proceeding, consider identifying from which geographical areas a video
is restricted. After you have identified a video with possible country restrictions, paste the video ID into the
following URL. Our video ID is cgEnBkmcpuQ.
http://polsy.org.uk/stuff/ytrestrict.cgi?ytid=cgEnBkmcpuQ
The result is a page with a world map. Countries in grey are allowed to view the target video while countries in
red are not. Another service which replicates this is WatanNetwork. The following URL displays their map.
https://watannetwork.com/tools/blocked/#url=cgEnBkmcpuQ
While I cannot natively play this video due to my location, I can easily view the default and high resolution still
frames with the technique described in the previous section. The following exact URLs display content otherwise
not viewable.
https://i.ytimg.com/vi/cgEnBkmcpuQ/hqdefault.jpg
https://i.ytimg.com/vi/cgEnBkmcpuQ/maxresdefault.jpg
If a video is blocked from playing in your location, you can usually use a VPN which should allow viewing.
Identify which countries are not blocked using the previous methods and select a server in one of those areas.
The internet is full of "YouTube Proxy" websites which promise to play any blocked video, but I have found
them to be unreliable.
YouTube Metadata
Most of the details of a YouTube video can be seen on the native page where the video is stored. Occasionally,
some of this data may not be visible due to privacy settings or profile personalization. In order to confirm that
you are retrieving all possible information, you should research the data visible from YouTube's servers. The
most comprehensive way to do this is through Google's YouTube API. Any Google account can request a free
API key from Google at developers.google.com. You will need to create a new project and enable a YouTube
API key. For your convenience and the search tools, I have already created the following key.
AIzaSyDNALbuV1FZSRy6JpafwUaV_taSVV12wZw
I suspect this key will be abused and disabled at some point, but I will keep the key used in the tools updated.
Creating your own key prevents outages. We can now use this for the following query based on our target video.
https://www.googleapis.com/youtube/v3/videos?id=cgEnBkmcpuQ&part=snippet,statistics,recordingDetail
s&key=AIzaSyDNALbuV1FZSRy6JpafwUaV_taSVV12wZw
This presents a text-only view of all metadata associated with the target video (cgEnBkmcpuQ). While any
YouTube video page displays estimated dates, like, dislikes, and comment counts, the metadata is more precise.
The following is partial data extracted from our demonstration. I believe every YouTube investigation should
document all metadata.
"publishedAt": "2012-07-24T18:33:57Z",
"channelId": "UCP6YCSvxq2HEX33Sd-iC4zw",
"viewCount": "656405279",
"likeCount": "1421566",
"dislikeCount": "717133",
"favoriteCount": "0", "commentCount": "1173"

374 Chapter 30

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

YouTube Profiles
If you ever locate a video of interest, you should investigate the profile which hosts the content. As stated earlier,
every YouTube video is associated with a profile. Clicking the uploader's name directly below a video should
display this content. However, the profile page displays only a portion of available results. Let's conduct a
demonstration. Assume you have identified a suspect video which is associated with the profile at
https://www.youtube.com/user/SnubsieBoo. Viewing this page tells you that she has approximately 35,000
subscribers and videos. However, we can dig deeper into her account with the following URL.
https://www.youtube.com/feeds/videos.xml?user=SnubsieBoo
This text-only page presented a lot of data, but I am most interested in the following.
<name>Shannon Morse</name>
<yt:channelId>UCNofX8wmSJh7NTklvMqueOA</yt:channelId>
<link="https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCNofX8wmSJh7NTklvMqueOA"/>
<published>2006-08-16T23:23:03+00:00</published>
These details tell us her Channel ID assigned to her username and the exact date and time she created her
YouTube account. All of this should be documented within our investigation. After this content, you can see
the metadata of each video, which includes the following.
<published>2020-11-21T15:00:05+00:00</published>
<updated>2020-11-21T15:00:05+00:00</updated>
<media:starRating count="48" average="4.75" min="1" max="5"/>
<media:statistics views="374"/>
This tells us the exact creation and modification times of each video along with viewer details. Again, this text
can be helpful in our report. If you created your own API key as explained in the previous page, you can query
more details. The following uses my own key and her Channel ID.
https://youtube.googleapis.com/youtube/v3/channels?part=snippet&id=UCNofX8wmSJh7NTklvMqueOA
&key=AIzaSyDNALbuV1FZSRy6JpafwUaV_taSVV12wZw
The results tell us she is in the United States ("country": "US") and has a custom YouTube URL at
https://www.youtube.com/ShannonMorse ("customUrl": "shannonmorse"). Finally, we can retrieve a full-size
image of her profile photo within this code. The following URL appears after "High". This links to a highresolution (800x800) image of her profile picture, which is otherwise only available as a 160x160 icon. All of the
search options on this page are available in the Videos Tool presented later.
yt3.ggpht.com/ytc/AAUvwnix3Pc9x9SX4z85pV6MtKGGTndGxIGqV8_dWJ9bsPw=s800-c
Reverse Image Search
You learned about reverse image searching in the previous chapter. Since YouTube allows us to extract frames
from any video without playing the video itself, we can easily automate reverse image searching of those images.
We already know that the maximum resolution image for our target video is available at
https://i.ytimg.com/vi/cgEnBkmcpuQ/maxresdefault.jpg. Therefore, the following URL would conduct a
reverse image search via Google, which should identify additional copies of this video. The Videos Tool will
replicate this across Bing, Yandex, and TinEye using the methods explained in previous chapters.
https://www.google.com/searchbyimage?image_url=https://i.ytimg.com/vi/cgEnBkmcpuQ/maxresdefault.j
pg&client=app

Videos 375

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

This URL presents 305 results, including links to the target video available within dozens of additional video
platforms. While this works well on YouTube videos, complete reverse video searching across multiple networks
will be explained later in this chapter. The search tools presented at the end automates all of these techniques.
Immediate Download Options
My preferred method for extracting YouTube and other online videos was explained in previous chapters while
discussing YouTube-DL and yt-dlp within a Linux, Mac, or Windows OSINT machine. This will always be
the most stable and reliable option, and you should be proficient with the video download strategies
explained within Chapter Ten. However, if you have no software or browser plugins available to you, there
is another easy option. While you are watching any YouTube video, you can add "deturl.com/" to the address
in order to download the video to your computer. To test this, navigate to the following.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t2mU6USTBRE
Now, add "deturl.com/" to the beginning, as indicated in the following address.
https://deturl.com/www.youtube.com/watch?v=t2mU6USTBRE
You will be presented a new page with many options including the ability to download the video; download only
the audio; convert the video to a different format; and bypass the age restriction as discussed earlier. Additional
options include yout.com and y2mate.com.
YouTube Comments
As a reminder, the Video Download Tool previously presented for Linux, Mac, and Windows possesses
YouTube-Tool, which extracts comments from video pages. I believe this type of documentation should be a
part of every investigation associated with a YouTube video. However, you can also search through all video
comments with an online tool. YouTube Comment Finder (ytcomment.kmcat.uk) allows a query of any term
against all comments posted to a video. This is beneficial when a target video possesses thousands of comments
which cannot be loaded into a single page.
The previous video currently has over 42,000 comments. After populating the YouTube URL into YouTube
Comment Finder, we can search within those comments. Assume I wanted to know if anyone mentioned MTV
within these 42,000 comments. A query for that term immediately displayed the seven results which include
MTV. Furthermore, all results display the name of the poster; the full comment; the number of likes and replies;
a link to the native comment on the YouTube page; and the exact date and time of post, as seen below.
Brian Teel
This video could never be made today. MTV would be boycotted just for playing it.
Show Comment | Likes: 0 | Replies: 0 | 2/20/2022, 17:07:38
This is a great benefit to our investigations. I wanted to reverse-engineer the method for this query in case the
YouTube Comment Finder site ever shut down. It seems they are querying the Google API for the data. The
following is the structure, assuming you are searching through the comments of YouTube ID
"t2mU6USTBRE".
https://www.googleapis.com/youtube/v3/commentThreads?part=id,snippet&videoId=t2mU6USTBRE&p
ageToken=&order=Relevance&maxResults=100&searchTerms=&textFormat=plainText&key=AIzaSyDNA
LbuV1FZSRy6JpafwUaV_taSVV12wZw
The results are not as pretty as displayed through the previous website, but the text-only view from an official
Google source could be desired. The following displays the API view of the same comment.

376 Chapter 30

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

"kind": "youtube#commentThread",
"etag": "qdR5vhARYWedx117YcpTnx9vECY",
"id": "Ugyk7ac2hEf7tOAAnA54AaABAg",
"snippet": {
"videoId": "t2mU6USTBRE",
"topLevelComment": {
"kind": "youtube#comment",
"etag": "Tp1XaLoiR_MaAFs-XL_6I8Y5Ur4",
"id": "Ugyk7ac2hEf7tOAAnA54AaABAg",
"snippet": {
"videoId": "t2mU6USTBRE",
"textDisplay": "This video could never be made today. MTV would be boycotted just for playing it.",
"textOriginal": "This video could never be made today. MTV would be boycotted just for playing it.",
"authorDisplayName": "Brian Teel",
"authorProfileImageUrl":
"https://yt3.ggpht.com/ytc/AMLnZu8KhBLuYE6dKaC2N43QqL2eeLiPb3a36xPkuyk=s48-c-k-c0x00ffffffno-rj",
"authorChannelUrl": "http://www.youtube.com/channel/UCMF3qEhJlHmXYarRyGe5MTQ",
"authorChannelId": {
"value": "UCMF3qEhJlHmXYarRyGe5MTQ" },
"canRate": true,
"viewerRating": "none",
"likeCount": 0,
"publishedAt": "2022-02-21T00:07:38Z",
"updatedAt": "2022-02-21T00:07:38Z"}},
"canReply": true,
"totalReplyCount": 0,
"isPublic": true
YouTube Channel Crawler (channelcrawler.com)
As previously explained, anyone can search YouTube and filter by Channels. This allows you to only see results
which possess one or more videos within a designated Channel. Unfortunately, the results place emphasis on
the most popular channels. Within an investigation, it is much more likely that your target will not have
thousands of views or followers. Instead, a channel with no subscribers is more common. Finding these poorlyvisited channels is quite difficult with official search options.
Instead, we can find these lesser-known collections with YouTube Channel Crawler. Let's conduct an example
demonstration. I queried the term "Guns" within YouTube, clicked the filters option, and chose to only display
Channels. I received numerous results, and every Channel featured over 100,000 subscribers. I would never find
my target there. Now, let's use our crawler. I chose the term of "Guns", no limit to the results, a maximum of
40 subscribers and 40 total views, and did not specify a date range. Figure 30.01 displays partial results. As you
can see, these Channels receive very little attention, but were at the top of my results due to the filters I applied.

Figure 30.01: Channel results on YouTube Channel Crawler.

Videos 377

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

YouTube Unlisted Videos
YouTube videos can be classified as "Public", "Private", or "Unlisted". Public videos appear within YouTube
search results; private videos require an invitation from the host; and unlisted videos sit in between. Unlisted
videos will not appear within search results, but they can be seen by anyone possessing the direct URL. There
are two methods to discover unlisted videos. First, we can conduct a search on Google such as the following.
site:youtube.com "This video is unlisted" intitle:osint
This can be unreliable, as it presents videos which contain "This video is unlisted" within the description
provided by the uploader. I find Unlisted Videos (unlistedvideos.com) to be more reliable. Conduct a keyword
search on this site to identify videos which are unlisted and not present within search results.
YouTube is not the only video sharing service on the internet. Wikipedia identifies dozens of these sites, but
searching each of them can become tedious. These sites are no longer restricted to pages of video files with
standard extensions such as mp4, mpg, and flv. Today, services such as Instagram allow embedded videos which
do not conform to yesterday's video standards. Many new services present the viewer with animated gif files
that only appear as true videos. Fortunately, search engines like Google, Bing, and Yandex offer a search across
all of the types.
Google Videos (google.com/videohp)
A search on YouTube for "school bus fight" returned over 500,000 results. However, Google Videos returned
3 million results. These include the results identified in the previous YouTube search plus any videos from other
sites that meet the search criteria. This will often lead to duplicate videos that have been posted by news websites
and social networks. Google can filter these results by duration time, date and time captured, and video source.
The top menu of any Google video results page will display these options. A Google search for the term "female
street fight", including filters for videos with a short duration that were posted this week from any source,
returned over 900 results. These results could either be further filtered with search terms or quickly viewed by
still frame to determine relativity to the investigation.
Bing Videos (bing.com/videos)
One feature that makes Bing a favorite site for searching videos is the instant video playback option. When
viewing a video search results page, simply hovering the cursor over the video still shot will start the video
playback from the beginning of the video. This eliminates the need to navigate to each video page for playback
to determine the value of the video. Bing also offers filtering by length and source. The "select view" toolbar at
the top of each search result page will allow you to sort the results by either the best match or the most recent.
Whether using Google or Bing to locate videos, I recommend turning off the safe search feature. This feature
is designed to prohibit some videos with adult content from displaying. With investigations, it is often these
types of videos that are wanted.
Yandex Videos (yandex.com/video)
In 2020, Yandex's video search option became a contender for OSINT usage. While Google and Bing are
constantly removing videos, which violate their policies associated with violent and inappropriate content,
Yandex seems to allow anything. Similar to my recommendations for general search and images, Yandex
Videos should always be queried when researching any video file. Direct query URLs for all three services
follows.
https://www.google.com/search?tbm=vid&q=osint
https://www.bing.com/videos/search?q=osint
https://yandex.com/video/search?text=osint

378 Chapter 30

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Social Network Videos
Google, Bing, and Yandex index social networks for video pages, but these search engines can never replicate
internal queries through popular networks such as Twitter, Facebook, Reddit, and others. We should always
consider a keyword search directly within these services. The following assumes "osint" is your search term and
provides a direct URL for each network query.
Twitter: https://x.com/search?q=osint&f=media
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/search/videos/?q=osint
Reddit: https://www.reddit.com/search?q=site:v.redd.it%20AND%20osint&type=media
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/tag/osint
When you locate videos embedded within social networks, use the previous methods to download any evidence.
I always start with the Video Download Tool. If it is a live stream, I use the Video Stream Tool. If neither are
available or functioning, browser extensions may work. If you get desperate, try various free third-party tools
such as Twitter Video Downloader (twittervideodownloader.com), FDown (fdown.net), and Instagram
Downloader (igdown.net).
Deleted Videos
It has become very common for people to remove their YouTube videos. This often happens when unwanted
attention is generated and the user regrets the post. The following technique will not always work, but I have
had many successes within my own investigations. Consider the following video which has been removed from
YouTube.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9ZmsnTDLykk
The Internet Archive has been mirroring YouTube videos for years and often possesses their own independent
copies. We can look for this with the following URL.
https://web.archive.org/web/https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9ZmsnTDLykk
This identifies 276 captures of this video page. However, these are HTML archives, and the video will not play
within any of them. These pages are beneficial for locating comments associated with your target video, but not
for the video content itself. We can use the following URL to play the full resolution version of the archived
video.
https://web.archive.org/web/2oe_/http://wayback-fakeurl.archive.org/yt/9ZmsnTDLykk
We can now right-click on the video to save our own offline copy. You would only need to replace your target
YouTube video ID with the one listed here (9ZmsnTDLykk). Our search tools will replicate this for you at the
end of the chapter.
Reverse Video Searching
There was a brief mention earlier of conducting a reverse image search on the still captures of a YouTube video.
This would use the same techniques as mentioned in Chapter Twenty-Nine for images. While there is no official
reverse video search option, applying the techniques to still captures of videos can provide amazing results. This
method is not limited to YouTube. We can conduct reverse image searches on videos from many sites. As the
popularity of online videos is catching up to images, we must always consider reverse video searches. They will
identify additional websites hosting the target videos of interest. Before explaining the techniques, consider the
reasons that you may want to conduct this type of activity.

Videos 379

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•

•
•

School resource officers and personnel are constantly notified of inappropriate video material being
posted online. Identifying these videos, consisting of fights, malicious plans, and bullying, may be
enough to take care of the situation. However, identifying the numerous copies on other websites will
help understand the magnitude of the situation.
Global security divisions monitoring threats from protest groups will likely encounter videos related to
these activities. However, identifying the numerous copies on various websites will often disclose
commentary, online discussions, and additional threats not seen in the primary source video.
Human trafficking investigators can now reverse search videos posted to escort providers similar to the
now seized site Backpage. The presence of identical videos posted to numerous geographical areas will
highlight the travel and intentions of the pimps that are broadcasting the details.

There are limitless reasons why reverse video searching should be a part of your everyday research. The following
methods will get you started with the most popular video websites. These techniques can be replicated as you
find new services of interest.
YouTube: As explained earlier, YouTube offers four still frames for every video uploaded plus a high-resolution
image. Obtain the URLs outlined during that instruction, and provide each to Google, Bing, Yandex, TinEye,
and Baidu as a reverse image search as previously explained. The Videos Tool presented later will automate this
process.
Vimeo: Vimeo does not natively offer URLs with a video ID that display screen captures of multiple frames.
However, they do provide a single high definition still capture for every video. This is stored in the Application
Programming Interface (API) side of Vimeo, but it is easy to obtain. As an example, consider your target is at
https://vimeo.com/99199734. The unique ID of 99199734 is assigned to that video. You can use that number
to access the video's API view at https://vimeo.com/api/oembed.json?url=https://vimeo.com/99199734.
This address will display a text only page with the following content.
Type: "video",
version: "1.0",
provider_name: "Vimeo",
provider_url: "https://vimeo.com/",
title: "Billy Talent 'Try Honesty'",
author_name: "S M T",
author_url: "https://vimeo.com/user10256640",
is_plus: "0",
html: "<iframe src="https://player.vimeo.com/video/99199734" width="480" height="272"
frameborder="0" title="Billy Talent &#039;Try Honesty&#039;" webkitallowfullscreen mozallowfullscreen
allowfullscreen></iframe>",
width: 480,
height: 272,
duration: 247,
description: "Music Video Directed by Sean Michael Turrell.",
thumbnail_url: "https://i.vimeocdn.com/video/513053154_295x166.jpg",
thumbnail_width: 295,
thumbnail_height: 167,
upload_date: "2014-06-25 21:29:06",
video_id: 99199734,
The portion relevant to this topic is the thumbnail URL. Following that description is an exact address of the
"medium" image used at the beginning of each Vimeo video. Removing the "_295x166.jpg" from the end of the
URL presents a full size option, such as the following.
https://i.vimeocdn.com/video/513053154
380 Chapter 30

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

We will use this static URL within our tools. Also note that this view identifies the exact date and time of upload.
The video page view only identified the date as "1 Year Ago". A reverse image search of the thumbnail URL,
using our video search tools in a moment, will produce additional websites which host the same (or similar)
video.
Others: Repeating this process for every video sharing website can get redundant quickly. Instead, consider the
following. Practically every online video possesses a still image that is displayed to represent the video before
being played in search results. This image is likely a direct link that can be seen in the source code. Searching
"jpg" and "png" may quickly identify the proper URL. Providing this image to various reverse image search
websites will likely display additional copies of the target video within unknown websites.
Internet Archive (archive.org)
The premise of this site is to permanently store open source movies, which can include commercial and amateur
releases. The search option at the beginning of every page allows for a specific section of the site to be searched.
Selecting "community video" will provide the best results for amateur video. A large number of anti-government
and anti-American videos are present and ready for immediate download. Unlike YouTube, this site does not
make it easy to identify the user that uploaded the videos. Furthermore, it does not link to other videos uploaded
by the same user. To do this, you will need to look for some very specific text data. As an example, consider
that Internet Archive user Enver_Awlaki is your target. His video profile is located at
http://www.archive.org/details/Enver_Awlaki. One of his video pages is stored at the address of
https://archive.org/details/Awlaki_to_americans.
Below the video frame in the center of the page are several options on the lower right. These allow you to specify
video files with different file types. Below these options is a link titled "Show All". Clicking the link provides a
view of the files associated with the video as seen in Figure 30.02. The eighth link on this list forwards to the
metadata associated with the video. This data includes the title, description, creator, email address used to upload,
and the date of upload, as seen in the text below the example.

<mediatype>movies</mediatype><collection>opensource_movies</collection>
<title>Awlaki_to_americans</title><description>UmmaNews</description>
<uploader>ibnumar@islamumma.com</uploader>
<addeddate>2012-03-31 22:47:36</addeddate>
<publicdate>2012-04-01 00:09:10</publicdate>
This view quickly identifies the email address of ibnumar@islamumma.com as the verified uploader of the video
content. It also displays the exact date and time of upload and publication. In this example, notice that the author
waited over an hour to publish the content. Since 2016, I have seen the Internet Archive become a very popular
place to store video, especially from international subjects that may be blocked from traditional American
services such as YouTube.

Videos 381

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

TV News Archive (archive.org/details/tv)
At the time of this writing, the TV News Archive, another part of archive.org, had collected 2,094,000 television
news broadcast videos from 2009 to present. Furthermore, it extracts the closed captioning text from each video
and provides a search option for this data. This allows you to search for any words verbally stated during these
broadcasts in order to quickly locate videos of interest. A search of the term "Bazzell" resulted in 35 videos that
mentioned someone with my last name within the broadcast. Selecting any result will play the video and all text
from the closed captioning. The menu on the left will allow filtering by show title, station, date, language, and
topic. I have found this resource valuable when vetting a potential new hire for a company.
Video Closed Captions (downsub.com)
YouTube and other providers attempt to provide captioning subtitles for as many videos as possible. This
automated process transcribes any spoken dialogue within the audio of the video file and documents the words
to text. To see this text while watching a video, click on the closed captioning icon (cc) in the lower right area
of the video box. When the icon changes to a red color, the subtitles will display. These subtitles are contained
within a small text file associated with the video. It also includes timestamps that identify the frame in which
each piece of text is spoken. YouTube does not provide a way to obtain this text file, but Downsub does. Copy
an entire URL of any YouTube video with closed captioning. Paste this link into this website and execute the
process. This will display download links for the captioning inside the video. Links for each language will
download text files with an .srt file extension. These automated captions are not usually completely accurate.
Slang and mumbled speech may not transcribe properly. Any time you collect and submit a YouTube video as
part of a report, I recommend obtaining this caption file as well. Even though the actual text may not be accurate,
it can help during official proceedings with identifying a specific portion of a video.
Live Video Streams
If you are investigating any live event that is currently occurring, live streaming video sites can be a treasure of
useful intelligence. These services offer the ability for a person to turn a cell phone camera into an immediate
video streaming device capable of broadcasting to millions. The common set-up is for a user to download a host
service's application to a smartphone. Launching the application will turn on the video camera of the phone and
the video stream is transmitted to the host via the cellular data connection or Wi-Fi. The host then immediately
broadcasts this live stream on their website for many simultaneous viewers to see. An average delay time of five
seconds is common.
There are now several companies that provide this free service. The following are listed in my order of preference
for investigative needs. Each site has a search option to enter the keywords that describe the live event you want
to watch. You may also see Twitter links to these services while monitoring targets.
YouTube (youtube.com/live)
TikTok (tiktok.com/live)
Twitch (twitch.com)
Bitchute (bitchute.com)
LiveU (liveu.tv/resources/tv)
YouNow (younow.com)
UScreen (uscreen.tv)
Consider the Video Stream Tool presented in Section One when you want to view and capture any live video
streams. It provides the most robust and stable option, especially if you keep your tools updated with the
automated scripts.

382 Chapter 30

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Real World Application: During several large events, I have used live streams to capture the majority of my
intelligence. In one investigation, I was assigned the task of monitoring social networks during a large protest
that had quickly become violent to both officers and civilians. While Twitter and Facebook occasionally offered
interesting information, live streams provided immediate vital details that made a huge impact on the overall
response of law enforcement, fire, and EMS. The live video streams helped me identify new trouble starting up,
victims of violence that needed medical attention, and fires set by arsonists that required an immediate response.
Listen Notes (listennotes.com)
This is not a video utility, but I believe it fits best within this chapter as a media service. Listen Notes queries a
keyword through millions of audio podcasts and presents any results. As an example, I conducted a search of
the term "privacy" and received 10,000 matches of that word within the indexed podcasts. We can take this a
step further with an email address search. I searched "privacypodcast@protonmail.com" and received one result
based on show notes of an old episode. As the number of podcasts continue to grow, and audio to text
technology improves, this technique will become more useful in our investigations.
Video Analysis
If you have discovered a target video on a YouTube or Vimeo page, you may want to analyze individual frames
without using the utilities presented within Chapter Ten. You can use Anilyzer (anilyzer.com) for this task.
Enter the video URL; select the appropriate provider; and click "Watch Video". you can now click through each
still frame or modify the playback speed to fit your needs. I use this tool when I need a quick way to scrutinize
a handful of frames, especially with surveillance videos.
YouTube Handles
In 2022, YouTube began rolling out user-defined handles as a way to connect to your favorite media. This was
already somewhat available within the URL. As an example, the following two links connect to the same content.
The first is a user's page and the second is their handle.
https://www.youtube.com/ambermac
https://www.youtube.com/@ambermac
I currently do not see much investigative value, aside from an additional URL to query when researching
usernames. I believe most people who possess a custom YouTube handle already possess a profile with the
same name.
IntelTechniques Videos Tool
If you feel overwhelmed at this point, I understand. Navigate to the "Videos" page in your Tools download, or
online at https://inteltechniques.com/tools/Videos.html, to access an all-in-one option similar to the
previous tools. This should replicate and simplify the processes which were explained throughout this chapter.
I hope you find it helpful. Please note that some fields only require a YouTube video ID, while others require
search terms or usernames.

Videos 383

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE
BROADCAST STREAMS

Within the previous chapter, I explained the analysis and collection of online videos. While I did briefly mention
live video streams on services such as YouTube, there is a whole other online world of live broadcast streams.
These are typically not pre-recorded, and often are not archived after the broadcast. Before we dive into the
techniques, let's discuss the reason these streams could be important to our investigations. I will break this
chapter up into four topics, each of which are explained below.
Live Television News: Most international television news services broadcast their shows live on the internet.
This can be very valuable when you are investigating a live incident far from your current location. If you are in
California, it may be difficult to watch the local news in Chicago to monitor current events there. Through online
video streams, we can watch live local, state, national, and international news broadcasts from anywhere in the
world. We will also use our own custom tools to easily access the streams important to you.
Live Commercial Radio: Similar to TV broadcasts, most commercial radio stations broadcast over the internet.
This access can be equally valuable when trying to listen to a live news broadcast from another state or country.
Live Web-Controlled Radios: Online radio broadcast streams are great, but they never replicate the true
listening experience one would receive if listening locally through a receiver. There is often a delay; targeted
commercials might play during the middle of a broadcast; and you might receive a different stream of audio
based on your location (for marketing purposes). Sometimes, you might want to listen to a pure audio broadcast
exactly as it would be heard in another state or country through a radio receiver. We will access physical radios,
which are connected to external antennas, from all over the world via the internet. We will even control them,
change the stations, and hear the same audio that we would receive if we were present at that location. This also
applies to shortwave frequencies and pirate radio stations. As one of many examples, we can tune into a radio
present in Ireland, which has an antenna targeting AM reception, and listen to stations live in that region,
including all BBC content, and shortwave pirates broadcasting from the ocean. I believe this is one of the most
fascinating pieces of technology we have today.
Live Web-Controlled Scanners: Similar to the previous topic, we will eavesdrop on local scanner radios which
will allow us to hear emergency radio traffic in real time all over the world. If you are investigating a live event,
there is no better source of news than the police, fire, and EMS working at the scene. If we miss anything, we
can tap into online archives of the transmissions.
Nerd alert! I confess that I tend to geek-out on audio and video broadcasts, especially those in other countries.
This might stem from my early days of local, shortwave, and scanner radio monitoring. 13-year-old me could
have never understood how I could connect to practically any live video or audio stream anywhere in the world
in real time. While you may not have the same fascination as I do for various broadcasts, please approach with
an open mind. These broadcasts can be extremely valuable to your own investigations.

384 Chapter 31

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Live Television News Streams
Only a few years ago, the local news which was served to your television was determined by your location. An
antenna might receive the analog or digital feed from a local news station's building, or cable television might
bring in that same video stream. If you lived in Chicago, you received Chicago news. More recently, satellite
television began offering local news stations, often as an affiliate for ABC, CBS, or NBC, along with national
programming. Some satellite services even offered the ability to purchase channels from other major
metropolitan areas. Today, most local, national, and international news services offer their content via the
internet through their websites. This is nothing new, and I assume most readers already know they can retrieve
this content. However, I believe there is a better way.
When you visit a website to stream local news, you also receive all associated web trackers, advertising scripts,
and forced commercials before and during the broadcast. Some stations will not let you maximize the video
window because they don't want your eyes interrupted from their flashy ads and popup annoyances. My
preference is to identify the video stream and view it through my own web-based tools which bypass most
annoyances. The following tutorial will walk you through a few common scenarios which will help identify the
streams for your own needs. At the end, I present my custom online and offline tools which already have most
of this content embedded into them. You can decide if my tools suffice for your work or if you should create
your own. A lot of the content within this section may seem technically complicated. Please know that all of the
coding is optional, and you can rely on my tools if desired. However, an understanding of the technology and
creation of your own tool now can lead to fewer headaches later. Let's begin.
CBS offers a choice of 24-hour national and local news coverage. A national feed can be found at cbsnews.com.
Clicking the play icon streams their live national feed in your web browser on top of the other elements within
their web page. However, I prefer to access the video feed itself. In Chapter Nine, I explained the use of the
Firefox add-on called Stream Detector. We can also use this to identify these live news streams. Before clicking
the play option, make sure that Stream Detector is installed and active within Firefox. After beginning the live
video stream, you should notice new results within the Stream Detector tool. Figure 31.01 displays my results.

Figure 31.01: A Stream Detector result.
I prefer to read these results from the bottom to the top, and I typically look for the first entry of any "m3u8"
file in the list. In this scenario, the first entry loaded within the page was "master.m3u8". Left-clicking this file
copies it into your computer's clipboard. At the time of this writing, the first "master.m3u8" file possessed the
following complete URL.
https://dai.google.com/linear/hls/event/Sid4xiTQTkCT1SLu6rjUSQ/master.m3u8
This file serves as a "playlist" or set of instructions to play a live video stream. Placing this URL directly in your
browser will likely download the file, but not play the video stream. Instead, we should create our own HTML
file like we did with the rest of our tools within Section One. I titled my file cbs.html and placed it within the
"video" folder in my online and offline tools package. The entire content appears in the following section.

Broadcast Streams 385

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

<head><link href="https://vjs.zencdn.net/7.20.3/video-js.css" rel="stylesheet"
/></head>
<body>
<video
id="CBS"
autoplay="true"
class="video-js"
controls
preload="auto"
width="640"
height="480"
data-setup="{}">
<source
src="https://dai.google.com/linear/hls/event/Sid4xiTQTkCT1SLu6rjUSQ/master.m3u
8" type="application/x-mpegURL" /></video>
<script src="https://vjs.zencdn.net/7.20.3/video.min.js"></script></body>

Now, let's pick apart the important pieces. The line starting with <head> begins our file and incudes a link to
an online repository of our video player (Video JS). This is the code which will play the video stream in a nice
format. Within the <body> section, we can set our desired settings for the video output. This includes a unique
identifier (CBS); the setting to automatically begin the stream (autoplay); and the desired width and height
(640x480). You could modify any of these for your own needs. The <source section includes our URL which

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

<script type="text/javascript">
function dosearch(menu)
{window.open(menu, 'inner');}
</script>
<form onsubmit="dosearch(
">
<select name="menu" id="menu">
<option value="" selected>Select</option>
<option disabled="">US:</option>
<option value="video/ABC.html">ABC National</option>
<option value="video/CBS.html">CBS National</option>
<option value="video/FOX.html">FOX National</option>
<option value="video/NBC.html">NBC National</option>
</select>
<input type="submit" style="width:80px" value="Launch" /></form>
<iframe name="inner" class="inner" width="640px" height="480px"
overflow="hidden" frameborder=0 scrolling="no"></iframe>

In this example, you can see a reference to the CBS.html file which we previously created. It is one option within
the drop-down menu. You could add any files you created which contain a live stream. The "iframe" line tells
the browser to load the chosen file within a frame on the page to keep the menu present. Figure 31.03 displays
the online tool with the CBS option selected. I purposely left the menu visible to see a portion of the options
included within my demo tools.

Now that you
local coverage
streams for Atl
ny others. You
can find each page under the "Local" section at cbsnews.com, or simply copy them from the pages I already
created within the online and offline search tools. This allows you to instantly connect to a live news stream in
every major U.S. city at any time. I have this running daily. As I write this in Los Angeles, I received word of a
series of shootings in Chicago which I wanted to hear more about. I could wait for minimal coverage on CNN,
or I could watch the live Chicago feeds from Fox and CBS to receive better details. There are countless ways in
which this tool could be valuable to investigators.
Many live news streams broadcast on YouTube. Consider Al Jazeera as an example. If you navigate to
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bNyUyrR0PHo, you will be presented their current live stream page.
I can do without all of the Google tracking, user comments, and constant chat flowing down the screen. Instead,
I want to embed this stream into my tools. I created a file called AlJazeera.html which contained the following
entire content.
Broadcast Streams 387

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

<body>
<iframe width="640" height="480" src="https://www.youtubenocookie.com/embed/bNyUyrR0PHo?controls=0&autoplay=1" frameborder="0"
allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media"
allowfullscreen>
</iframe>
</body>

This code sets the size of the video; identifies the stream source; informs the browser to automatically play the
content; and allows the video to be maximized to full screen playback. Notice the portion I bolded
(bNyUyrR0PHo). This matches the YouTube live stream ID from the previous YouTube URL. You can now
replace this single identifier within this code to make a file for any other live YouTube stream. Let's do one more
example. The European live streaming news source from Germany called DW News possesses a YouTube live
stream at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tZT2MCYu6Zw. The following code would embed this stream
into a new file.
<body>
<iframe width="640" height="480" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/
tZT2MCYu6Zw?controls=0&autoplay=1" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer;
autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media" allowfullscreen>
</iframe>
</body>

Live examples of both of these pages can be analyzed at the links below. They are also both included in the Live
Video Streams Tool at https://inteltechniques.com/tools/Video.html.
https://inteltechniques.com/tools/video/AlJazeera.html
https://inteltechniques.com/tools/video/GermanyDW.html
CBS and YouTube might provide all the coverage you need, but those are just the tip of the iceberg. You can
locate practically any online live news stream; identify the stream file with Stream Detector; and create a new
page for your own set of tools. From there, you can rely on the following channel aggregators to find new live
streams of interest.
TubiTV (tubitv.com/live): This service streams hundreds of channels to your browser for free. You can also
use their stream URLs to populate your own tool. As one example, I use their live ABC national stream located
at https://live-news-manifest.tubi.video/live-news-manifest/csm/extlive/tubiprd01,ABC-News.m3u8 within
my tool set. I also collected numerous local news channel URLs from their "Local" page.
Pluto (pluto.tv/en/live-tv): This service also presents hundreds of free live streaming channels including
several national and international news feeds. They tend to block their links when posted within another website.
However, they should work fine within your own offline tools ran from a folder on your computer. Figure 31.04
(left) displays the result when I tried to play a Pluto stream from my website's online tools. Their security settings
prevent this. However, Figure 31.04 (right) shows the result when I launch the same file from my offline tools
on my Desktop via my browser. Always try all options when you encounter issues.
USTV247 (tv247.us): This site might be illegally streaming premium services such as HBO, but they also offer
streams which can be found for free. For example, their PBS stream is currently being broadcasted from the
URL of https://tv247.us/watch/pbs-us-live-stream/. Place this into a new html file relying on the Video JS
code, and you have PBS in your tool set. My example is located within my online search tools at
https://inteltechniques.com/tools/video/PBS.html, however, this page goes down often as USTV247 blocks
my copying of their stream (the irony). If they block cross-site scripting for a channel you would like, placing it
within your offline tools should bypass the restriction.

388 Chapter 31

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

LocalNow (localnow.com/channels): If you are still craving local news options, LocalNow should have you
covered. Use Stream Detector to identify feeds of interest and place them within an HTML file using Video JS
as previously explained.
Roku (therokuchannel.roku.com): This option has limited live content, but it may be useful to you.
The rest is up to you. The tutorials here, along with the files I have already created for you in the offline search
tools, should be all you need to create your own customized tool.

Figure 31.04: A blocked stream (left) which was bypassed in offline tools (right).
Live Commercial Radio
Live radio streams are old news. Most commercial AM and FM stations have a website which will stream their
live broadcasts online. Some even offer second and third alternate streams with different content. If you have a
favorite station, you may already stream a high-quality version of their content while you work. However, there
is much more to discuss.
Similar to my reasons to stream news video within my own tool, I prefer to stream audio feeds outside of the
provider's website. Some radio streaming websites insert additional advertisements before the radio stream,
which are delivered through the website. Some make you sit through a video ad before the stream begins. If we
can identify the desired streams, we can add them to our own tool which can bypass several annoyances. It also
offers us a clean way to select the audio feed without interruptions.
Let's begin with something basic and easy. If you navigate to the BBC World News site at bbc.com/news/world,
you will not find a link to their 24/7 audio stream. However, if you go directly to their "Sounds" site located at
https://www.bbc.co.uk/sounds/play/live:bbc_world_service, their embedded web player will begin playing
their World Service radio stream. Unfortunately, this is an MPD file which will not play by itself within our tools.
A search for "BBC radio streaming URLS" presented me with numerous results which displayed pure streaming
URLs for our needs. I now know that http://stream.live.vc.bbcmedia.co.uk/bbc_world_service is what I want.
I can place this directly into my browser and stream live audio from the BBC. I could bookmark this URL for
future use. If only every service was this easy.
Many live radio streams will be in "m3u8" format. Much like the video streams which use this format, we will
need to play these streams through a third-party player. I currently rely on HLS Player (hlsplayer.org). Let's
conduct another example. Al Jazeera Radio has a direct stream located at the following URL.
https://live-hls-audio-web-aje.getaj.net/VOICE-AJE/index.m3u8

Broadcast Streams 389

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

However, inserting this into your browser simply downloads the m3u8 file. If we add our HLS Player link before
the stream, it will play fine through our browser. The following link loads the Al Jazeera Radio URL into an
embedded player for direct access to the audio stream.
https://www.hlsplayer.org/play?url=https://live-hls-audio-web-aje.getaj.net/VOICE-AJE/index.m3u8
Before we create our custom audio streaming tool to handle all of this, we should first consider sources for the
streaming URLs we will need. Searching for your favorite stations might yield all of the results you need. I prefer
to begin my search at Radio Browser (www.radio-browser.info). This crowd-sourced service attempts to
possess direct audio streams for every radio station in the world. Searching your target streams' call letters, name,
station, number, or location should get you results. My search of BBC immediately identified the URL we used
in the previous example without much effort. This database powers many online streaming applications,
including Radio Garden (radio.garden) and Radio Browser's own map of streams (radio-browser.info/map).
We will use their API in our search tools next.
Hopefully, you now have an idea of the types of radio streams which you might like available to you when
needed. Let's work through the first portion of the Live Audio Streams tool included with your offline search
tools and online at https://inteltechniques.com/tools/Radio.html. The first four forms allow you to query
a commercial radio station by search term, call letters, broadcast state, or broadcast country. These all query the
Radio Browser database via their API and provide results as JSON text in a new tab. Search for the "url" of
each result. Many results can be played directly within the browser. Those with "m3u8" at the end will need the
HLS Player added to the URL as previously explained.
The next section includes a pre-configured "Radio News Stream" option. Selecting one of the streams and
clicking "Play" will load the audio controls within the page and allow immediate streaming of the chosen content.
Let's take a look at the source code for this section below.
<script type="text/javascript">
function dosearch2(menu2)
{window.open(menu2, 'inner');}
</script>
<form onsubmit="dosearch2(this.menu2.value); return false;">
<select name="menu2" style="width:200px">
<option>Radio News Stream</option>
<option value="https://www.hlsplayer.org/play?url=https://live-hls-audio-webaje.getaj.net/VOICE-AJE/index.m3u8">Al Jazeera News</option>
<option value="http://stream.live.vc.bbcmedia.co.uk/bbc_world_service">BBC
News</option>
<option
value="https://www.hlsplayer.org/play?url=https://cbcradiolive.akamaized.net/h
ls/live/2041053/ES_R1SRE/master.m3u8">CBC News</option>
<option
value="https://www.hlsplayer.org/play?url=https://live.amperwave.net/manifest/
audacy-cbsnewsaac-hlsc.m3u8">CBS News</option>
<option value="http://radio.ukr.radio:8000/ur1-lv-mp3">Ukraine News</option>
</select>
<input type="submit" style="width:50px" value="Play" /></form>

The selection in bold is the area which determines which audio feeds will play when selected. Notice that
selections such as the BBC do not need the HLS Player while Al Jazeera does. I included only a few entries here
as a demonstration. You should consider modifying your own offline search tools to include the streams most
valuable to you. I keep my local news stations ready to go. The quality is superior to the AM or FM broadcasts
and I can easily stream from my mobile device if desired. The sky is the limit for your own tools.

390 Chapter 31

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Live Web-Controlled Radios
This may be my favorite portion of this chapter. If you have listened to my podcast or read my magazine, you
know that I am fascinated by analog radio reception. Whether that means pulling in distant AM stations with
my handheld radio or tuning into pirate shortwave broadcasts using an external outdoor antenna, there has
always been something magical about eavesdropping on audio which was not meant to be heard in my location.
While I still break out the portable radio on occasion, I rely most on internet-connected, remote-controlled
radios located all over the world. Let's start with some manual access and control options before we automate
our tasks within our custom tools.
I have mentioned WebSDR (websdr.org) within previous editions of this book. It allows you to connect to
select analog radios via the internet and control the frequencies to which they are tuned. One can then listen to
a radio broadcast exactly as it is heard from a specific location. I still visit WebSDR occasionally, but I now
much prefer KiwiSDR (kiwisdr.com) for this purpose. We will start at their listing of publicly-accessible radios
on their site at kiwisdr.com/public. At the time of this writing, there were 651 radio receivers online from all
over the world.
The KiwiSDR is a software-defined radio (SDR) board that attaches to a BeagleBone miniature computer. It
then connects to an internet connection for broadcast to the world. Most owners attach a high-quality indoor
or outdoor antenna appropriate for their location. Most devices allow up to four simultaneous connections from
the internet, and each visitor can control the tuning of the radio without impact to other listeners. These kind
anonymous internet hosts provide a great service to us listeners.
While I am writing this, I am in Los Angeles. I can listen to practically any southern California radio station
through any cheap receiver. However, assume I am interested in a broadcast from China or London. While
commercial radio stations in those countries likely have an official audio stream, anything outside of the common
AM and FM bands is not otherwise online. I can connect to these international radios; tune to any frequency
between 1 KHz and 30,000 KHz; and hear exactly what I would receive if I were physically present at the radio's
location. I find this astonishing. OK, let's get to the demonstration.
I randomly selected a radio in the UK. The following URL connected me to receiver located in West Wales
which possessed a Wellbrook ALA1530LN active loop antenna. You do not need to connect to this specific
receiver, any other option available should appear exactly the same as my example.
http://sdrwales.hopto.org:8073/
Figure 31.05 displays the default view of most KiwiSDR interfaces. The first thing I like to do is to eliminate the
purple popup "Welcome" menu, as it blocks my view and provides no value to me. Clicking the arrow in the
upper right corner of that menu collapses it to the left side. This shows more of the waterfall display, which
identifies frequencies which have active audio broadcasts. Seeing this overall 1 KHz to 30,000 KHz coverage
immediately tells me how well this radio receives broadcasts within various bands.
Next, I tune to the desired frequency. Since the BBC broadcasts their live news service on the longwave spectrum
at 198 KHz, I entered that within the frequency field (visible in the figure) and struck enter. This presented a
crystal-clear live broadcast of the BBC longwave broadcast. However, many of these receivers default to a "LSB"
or "Lower Side Band" mode. I prefer traditional "AM" mode, so I clicked the "AM" button for better sound.
Next, I do not like the large banner at the top of the page, which is not visible within the figure. Clicking the
grey "up" arrow should dismiss this. If the volume is low, sliding the volume bar up should correct the issue.
None of these actions are difficult, but they can become tedious when tuning to multiple frequencies during a
session. Instead, I rely on keyboard shortcut keys for this. I typically type "xayyyVVVVVzzzzz" any time I
connect to a stream. The following explains these keys.

Broadcast Streams 391

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

x:
a:
yyy:
VVVVV:
zzzzz:

Closes all popup windows
Selects the "AM" mode
Removes all three banners from the top
Amplifies the volume five times
Zooms into the chosen frequency

The result of these actions can be seen in Figure 31.06. This presents a much cleaner view. You can see that I
am tuned to a strong stream, but holding down alt and clicking the right arrow six times would take me to
another longwave UK broadcast at 252 KHz. Clicking around would allow me to listen to longwave, AM, and
shortwave broadcasts. The visible waterfall helps me locate strong streams without manually connecting to each
frequency. Shift-z (uppercase "Z") zooms back out at any time.

Figure 31.05: A default interface to KiwiSDR.

Figure 31.06: A cleaner interface to KiwiSDR.
To make things even easier, we can modify our URL to make all of these actions on our behalf. Using our
original West Wales URL, the following URL connects to our desired radio; tunes to the BBC longwave
frequency; closes all menus; eliminates all three banners; enhances the volume; and zooms into the band.
http://sdrwales.hopto.org:8073/?f=198am&keys=xyyyVVVVVzzzzz
392 Chapter 31

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

You could bookmark this URL and immediately access this station with a minimal view at any time. You could
replicate this and create URLs for numerous stations from unique locations. There are many options here.
Before you commit, consider my online and offline search tools which you previously downloaded. I will use
my Live Audio Streams tool at https://inteltechniques.com/tools/Radio.html as an example, but you could
modify your own offline version if desired, as explained within Chapter Sixteen. While writing this chapter, I
expanded the Remote Radio Access menu and selected a UK radio in Amersham. I then entered my desired
frequency (198 KHz), and clicked "Play". The tool automatically conducted all of my desired tasks, and displayed
the waterfall. You no longer need to remember the keyboard shortcuts or URL modifications. The tool should
take care of everything. You could enter a different frequency or use your mouse to select strong signals. Of
course, you can always replicate this from the main KiwiSDR site. I have simply chosen many international
radios which work well for my needs.
I also find the site at http://rx.linkfanel.net/ to be extremely helpful. It is linked within my tools and titled
"Launch Live Shortwave Receiver Map". Figure 31.07 displays a partial view. This is a map version of all online
KiwiSDR receivers. You can zoom into any location and select the receiver desired. This map also identifies
areas which are currently in darkness, which typically aids in shortwave radio reception. As I write this, it is noon
in California. That is a very bad time to listen to shortwave broadcasts due to sunlight propagation. However, it
is nighttime in Australia, so I might want to connect to radios there if I want to find clear shortwave stations
broadcasting to the entire world.

Figure 31.07: An international map of online KiwiSDR receivers.
I realize this can seem overwhelming at first. There are unlimited listening options which quickly change. Please
allow me to explain how I take advantage of these receivers for fun and as part of my investigations. The fun
part is obvious. I enjoy tracking down international shortwave broadcasts. I have heard many pirate stations on
shortwave being broadcast from ships within international waters. These are often full of music, but I have also
intercepted shows about hacking and disappearing from society. They also allow me to tune into a live KFI AM
640 stream when I am traveling internationally and need some familiar voices. There is something soothing
about a real feed and not a digitally-compressed stream with commercials catered to my location. I want the real
thing.
However, this is a book about online investigations, so I should stick to that. I find these radios to be vital to
that need. I can tune into local radio stations which are broadcasting updates about current events. If I want to
get a local take on the current situation in Ukraine, local stations in that area might give me more insight. A
surprising number of these are in English. If I want to listen to a shortwave broadcast from China about

Broadcast Streams 393

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

international affairs, it is a click away. Some of these receivers are also capable of receiving Citizens' Band (CB)
frequencies. I can listen to individuals using their CB radios in practically any U.S. city from my home.
My main investigative use is HAM radio. These receivers allow access to all low and high amateur radio
frequency bands. This allows me to listen to HAM operators from practically anywhere in the world. While a
lot of this chatter is from hobbyists testing their equipment, I can also receive real-time updates about major
events. If there is a wildfire or missing person rescue in an area, be assured that HAM operators are discussing
updates unavailable to any news outlet. Is there police activity and road closures due to a barricaded subject?
There is likely an amateur radio operator discussing the events in real-time. There is no limit to the power of
this technique. I encourage you to familiarize yourself now, and everything will be easy when needed.
Live Web-Controlled Scanners
The receivers in the previous section cover everything from the bottom of the radio spectrum until 30 MHz
(30,000 KHz). This will include most traditional radio broadcasts within longwave, AM, and shortwave. They
will not receive anything within upper frequencies commonly used for emergency services, aviation, marine, or
VHF amateur radio. For those, you would need a "scanner" type of radio, which typically begins at 25 MHz and
can reach over 1 GHz. While we do not have scanner receivers which allow us to control the tuning, we do have
numerous scanners which are pre-tuned and connected to the internet for our listening.
Broadcastify (broadcastify.com) is our best resource. This site has been a steady part of my arsenal for over a
decade. It allows you to listen to live and archived streams of radio traffic from emergency transmissions.
Broadcastify is the largest platform of live streaming audio from public safety, aircraft, rail, and marine related
communications in the United States. From the "Listen" > "Browse Feeds" menu, you can drill down through
states and counties to select your area of interest. From there, you rely on the willingness of internet strangers
to share their audio feeds to the world. I can be in Los Angeles and listen to a stranger's police scanner
monitoring frequencies in Chicago. I confess that on occasion, I listen to the police department which hired me
in the 90's to hear what my former colleagues are doing. If you are investigating any event in real-time, this can
be a wonderful free service.
I recently heard about an active shooter within a neighborhood where a few friends live. Instead of waiting for
tomorrow's copy of the local newspaper to know what happened, I tuned into the live police frequencies for
that district. I heard all updates in real-time, and could let my friends know. I was recently stuck in traffic due to
a road closure and a lot of police activity. Connecting through my mobile device let me know that a bad accident
had shut down the highway and that a specific alternate route was being planned. This allowed me to jump
ahead of the crowd and be on my way. However, the real power is in the archives.
Every scanner broadcast is recorded at all times. A paid membership provides access to these archives. This has
been a huge benefit to my investigations. I can go back in time to hear the original dispatch and all follow-up
radio transmissions. Even better, I can do this without a subpoena or FOIA request. I have been a scanner
enthusiast for much of my life, but this takes everything to a new level. In the early 90's, I would have never
suspected that I could hear all frequencies at any time and "rewind" communications from anywhere.
A premium membership is $30 annually. This provides commercial-free listening; non-stop streaming; access to
archives; custom listening templates; and programming functions through scanner software. The free tier allows
limited streaming with commercials and manual query of frequencies. I know many people who get by with the
free version. The first time you need access to the archives, the cost of membership will likely be justified. This
service allows journalists to play dispatch recordings without waiting on a public release from a government
agency. The scanner section of my Live Audio Streams tool allows you to select a state or country and
immediately be taken to the Broadcastify page, which allows you to listen to any online streams or archives.

394 Chapter 31

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Scanner to Text (copcrawler.com)
This service takes advantage of the previous police scanner utilities and applies artificial intelligence (AI) speechto-text products to create text files of all transmissions. Due to poor audio quality, the results can vary, but the
following random example matched the audio well.
0.00: This is badge six on scene 310946 with EMS.
8.00: 40 call-in at Boulders of Lake Ridge
16.00: 3324
21.00: Check area in reference to a possible disturbance
This allows you to query text and quickly identify which audio recordings match your term of interest, and allows
you to play the associated audio within the page.
Community Watch Dogs
In recent years there has been a noticeable increase in social justice causes and other community watchdog
groups creating and sharing portals for viewing public video feeds. Locating these feed collections can be a time
saver, especially when working on an event or critical incident in a remote city or region. An example which
offers a dashboard for pulling up department of transportation camera feeds for a handful of major US cities is
https://www.pig.observer/nyc/. This particular dashboard allows us to add and remove camera feeds via an
interactive map of the city. Always keep in mind that these sites often collect IP data from site users and many
of these groups are not friendly to law enforcement and government. I always use VPN and a secure browser
when utilizing these services. Figure 31.08 displays an example.

Figure 31.08: Camera feeds on observer.com.
Live Web Cam Search (www.earthcam.com/search/advanced_search.php)
Online cameras are everywhere. Most are private and cannot be accessed by the public. However, an alarming
number of feeds are available to anyone with an internet connection. This site allows advanced query in order
to locate your desired camera. You can search by location, camera name, or category. This can be very beneficial
for those working within intelligence centers whenever a disaster or other large-scale event has occurred. You
can quickly get a live view of the commotion.
Broadcast Streams 395

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO
DOMAIN NAMES

A specific web page may quickly become the focus of your investigation. Websites, also known as domains, are
the main sites at specific addresses. For example, the website that hosts my blog, www.inteltechniques.com/blog,
is on the domain of inteltechniques.com. The "www" or anything after the ".com" is not part of the domain.
These addresses should always be searched for additional information. If your target has a blog at a custom
domain, such as privacy-training.com, the content of the site should obviously be examined. However, digging
deeper into the domain registration and associated connections can reveal even more information. Every time I
encounter a domain involved in my investigation, I conduct full research on every aspect of the domain,
including historical registration, visual depiction, and hidden content. I rely heavily on the automated tools
presented at the end of the chapter to make the work easy.
Current Domain Registration & Hosting
Every website requires information about the registrant, administrative contact, and technical contact associated
with the domain. These can be three unique individuals or the same person for all. The contact information
includes a full name, business name, physical address, telephone number, and email address. These details are
provided by the registrar of the domain name to the service where the name was purchased. This service then
provides these details to Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN). From there, the
information is publicly available and obtained by hundreds of online resources. While ICANN declares that the
provided information is accurate, this is rarely enforced. While most businesses supply appropriate contacts,
many criminals do not. While we must consider searching this publicly available information, often referred to
as Whois details, we will also need to dig deeper into domain analysis in order to obtain relevant results. First,
we will focus on the easy queries.
Whois queries (pronounced "who is") are very simple searches, but are not all equal. While this data is public, it
could change often. Some Whois search sites display the bare bones details while others provide enhanced
information. There are dozens of options from which to choose, and I will explain those that I have found
useful. After the demonstrations, I present my own custom online tool that automates many processes.
The biggest hurdle with Whois data is privacy controls. Many domain owners have started using private
registration services in order to protect their privacy. These services provide their own data within the Whois
search results, and only these companies know the true registrant. While a court order can usually penetrate this
anonymity, I will discuss public resources to help in these situations later. Some web hosts now provide free
masking services for domain owners, which is making this problem worse. Historical record queries will be vital
if you see this happening. Until then, let's focus on current registration data. For the first example, I will use a
target domain of cnn.com. Assume that this website is the focus of your investigation and you want to retrieve
as much information as possible about the site, the owner, and the provider of the content. For the standard
Whois search, as well as many other options, I prefer ViewDNS.info.
ViewDNS Whois (viewdns.info/whois)
This service provides numerous online searches related to domain and IP address lookups. Their main page
(viewdns.info) provides an all-in-one toolbox, but the above website connects you directly to their Whois search.
Entering cnn.com here presents the following information.
Domain Name: cnn.com
Updated Date: 2020-10-20T13:09:44Z
Creation Date: 1993-09-22T00:00:00.000-04:00
Admin Organization: Turner Broadcasting System, Inc.
396 Chapter 32

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Admin Street: One CNN Center
Admin City: Atlanta
Admin State/Province: GA
Admin Postal Code: 30303
Admin Country: US
Admin Phone: +1.4048275000
Admin Fax: +1.4048271995
The administrative and technical contacts were identical to the registrant shown above. This data identifies the
company which owns the site and associated contact details. We also know it was created in 1993 and the record
was updated in 2020. This is a great start, if the provided details are accurate. I have found that ViewDNS will
occasionally block my connection if I am connected to a VPN. An alternative Whois research tool is who.is.
ViewDNS Reverse IP (viewdns.info/reverseip)
Next, you should translate the domain name into the IP address of the website. ViewDNS will do this, and
display additional domains hosted on the same server. This service identified the IP address of cnn.com to be
151.101.1.67 and stated the web server hosted dozens of additional domains related to this company. These
included weather.cnn.com and cnnbusiness.com. If the results had included domains from websites all over the
world without a common theme, it would have indicated that this was a shared server, which is very common.
ViewDNS Reverse Whois (viewdns.info/reversewhois)
This utility attempts to search the domain in order to locate other domains owned by the same registrant. In our
example, it located 28 additional domains associated with our target. If the domain possessed private registration,
this technique would fail.
ViewDNS Port Scanner (viewdns.info/portscan)
This online port scanner looks for common ports that may be open. An open port indicates that a service is
running on the web server that may allow public connection. A search of cnn.com revealed that ports 21, 80,
and 443 are open to outside connections. Port 80 is for web pages and port 443 is for secure web pages. These
are open on practically every website. However, port 21 is interesting. ViewDNS identifies this as a port used
for FTP servers, as was discussed previously. This indicates that the website hosts an FTP server and connecting
to ftp.cnn.com could reveal interesting information.
ViewDNS IP History (viewdns.info/iphistory)
This tool translates a domain name to IP address and identifies previous IP addresses used by that domain. A
search of cnn.com reveals the following details. The first column is the IP address previously associated with
the domain, the second column identifies the current user and company associated with that IP address, and the
last column displays the date these details were collected by ViewDNS.
IP Address
151.101.65.67
151.101.193.67
151.101.1.67
157.166.255.19
157.166.255.18
157.166.226.25

Location
United States
United States
United States
United States
United States
Atlanta

IP Address Owner
RIPE NCC
RIPE NCC
RIPE NCC
Turner Broadcasting System, Inc.
Turner Broadcasting System, Inc.
Turner Broadcasting System, Inc.

Last seen
2020-11-23
2020-11-23
2020-11-23
2011-04-04
2011-04-04
2011-04-04

Domain Names 397

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

ViewDNS DNS Report (viewdns.info/dnsreport)
This option presents a complete report on the DNS settings for the target domain. This tool is designed to
assist webmasters and system administrators diagnose DNS related issues, but we can use it to peek into their
settings, including DNS and mail server details.
The utilities hosted at ViewDNS are always my first stop for a couple of reasons. First, the site has been very
reliable over the past ten years. More vital, it allows query via static URL. This is beneficial for submission
directly from our tools. The following displays the URL structure for the previous techniques, with cnn.com
as the target.
https://viewdns.info/whois/?domain=cnn.com
https://viewdns.info/reverseip/?host=cnn.com&t=1
https://viewdns.info/reversewhois/?q=cnn.com
https://viewdns.info/portscan/?host=cnn.com
https://viewdns.info/iphistory/?domain=cnn.com
https://viewdns.info/dnsreport/?domain=cnn.com
Historical Domain Registration
As stated previously, many domains now possess private registration. This means that you cannot see the owner
of a domain publicly. Many hosts are now offering private registration as a free service, further complicating
things for investigators. If you query a domain and see a name entry such as "WhoisGuard Protected", you know
that the domain is protected. There are two ways to defeat this. The first requires a court order, which is outside
the scope of this book. The second way to reveal the owner is through historical domain records. If the domain
has been around a while, there is a very good chance that the domain was not always private. There are several
free and paid domain history services, and I present my favorites in order of usefulness.
Whoxy (whoxy.com)
This is one of the very few premium services which offer a decent free tier. Searching my own domain, which
currently possesses private registration, reveals valuable results. The general registration data was "protected"
and confirms what I found on ViewDNS. Scrolling down the page reveals powerful historical records. These
identify my real name, multiple email addresses used during various registrations, and a date next to each entry
to tie it all together. Figure 32.01 displays one of the results. This confirms that during July of 2015, my site was
briefly registered without privacy protection. The "9 Domains" link reveals even more information. Figure 32.02
displays this result which identifies numerous domains which I had previously created from 2007 through 2018.
This resource has single-handedly exposed more private domain registrations than any other free service during
my investigations throughout 2022. Furthermore, it allows submission via URL which will benefit our search
tools, as follows.
https://www.whoxy.com/inteltechniques.com
The search option in the upper right allows us to query email addresses, names, and keywords. This can be
extremely valuable when you do not know which domain names your target has owned. Searching "OSINT"
reveals a surprising amount of people and companies purchasing domains associated with this topic. Whoxy
offers many paid services if the free tier is not sufficient. Of the paid services, this one is the most affordable,
allowing you to purchase small amounts of information without committing to any specific level of subscription.

398 Chapter 32

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Figure 32.01: A Whoxy historical domain registration result.

Whoisology (whoisology.com)
This service appeared in 2014 and becomes more powerful every month. Like Whoxy, it provides historical
domain records as a reverse-domain search utility. The home page of Whoisology presents a single search field
requesting a domain or email address. Entering either of these will display associated websites and the publicly
available Whois data. This is where the publicly available free features end. Any further details require
registration. I encourage all readers to create a free account. Once logged in as a free user, you receive much
more detail within your searches. The first basic feature that you see is the display of standard Whois data which
will identify the registered administrative contact, registrant contact, technical contact, and billing contact. These
will often be the same individual for most personal websites. The advanced feature within this content is the
ability to immediately search for additional domains associated within any field of this data. As an example, a
search for the domain of phonelosers.org reveals the following data.
Name
Email
Street
City
Region
Zip / Post
Phone

Brad Carter (88)
brad@notla.com (7)
PO Box 465 (1,091)
Albany (42,428)
Oregon (492,506)
97321 (3,080)
8144225309 (4)

The name, address, and other data can be found on any Whois search website. However, the numbers in
parentheses identify the number of additional domains that match those criteria. In this example, there are a
total of 88 domains registered to Brad Carter, and seven domains registered to the email address of
brad@notla.com. Clicking on any of these pieces of data will launch a new page with all of the matching domain
information. As an example, clicking on brad@notla.com will display the 7 domain names associated with his
email address. Clicking 8144225309 will display the 4 domain names associated with his telephone number. One
of these is a new domain that is not directly associated with him. However, since it was registered with the same
phone number, there is now a connection.

Domain Names 399

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

This type of cross-reference search has not been found through many other services. Another powerful feature
of Whoisology is the historical archives. This service constantly scans for updates to domain registrations. When
new content is located, it documents the change and allows you to search the previous data. As an example, a
search of computercrimeinfo.com reveals the current administrative contact telephone number to be
6184628253. However, a look at the historical records reveals that on October 16, 2012, the domain contact
number was 6184633505. This can be a great way to identify associated telephone numbers that have since been
removed from the records. Whoisology will also provide details from the search of an email address. In my
experience, Whoisology will provide a more detailed and accurate response than most other resources. However,
this comes at a cost. Whoisology continues to minimize the free options in order to maximize sales. Your usage
may vary by the time you try the free services. A search of the email address brad@notla.com revealed the
following domains associated with that account.
notla.com
phonelosers.com
bigbeefbueno.com
callsofmassconfusion.com
snowplowshow.com
phonelosers.org
If you ever encounter an investigation surrounding a domain or any business that possesses a website, I highly
encourage you to conduct research through Whoxy and Whoisology. They also offer access through their API
at a cost. The individual queries through their website are free. Whoisology restricts free accounts to only one
historical record and three searches every 24 hours. Because of this, Whoxy receives my overall
recommendation. I believe Whoisology offers the most data for those looking to purchase a subscription in
order to query numerous domains, but it can be quite expensive. WhoisXMLAPI (whoisxmlapi.com) offers
limited free trial access to their historical domain data, but it requires access through their API, as previously
explained within Chapter Twelve.
Archive.org Domain Registration Data (web.archive.org)
You now know there are many ways to identify the owner of a domain through historical Whois captures. You
might get lucky through a free preview of previous registration data or be required to purchase access in order
to see all records dating back decades. We have one last free option which has been successful for me throughout
several investigations. We can query the Wayback Machine for the exact historical URL of a domain registration.
If you navigate directly to https://who.is/whois/phonelosers.org, you can see that the domain possesses
WhoisGuard protection and the owner's identity is masked. This is displayed in Figure 32.03 (left). However, it
is possible that the Wayback Machine captured this exact page. The following URL displays any results.
https://web.archive.org/web/http://who.is/whois/phonelosers.org
This URL defaults to a capture from 2017 which displays the owner's name, address, telephone number, and
email. This can be seen in Figure 32.03 (middle). Clicking the earliest archive presents a capture of this data from
2010, as seen in Figure 32.03 (right). We now have accurate historical domain registration data without a
premium membership, and two additional telephone numbers to investigate. This is not the only domain
registration service indexed by archive.org. The following direct links query domain registration history from
Who.is, Domain Tools, Whoxy, and Whoisology. Replace cnn.com with your target domain. The domain tools
presented at the end of this chapter replicate each of these options.
https://web.archive.org/web/http://www.who.is/whois/cnn.com/
https://web.archive.org/web/https://whois.domaintools.com/cnn.com
https://web.archive.org/web/https://www.whoxy.com/cnn.com
https://web.archive.org/web/https://whoisology.com/cnn.com

400 Chapter 32

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Figure 32.03: Results from who.is (left) and the Wayback Machine (middle and right).
Historical Content Archives
I previously mentioned The Internet Archive and explained how it collects copies of websites over time. This is
very useful when we need to see the ways in which a website has changed. This is especially true if our target
domain is no longer online. The direct URL for a domain query at their service is as follows.
http://web.archive.org/web/*/cnn.com
This view presents a graphical way to browse through various archives at a specified domain. However, we can
also conduct a URL-based query which presents all full URLs which have been archived by the service. This
text-only view can be accessed with the following URL structure.
https://web.archive.org/cdx/search/cdx?url=cnn.com/*&output=text&fl=original&collapse=urlkey
The result from this URL is tens of thousands of URLs, many of which no longer exist on the domain, but can
be accessed via The Internet Archive. This text view is easy to copy and paste into a report.
If you queried my website, IntelTechniques.com, you should be notified that my domain is not indexed by their
service. This is because I placed code within my site requesting the pages to be ignored by The Internet Archive's
indexing engine. However, this request is ignored by other providers. Archive.org is not the only service which
provides archived domains.
Archive Today (archive.is / archive.ph / archive.md)
This service also collects copies of websites and ignores all requests for deletion. My own site can be found at
the following URL, which displays 183 captures dating back to 2013.
https://archive.is/*.inteltechniques.com
Mementoweb (mementoweb.org)
This service offers a "Time Travel" option which presents archives of a domain from several third-party
providers. The following URL queries my own domain, which found 5 new archives.
http://timetravel.mementoweb.org/list/19991212110000/http://inteltechniques.com
Library of Congress (www.loc.gov/web-archives)
This option allows you to search by domain to discover all publicly available content in the Library of Congress
Web Archives. A direct URL is as follows.
https://webarchive.loc.gov/all/*/http://inteltechniques.com

Domain Names 401

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Portuguese Web Archive (arquivo.pt)
I was surprised to see my site indexed here with 12 historic archives dating back to 2017. The query URL
structure is similar to https://arquivo.pt/url/search?hitsPerPage=100&q=inteltechniques.com.
Historical Screen Captures
You should document the current visual representation of your target website. This may be a simple screen
capture, but you may have advanced needs. When I am investigating a domain, I have three goals for visual
documentation. I want documentation of the current site, any historical versions archived online, and then future
monitoring for any changes. Previous chapters presented numerous methods for capturing live web pages and
techniques for locating archives. Let's briefly revisit these methods and then apply new resources.
Search Engine Cache
Searching your target domain within Bing and Yandex should present numerous results. The first is almost
always the home page, and clicking the green down arrow presents a cached version of the page with some
providers. This should be conducted first in order to identify any cached copies, as previously explained.
Website Informer (website.informer.com)
I am mostly interested in the screen capture available to the right of a search result. Figure 32.04 (upper left)
displays their capture of my site in May of 2019.
URLScan (urlscan.io)
Similar to the previous option, this service provides very little valuable details. However, the screen captures are
often unique. Figure 32.04 (upper middle) displays a result from August of 2018.
Easy Counter (easycounter.com)
The screen capture presented here was very similar to Website Informer, but it was cropped slightly different.
This appears to be from May of 2019 and is seen in Figure 32.04 (upper right).
Domain Tools (whois.domaintools.com)
These screen captures are in high resolution and current. Figure 32.04 (lower left) displays the result from my
domain captured in August of 2022.
Domains App (dmns.app)
This service offers the highest resolution image, which is very high quality. However, you must know the exact
URL to receive a result. The following URL structure reveals a full-page screen capture of my site from April
2022. Figure 32.04 (lower middle) displays the result.
https://files.dmns.app/screenshots/inteltechniques.com.jpg
Hype Stat (hypestat.com)
Finally, the lowest-quality option we will receive is from Hype Stat. This is typically an older image. Figure 32.04
(lower right) displays their selection for my site from 2020.
The following direct URLs will be used for our search tool, displaying my own site as an example.

402 Chapter 32

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

https://website.informer.com/inteltechniques.com#tab_stats
https://urlscan.io/domain/inteltechniques.com
https://www.easycounter.com/report/inteltechniques.com
https://whois.domaintools.com/inteltechniques.com
https://files.dmns.app/screenshots/inteltechniques.com.jpg
https://hypestat.com/info/inteltechniques.com

Figure 32.04: Historical screenshot captures from six resources.
Follow That Page (followthatpage.com)
Once you locate a website of interest, it can be time consuming to continually visit the site looking for any
changes. With large sites, it is easy to miss the changes due to an enormous amount of content to analyze. This
is when sites like Follow That Page come in handy. Enter the address of the target page of interest, as well as an
email address where you can be reached. This service will monitor the page and send you an email if anything
changes. Anything highlighted is either new or modified content. Anything that has been stricken through
indicates deleted text. Parents are encouraged to set-up and use these services to monitor their child's websites.
It does not work well on some social networks such as Facebook, but can handle a public Twitter page fine.
Visual Ping (visualping.io)
If you found the service provided by Follow That Page helpful, but you are seeking more robust options, you
should consider Visual Ping. This modern Swiss website allows you to select a target domain for monitoring.
Visual Ping will generate a current snapshot of the site and you can choose the level of monitoring. I recommend
hourly monitoring and notification of any "tiny change". It will now check the domain hourly and email you if
anything changes. If you are watching a website that contains advertisements or any dynamic data that changes
often, you can select to avoid that portion of the page. Figure 32.05 displays the monitoring option for
phonelosers.org. In this example, I positioned the selection box around the blog content of the main page. I
also chose the hourly inspection and the "Tiny Change" option. If anything changes within this selected area, I
will receive an email announcing the difference.

Domain Names 403

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Figure 32

:

Email Address Identification
Lately, I am eager to identify any email addresses associated with a specific domain. This can lead to the discovery
of employees and can be used for further breach data queries. We now have three reliable resources which
should be queried any time we are investigating a domain name.
Hunter (hunter.io)
Previously, I explained how Hunter could be used to verify email addresses. This tool can also accept a domain
name as a search term, and provides any email addresses that have been scraped from public web pages. The
free version of this tool will redact a few letters from each address, but the structure should be identifiable. The
Hunter website should take you where you need to be, but I find myself getting caught in Captcha loops and
trial restriction notices. I now submit queries from the following URL structure.
https://hunter.io/try/search/cnn.com
The result is a list of email addresses with minor redactions. It also includes the online source of the information
which was scraped by Hunter. The following is an example.
http://edition.cnn.com/specials/cnn-investigates-team Jun 15, 2022
j**.martin@cnn.com
http://cnnpressroom.blogs.cnn.com/2011/05/17/cnn-launches-international-news-app May 1, 2022
c**re.duffy@cnn.com
Website Informer (website.informer.com)
Once I have exhausted Hunter, I switch to Website Informer. The results are typically fewer, but they are not
redacted. The URL submission I use follows.
https://website.informer.com/cnn.com/emails
SkyMem (skymem.info)
Finally, this service also displays full email addresses which are not redacted. The following URL allows our
search tool to automate the process.
https://www.skymem.info/srch?q=cnn.com

404 Chapter 32

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

As with most OSINT tools, these three services will likely never provide the same results. This is why it is so
important to exhaust all options in order to acquire the most data possible.
Blacklight (themarkup.org/blacklight)
You may want to know about any malicious activity embedded into a target website. Blacklight displays this
data. When querying cnn.com, I am notified of the following invasive activity.
34 Advertisement Trackers
52 Third-Party Cookies
Notifications to Facebook
Interactions with Adobe, Google, and others
Domain Analytics
Domain analytics are commonly installed on websites in order to track usage information. This data often
identifies the city and state from where a visitor is; details about the web browser the person is using; and
keywords that were searched to find the site. Only the owner of the website can view this analytic data. Analytics
search services determine the specific number assigned to the analytics of a website. If the owner of this website
uses analytics to monitor other websites, the analytic number will probably be the same. These services will now
conduct a reverse search of this analytic number to find other websites with the same number. In other words,
it will search a website and find other websites that the same owner may maintain. Additionally, it will try to
identify user specific advertisements stored on one site that are visible on others. It will reverse search this to
identify even more websites that are associated with each other. None of this relies on Whois data. A couple of
examples should simplify the process.
Spy On Web (api.spyonweb.com)
Spy On Web is one of many sites that will search a domain name and identify the web server IP address and
location. It also conducts a Whois query which will give you registration information of a website. More
importantly, it identifies and cross-references website analytic data that it locates on a target domain. A search
for the website phonelosers.org reveals a "Google AdSense" ID of ca-pub-3941709854725695. It further
identifies five domains that are using the same Google AdSense account for online advertising. This identifies
an association between the target website and these new websites. We now know that whoever maintains
phonelosers.org places ads on the page. We also know that those same ads and affiliate number is present on
five domains. This means that our target likely maintains all of the following domains. Recently Spy On Web
has moved to requiring registration and query submission via their API, but they offer a limited free tier.
www.notla.com
www.oldpeoplearefunny.com
www.phonelosers.com

www.phonelosers.org
www.signhacker.com

Hacker Target (hackertarget.com/reverse-analytics-search)
This service stands out due to their immediate availability of historic analytics IDs across multiple subdomains.
Consider a search of cnn.com. Hacker Target displayed dozens of associated Google IDs, such as the following.
cnnworldlive.cnn.com,UA-289507
center.cnn.com,UA-96063853
games.cnn.com,UA-74063330
We could search these IDs through this or other sites to track additional associated domains.

Domain Names 405

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

DNSLytics (dnslytics.com/reverse-analytics)
The final analytics option I offer is DNSLytics. Enter the analytics ID found with any of the previous techniques
and you may find associations not present within other options. The two direct URL options follow.
https://dnslytics.com/reverse-analytics/inteltechniques.com
https://dnslytics.com/reverse-adsense/inteltechniques.com
SSL Certificates
Most target websites will possess an SSL certificate which allows for a secure connection through HTTPS. The
history of these certificates can be quite lucrative. Consider my own domain through a free service called
CRT.sh (crt.sh) through a direct URL of https://crt.sh/?q=inteltechniques.com. Most of the data identifies
various certificate updates which do not provide any valuable information. However, through the history you
can see that I once purchased a group SSL certificate from GoDaddy. Clicking on any of these entries displays
the other domains I secured with this option, including dates of activity, as follows. This identifies other domains
to investigate.
inteltechniques.com
privacy-training.com

yourcomputernerds.com
computercrimeinfo.com

OSINT.sh (osint.sh)
This multiple-use service offers a lot to digest. I find the following direct URLs most beneficial.
https://osint.sh/subdomain: Display all subdomains of a target domain
https://osint.sh/stack: Display all technologies in use by a target domain
https://osint.sh/ssl: Display all SSL certificates associated with a target domain
https://osint.sh/whoishistory: Display historic registrations associated with a target domain
https://osint.sh/analytics: Display all domains associated with a Google Analytics ID
https://osint.sh/adsense: Display all domains associated with a Google AdSense ID
https://osint.sh/domain: Display all domains associated with keywords
https://osint.sh/reversewhois: Display all domains publicly associated with an email address
https://osint.sh/ocr: Extract text found within a document stored at a target domain URL
Website Source Code
Every website possesses valuable information "under the hood" within its source code. We should always search
within this code and understand the various technologies used to create the site. For this, I rely on the following
services.
NerdyData (search.nerdydata.com)
NerdyData is a search engine that indexes the source code of websites. I use this to locate websites which steal
the source code of my search tools and present them as their own. In one example, I searched "function
doSearch01(Search01)", which is the JavaScript I use within the search tools. NerdyData immediately identified
a competitor's website which was selling access to my scripts.
If you have located a Google Analytics ID, AdSense ID, or Amazon ID of a website using the previous methods,
you should consider searching this number through NerdyData. A search of our target's Google AdSense
number revealed five domains that possess the same data. The search of the Amazon number revealed three
domains. If this service presents more results than you can manage, consider using their free file download
option to generate a csv spreadsheet.

406 Chapter 32

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Real World Application: While investigating an "anonymous" website that displayed photo evidence of a
reported felony, I discovered that the registration information was intentionally inaccurate. A search of the
website on these services identified a Google Analytics ID and an additional website that possessed the same
number. That additional website was the personal blog of the suspect. An arrest was made the same day.
Built With (builtwith.com)
A quick analysis of a target website may identify the technologies used to build and maintain it. Many pages that
are built in an environment such as WordPress or Tumblr often contain obvious evidence of these technologies.
If you notice the YouTube logo within an embedded video, you will know that the creator of the site likely has
an account within the video service. However, the presence of various services is not always obvious. Built With
takes the guesswork out of this important discovery. Entering the domain of phonelosers.org into the Built With
search immediately identifies the web server operating system (Linux), email provider (DreamHost), web
framework (PHP, WordPress), WordPress plugins, website analytics, video services, mailing list provider, blog
environment, and website code functions. While much of this is geek speak that may not add value to your
investigation, some of it will assist in additional search options through other networks. Another option for this
type of search is Stats Crop (statscrop.com).
Subdomains
A subdomain is a domain that is a part of another domain. For example, if a domain offered an online store as
part of their website example.com/shop.html, they might use a subdomain of shop.example.com. A subdomain
finder is a tool which performs an advanced scan over the specified domain and tries to find as many subdomains
as possible. This often discloses interesting evidence otherwise not visible within the main page. I rely on several
tools.
PentestTools (https://pentest-tools.com/information-gathering/find-subdomains-of-domain)
This unique tool performs several tasks that will attempt to locate hidden pages on a domain. First it performs
a DNS zone transfer which will often fail. It will then use a list of numerous common subdomain names and
attempt to identify any that are present. If any are located, it will note the IP address assigned to that subdomain
and will scan all 254 IP addresses in that range. In other words, it will attempt to identify new areas of a website
that may not be visible from within the home page. The following example may help to clarify.
The website at phonelosers.org is a blog that appears to have no further content to be analyzed. Searching for
it on Pentest-Tools provides additional intelligence. It identifies the following subdomains present the server.
webmail.phonelosers.org
ssh.phonelosers.org

ftp.phonelosers.org
www.phonelosers.org

mail.phonelosers.org

We now know that this domain possesses a webmail server, SSH connection, FTP server, and mail server. This
method has helped me locate "hidden" pages which contain several forum messages from users of the site.
Columbus Project (columbus.elmasy.com)
This new service emerged in late 2022, and is the fastest of all present options. The web-based search should
suit most users, but they also offer an API via Terminal with the following command, replacing "cnn.com" with
your target domain.
curl -H "Accept: text/plain" "https://columbus.elmasy.com/lookup/cnn.com"
I find myself using the API via terminal when I have numerous domains to query and I want to easily document
the results. I can add " > cnn.com.txt" at the end of the command to output a text file with all found subdomains.

Domain Names 407

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

If these options do not provide the results you need, consider SubDomain Finder (subdomainfinder.c99.nl)
and DNS Dumpster (dnsdumpster.com). These services rely on Host Records from the domain registrar to
display potential subdomains. DNS Dumpster also generates a domain map which may be downloaded as an
image or Excel spreadsheet. While searching a target domain related to a stalking investigation, it displayed a
blog hidden from the main domain. This presented more information than I could easily digest.
Robots.txt
Practically every professional website has a robots.txt file at the "root" of the website. This file is not visible
from any of the web pages at the site. It is present in order to provide instructions to search engines that crawl
the website looking for keywords. These instructions identify files and folders within the website that should
not be indexed by the search engine. Most engines comply with this request, and do not index the areas listed.
Locating this file is relatively easy. The easiest way to view the file is to open it through a web browser. Type the
website of interest, and include "robots.txt" after a forward slash (/). The file for CNN can be found at the
following address, with partial contents underneath.
http://www.cnn.com/robots.txt
Disallow: /cnnbeta
Disallow: /development
Disallow: /partners
The file identifies online folders which include a new beta website, temporary development page, and list of
their partners. Much of this content would not be found in a search engine because of the "Disallow" setting.
These Disallow instructions are telling the search engines to avoid scanning the folders "cnnbeta",
"development", and "partners". It is likely that there is sensitive information in these directories that should not
be available on Google or Bing. You can now type these directories after the domain name of your target to
identify additional information. Based on the robots.txt file in this demonstration, typing the following addresses
directly into a browser may generate interesting results.
https://www.cnn.com/cnnbeta
https://www.cnn.com/development
https://www.cnn.com/partners
Most robots.txt files will not identify a secret area of a website that will display passwords, raunchy photos, or
incriminating evidence. Instead, they usually provide insight into which areas of the site are considered sensitive
by the owner. If you have a target website and have exhausted every other search method, you should also visit
this file. It may direct you toward a new set of queries to find data otherwise ignored by search engines.
If this technique produces no results, you can conduct a Google or Bing query to identify any files. A search of
"site:cnn.com robots ext:txt" on either search engine identifies robots.txt files from the entire website. We can
also query the Wayback Machine to display changes of this file over time at the following URL structure.
https://web.archive.org/web/*/cnn.com/robots.txt
Search Engine Marketing Tools
The ultimate goal of most commercial websites is to generate income. These sites exist to bring in new
customers, sell products, and provide the public face to a company. This has created a huge community of
services that aim to help companies reach customers. Search Engine Optimization (SEO) applies various
techniques affecting the visibility of a website or a web page in a search engine's results. In general, the higher
ranked on the search results page and more frequently a site appears in the search results list, the more visitors
it will receive. Search Engine Marketing (SEM) websites provide details valuable to those responsible for

408 Chapter 32

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

optimizing their own websites. SEM services usually provide the overall ranking of a website; its keywords that
are often searched; backlinks; and referrals from other websites. SEO specialists use this data to determine
potential advertisement relationships and to study their competition. Online investigators can use this to collect
important details that are never visible on the target websites. Three individual services will provide easily
digestible data on any domain. I will use my own domain for each example in order to compare the data. Only
the free versions will be discussed.
Similar Web (similarweb.com)
Similar Web is usually the most comprehensive of the free options. However, some of these details usually
contradict other services. Much of this data is "guessed" based on many factors. A search of inteltechniques.com
produced the following partial information about the domain.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

The majority of the traffic is from the USA, followed by UK, DE, FR.
There is no paid search or advertisements on search engines.
There are 56 websites that possess links to the target, and 15 are visible.
"Buscador" led more people to the site than any other search term followed by OSINT.
Over 50,000 people visit the site monthly.
There are five main online competitors to the target, and the largest is onstrat.com.
71% of the visitors navigated directly to the domain without a search engine.
12% of the traffic was referrals from other websites and search engines.
The referrals included my other website (computercrimeinfo.com).
3% of the traffic to this site originated from social networks Facebook and Twitter.
Similar websites include onstrat.com and automatingosint.com.

Spyfu (spyfu.com)
This service replaced Alexa and Moon Search for me after those services were shut down. It provides site
rankings, competitors, common keywords, Google advertisement data, and backlinks. The data will probably be
redundant at this point, but the service should be queried. An additional website which provides a similar service
to Spyfu is Majestic (majestic.com).
Shared Count (sharedcount.com)
This website provides one simple yet unique service. It searches your target domain and identifies its popularity
on social networks such as Facebook and Twitter. A search of labnol.org produced the following results. This
information would lead me to focus on Pinterest and Facebook first. It tells me that several people are talking
about the website on these services.
Facebook Likes: 348
Facebook Shares: 538
Facebook Comments: 148

Facebook Total: 1034
Twitter Tweets: 0
Pinterest Pinned: 1

Reddit Domains (reddit.com)
Reddit was discussed previously as a very popular online community. The primary purpose of the service is to
share links to online websites, photos, videos, and comments of interest. If your target website has ever been
posted on Reddit, you can retrieve a listing of the incidents. This is done through a specific address typed directly
into your browser. If your target website was phonelosers.org, you would navigate to the exact URL of
reddit.com/domain/phonelosers.org. This example produced 16 Reddit posts mentioning this domain. These
could be analyzed to document the discussions and usernames related to these posts.

Domain Names 409

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Small SEO Tools: Backlinks (smallseotools.com/backlink-checker)
After you have determined the popularity of a website on social networks, you may want to identify any websites
that have a link to your target domain. This will often identify associates and people with similar interests of the
subject of your investigation. There are several online services that offer a check of any "backlinks" to a specific
website. Lately, I have had the best success with the backlink checker at Small SEO Tools. A search of my own
website, inteltechniques.com, produces 264 websites that have a link to mine. These results include pages within
my own websites that have a link to inteltechniques.com, so this number can be somewhat misleading. Several
of the results disclosed websites owned by friends and colleagues that would be of interest if I were your target.
Host.io Backlinks (host.io)
In 2021, I discovered this service which seems to offer many additional backlinks which were not present within
the previous option. The following direct URL displays 45 domains which are linking to my website.
https://host.io/backlinks/inteltechniques.com
Host.io Redirects (host.io)
This option displays any URLs which are forwarding their traffic to your target site. The following direct URL
displays my own results. You can quickly identify three domains which I own that are forwarding visitors to my
main site. Searching for historic records of these domains should reveal outdated websites and details.
https://host.io/redirects/inteltechniques.com
A summary of all details about a domain stored with Host.io can be found via the following direct URL.
https://host.io/inteltechniques.com
Small SEO Tools: Plagiarism Checker (smallseotools.com/plagiarism-checker)
If you have identified a web page of interest, you should make sure the content is original. On more than one
occasion, I have been contacted by an investigator that had been notified of a violent threat on a person's blog.
I was asked to track down the subject before something bad happened. A quick search of the content identified
it as lyrics to a song. One of many options for this type of query is the plagiarism checker at Small SEO Tools.
You can use this tool by copying any questionable text from a website and paste it into this free tool. It will
analyze the text and display other websites that possess the same words. This service uses Google to identify
anything of interest. The benefit of using this tool instead of Google directly is that it will structure several
queries based on the supplied content and return variations of the found text. Clicking the results will open the
Google search page that found the text. Another option for this type of search is Copy Scape (copyscape.com).
Octopus (octopus.do)
There are times when a visual representation of a site can be helpful in quickly identifying pages or sections
worthy of deeper investigation. Octopus generates a very simple and easy to navigate diagram of the site pages
with the benefit of labels and small text based descriptions. There are additional settings which allow you to
customize how the data is displayed on the page. These diagrams can also be nice additions to our reports.
XML Sitemaps (xml-sitemaps.com)
This service "crawls" a domain and creates an XML text file of all public pages. Scanning my own site and blog
displayed direct URLs of 493 unique pages. Exporting the XML file provided documentation of the process.

410 Chapter 32

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

This is a great companion to visual site mappers, as the text can be easily imported into reporting systems. This
often presents previously unknown content.
Threat Data
This represents a new category for this chapter and I am quite embarrassed it took me so long to realize the
value of the content. I use the term "Threat Data" to encompass the top four websites which monitor for
malicious content. For a network security analyst, this data might identify potentially malicious sites which
should be blacklisted within internal networks. For us OSINT researchers, the data represented here can provide
a unique glimpse into our target domain. Instead of explaining every facet of these services, I will only focus on
the new evidence received after a query of various domains. All of these services are available in your search
tools.
VirusTotal (virustotal.com)
This option displays the most useful information in regard to OSINT, and this is likely the most popular threat
data service of the four. Much of the details presented here are redundant to the previous options, so let's focus
only on the unique data. The "Details" menu provides the most public data. The Whois and DNS records should
be similar to other sites. The "Categories" area provides the general topics of the target site. For mine, it displays
"Information Technology". This can be useful to know a small detail about sites which have disappeared. The
"HTTPS Certificate" section can become interesting very quickly. The "Subject Alternative Name" portion of
this section identifies additional domains and subdomains associated with the SSL certificate of your target site.
When I search cnn.com, I receive dozens of additional URLs which could prove to be valuable. Below is a
partial view.
dev.client.appletv.cnn.com,dev.cnnmoney.ch,dev.content.cnnmoney.ch,dev.hypatia.api.cnn.io
I now know that cnn.io is directly associated with the target, which should then be investigated. The "Relations"
tab identifies many new subdomains such as customad.cnn.com, go.cnn.com, and store.cnn.com. The "Files"
section displays unique content from practically any other resource. It identifies files downloaded from the target
site for analysis and files which have a reference to the target site.
Let's analyze my own site as an example. Figure 32.06 displays two files which are present on my site. Both of
these files have been analyzed by VirusTotal from either user submission or automated scanning. The first
column displays the date of the scan and the second column identifies whether any virus databases detected the
files as malicious (none out of 60 tested positive for a virus). The final two columns identify the file type and
name. If I were to remove these files today, this evidence would stick around.
Figure 32.07 displays the result in the "Files Referring" section. These are files and programs, which are not
present on my site, that refer to my domain. All of these display positive results for being malicious. These are
basically files stored on other websites which mention my domain. If you were investigating me, you should try
to find these files for further analysis. The fourth file is a virus disguised as a digital copy of this book, attempting
to fool would-be downloaders. If your target is mentioned within off-site files, you can learn a lot from analysis.
Always use a virtual machine without network access if you plan to download or open anything found here.

Figure 32.06: A VirusTotal result identifying files from a domain.

Domain Names 411

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Figure 32.07: A VirusTotal result identifying files referring to a domain.
Finally, the "Community" tab can be a treasure of details if anything exists about your target domain. This is
where members of the VirusTotal community can leave comments or experiences in reference to the target site.
While there are no comments currently on my profile, I have seen helpful details on target "hacking" related
sites. These included owner details and new domains created for illegal phishing purposes. Most sites will not
have any comments, but this option should be checked while browsing through the other sections.
Threat Intelligence (threatintelligenceplatform.com)
This service replicates many of the features already presented. However, I usually look to three specific sections
in the domain report. The "Connected Domains" area identifies any external domains which are linked from
your source. This can often display hidden links to third-party services otherwise unknown from previous
queries. On my domain, you see a link to the icon service I use because I gave attribution within the footer of
my page. In previous investigations, I have found additional domains owned by the suspect. From there, I focus
on the "Potentially dangerous content" and "Malware detection" sections. Both of these offer a historical view
into any malicious content hosted on the target domain. This can include suspicious files or phishing campaigns.
While recently investigating a domain which currently possessed no content, this service confirmed the presence
of a phishing page designed to steal credentials.
Threat Crowd (ci-www.threatcrowd.org)
This service provides a unique view of the domains associated with your target. It can display server IPs, primary
domains, and additional domains which were once associated with the target.
Censys (censys.io)
Censys provides a detailed summary of the basics, which is quite redundant at this point. However, there are
three key pieces of information I access here on most domains. I previously mentioned the importance of
checking the Subject Alternative Names of a domain's SSL certificate. Most services conduct scans of the entire
internet in order to retrieve this data. The moment a certificate is issued, it is provided in real-time to Censys.
Censys thus does not need to rely on internet scans to discover certificates, and more importantly Subject
Alternative Names. Therefore, I always click the "Details" button on the summary page and look for any
interesting data by searching "alt_name" within the results. Next, I have relied on the HTTP Body text
information stored within the "Details" page of the HTTP and HTTPS sections. This is basically the HTML
code which makes the web page display properly within a browser. It is the same data you would see by viewing
the source code of a target page. If the target website should disappear, this entire section of code could be
copied; pasted into a text file; saved with an html extension; and opened within a browser to reveal the overall
look and structure. I prefer to capture this data in the event of a modified or removed target web page. Finally,
I believe Censys has the overall best data about the security certificates associated with a domain. It provides
hyperlinks to every certificate within the chain and extreme details about each. Much of this data is not valuable
to an OSINT report, but I prefer to collect a screen capture for potential later analysis or comparison to live
data. Overall, threat data is often considered minor bits of information designated only for the digital security

412 Chapter 32

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

community. OSINT practitioners should also be aware of the content available within these sites. While the
majority of details are not immediately useful, small nuggets of valuable information which cannot be found
anywhere else awaits you.
WordPress Data
Many websites displayed at domains are WordPress blogs. These can be customized in any way to have the
appearance of a traditional website. You may want to identify any vulnerabilities which exist within the
WordPress installation which may disclose interesting details about the site. The following providers display the
basics without the need to install any software. Please note the terms of service when you use these options. A
search of my own domain revealed the version of WordPress; blog IP address; hosting provider; title of the
blog; any blacklist entries; installed plugins; custom themes; login usernames; linked websites; and overall security
of the site.
https://sitecheck.sucuri.net/
https://hackertarget.com/wordpress-security-scan/
Domain Reputation
In the chapter about email addresses, I explained the importance of investigating an address's reputation for
sending spam or delivering malicious content. We can do the same for domains with the following URLs.
https://www.spam.org/search?type=domain&convert_block=1&group_ips=1&data=inteltechniques.com
https://www.mywot.com/en/scorecard/inteltechniques.com
Threat Analysis (dracoeye.com)
This service conducts a passive security audit for any domain. This can display spam reports, malware flags,
virus possibilities, server details, blacklists, and many other details. Queries can be submitted via URL as follows.
https://dracoeye.com/search/inteltechniques.com
Data Breaches and Leaks
Similar to email addresses and usernames, domains can possess valuable breach data. You should already be
familiar with breach data providers, so I will focus only on methodology here.
Dehashed (dehashed.com)
This service and search options function identical to the email queries. Provide the domain, and the results
display the breaches which possess at least one email address matching the provided data. The URL query
structure is https://dehashed.com/search?query="inteltechniques.com". Dehashed now requires that we create
a free account prior to receiving results on queries through their site, but they do accept addresses from most
masking services during registration.
IntelX (intelx.io)
This service presents partial Pastebin files which include your target domain. A direct query URL is
https://intelx.io/?s=inteltechniques.com. A free trial is required to see all results.
Leakpeek (leakpeek.com)
This service requires a free account to search domains, and a direct URL is not available.

Domain Names 413

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Shortened URLs
Social networking sites, such as Twitter, have made the popularity of shortened URL services soar. When people
post a link to something they want their friends to see, they do not want the link to take up unnecessary space.
These services create a new URL, and simply point anyone to the original source when clicked. As an example,
I converted a URL to a blog post from "https://inteltechniques.com/blog/2019/08/03/book-release-extremeprivacy/" to "https://bit.ly/32Up8h7".
You have likely seen these during your own investigations, and many people pay them little attention. There is
actually a lot of information behind the scenes of these links that can reveal valuable information associated with
your investigation. For a demonstration, I created the following shortened links, all of which forward to my
home page. After, I will explain how to access the hidden data behind each service.
bitly.com/29A4U1U
http://tiny.cc/v973ez
goo.gl/Ew9rlh
https://www.naturl.link/6VPA30
Bitly allows access to metadata by including a "+" after the URL. In our scenario, the direct URL would be
bitly.com/29A4U1U+. In this example, the results only identified that 21 people have clicked on my link.
However, creating a free account reveals much more detail. After logging in, I can see any websites that referred
the user to the link and extremely generic location data, such as the country of the user. This is a good start.
Tiny.cc adds a "~" to the end of a link to display metadata. In our example, the direct URL would be
tiny.cc/v973ez~. The results on this page identify the number of times the URL was clicked, the number of
unique visits, the operating systems of those that clicked the link, and the browsers used. This service also
displays generic location data, such as the country of the user. Tiny.cc blocklists certain domains (including mine
now), so your results may vary depending on your target.
Google gives us the same detail as above. However, Google has announced that they will be ending their
shortener services in August of 2025, so this is another Google feature which soon be deprecated. Naturl Link
is a good option if you are looking for a simple shortener which requires no account creation or other hoops to
jump through. It is a lesser known shortener service, but could not be easier to use. If you are investigating a
shortened URL link that was not mentioned, consider using the catch-all online service located at
CheckShortURL (checkshorturl.com).
UNFURL (dfir.blog/unfurl/)
This service appeared in late 2022, and I find it very valuable. You can enter any full internet address to gather
behind-the-scenes details by expanding the data associated within the URL. This could be to identify details
behind a Twitter post, Instagram photo, or shortened URL. As one of many examples, I often find Twitter links
posted in various places. Clicking these will forward me to the intended URL target, but I want more details. I
also find this very beneficial for the investigation of magnet Torrent links. Any time I find a Torrent link, I copy
and paste the entire URL into this tool. It typically displays the web seed, address tracker, source, file details,
and domains. I encourage you to submit any URLs or domains of interest to this tool. You will soon discover
the possibilities as related to your types of investigations.
Cloudflare
While identifying web hosts and IP addresses behind your target domain, you are likely to encounter sites hiding
behind Cloudflare. This company provides security for websites which often prevents online attacks and
outages. They also help keep web host and owner details hidden when investigating criminal websites. There is

414 Chapter 32

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

no magic solution to uncover the owner of a website behind Cloudflare's protection, but we do have a few
investigative options, as follows.
Historical: Use the previous methods to search historical domain registration records. While Whois sites may
show Cloudflare today, historical registration records may show the actual web host used prior to Cloudflare.
The result may or may not be the current host.
Censys (censys.io): Most websites possess Secure Socket Layer (SSL) certificates. Searching a domain name
through the Censys "Certificates" search may identify historical SSL ownership records. The direct URL of
"https://censys.io/certificates?q=inteltechniques.com" displays my own domain. The results identify my SSL
host authority as Sectigo in 2020, Comodo (Namecheap) in 2018, and GoDaddy in 2016. You now know my
domain host history. This area of Censys can be beneficial to any domain regardless of Cloudflare protection,
which is a feature often overlooked. We can also query a specific SSL certificate to potentially see other
associated domains. The previous search identified "7583b0cb25632de96575dd0f00ff99fed81b9069" as the SSL
certificate which I possessed in 2016. Searching this within Censys under the "Certificate" menu provides the
domains of computercrimeinfo.com, inteltechniques.com, privacy-training.com. We now have other domains
to investigate. Some of them may reveal the current domain registration provider and web host.
Third-Party Tracking: Some websites will hide their domain registration and host behind various protection
services, but continue to use analytics, tracking, and Google services. Consider the previous methods of
searching Analytics, and any other unique identifiers across other sites owned by the same target.
Advanced DNS
I mentioned Domains App (dmns.app) previously as a way to query stored historical screen captures. We can
also use this resource to see much more DNS details than the services explained at the beginning of this chapter.
This can often include an email address within the DMARC data which is not visible elsewhere. Consider an
example for michaelbazzell.com. We can query with the following direct URL.
https://dmns.app/domains/michaelbazzell.com/dns-records
The results identify the usual DNS suspects, including my web host and server IP address. However, there is
new data in the last sections.
"protonmail-verification=f84a8f78b21c92a4493fe5d9d5cb1150385846e9"
"v=spf1 include:_spf.protonmail.ch mx ~all"
"v=DMARC1; p=none; rua=mailto:donotspamme@michaelbazzell.com"
We now know that all email for that domain is handled within a Proton Mail account. We also see a new email
address in the final DMARC section. For many domains which apply this extra level of email security and
verification, you will find a legitimate email address which may have escaped your other analysis. As I write this,
I learned of a personal email address included within results for a domain which is part of a current investigation.
I have included this option within the search tool explained next.
IntelTechniques Domain Tool
Similar to the previous custom search tools mentioned here, I have created a page for easier domain searching.
While it does not possess every service discussed in this chapter, it can automate queries across the most
beneficial options. Each box allows entry of a target domain name. The "Submit All" option will open several
tabs within your browser that present each query listed on the page. The final section provides easy access to
shortened URL metadata. The online version at https://inteltechniques.com/tools/Domain.html is
updated often.

Domain Names 415

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE
IP ADDRESSES

IP addresses are often obtained from an internet investigation, email message, or connection over the internet.
When legal process is served to online content providers, a list of IP addresses used to log in to the account is
usually presented as part of the return of information. Serving legal orders to identify and obtain IP addresses is
outside the scope of this book. However, several techniques for collecting a target's IP address using OSINT
are explained in this chapter. The previous instruction assumed that you were researching a domain name. These
names, associated with websites, simply forward you to a numerical address that actually hosts the content. This
is referred to as an Internet Protocol (IP) address.
The way that you encounter IP addresses as a target of your research will vary widely. Law enforcement may
receive an IP address of an offender after submitting a subpoena to an internet provider. Any online researcher
may locate an IP address while researching a domain with the previous methods. While only one website can be
on a domain, multiple domains can be hosted on one IP address. The following resources represent only a
fraction of available utilities. Note that many of the domain name resources mentioned in the previous chapters
also allow for query by an IP address. Let's begin with the basic resources at ViewDNS.
ViewDNS Reverse IP (viewdns.info/reverseip)
This page was previously used to translate a domain name into an IP address. It will also display additional
domains hosted on an individual IP address. This service identified 134 domains hosted on 104.28.10.123. These
included domains from websites all over the world without a common theme. This indicates that he uses a
shared server, which is very common. If I would have seen only a few domains on the server, that may indicate
that he is also associated with those specific domains.
ViewDNS IP Location (viewdns.info/iplocation)
This utility cross-references an IP address with publicly available location data connected to the server hosting
any domains associated with the IP address. A search of 54.208.51.71 revealed the following information.
City:
Ashburn
Zip Code:
20147
Region Name: Virginia
Country Code: US
Country Name: United States
ViewDNS Port Scan (viewdns.info/portscan)
This online port scanner looks for common ports that may be open. An open port indicates that a service is
running on the web server that may allow public connection. A search of 54.208.51.71 revealed that ports 21,
53, 80, and 443 are open to outside connections. Port 21 is for FTP connections, 53 is for DNS settings, 80 is
for web pages, and port 443 is for secure web pages.
ViewDNS IP Whois (viewdns.info/whois)
This service was used earlier to display registration information about an individual domain. Entering an IP
address will attempt to identify details about any domain registrations associated with the address. A search of
54.208.51.71 revealed it to belong to Amazon and provided the public registration details.

416 Chapter 33

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

ViewDNS IP Traceroute (viewdns.info/traceroute)
This tool identifies the path that ViewDNS took from their servers to the target IP address. This can identify IP
addresses of servers that were contacted while you tried to establish communication with the address. These will
occasionally identify associated networks, routers, and servers. Additional IP addresses can be searched for
further details. The numbers after the IP addresses indicate the number of milliseconds that each "hop" took.
ViewDNS Reverse DNS (viewdns.info/reversedns)
This simply finds the reverse DNS entry for a given IP, which is usually the host name.
Similar to the Domain chapter, ViewDNS allows queries of IP addresses via URL, as follows.
https://viewdns.info/reverseip/?host=70.39.110.82&t=1
https://viewdns.info/iplocation/?ip=70.39.110.82
https://viewdns.info/portscan/?host=70.39.110.82
https://viewdns.info/whois/?domain=70.39.110.82
https://viewdns.info/traceroute/?domain=70.39.110.82
https://viewdns.info/reversedns/?ip=70.39.110.82
Bing IP (bing.com)
Once you have identified an IP address of your target, you can search for websites hosted on that IP address. A
specific search on Bing will present any other websites on that server. If your target is stored with a large host,
such as GoDaddy, there will not be much intelligence provided. It will only list websites that share a server, but
are not necessarily associated with each other. If the user is hosting the website on an individual web server, this
search will display all other websites that the user hosts. This search only works on Bing and must have "ip:"
before the IP address. An example of a proper search on Bing would look like ip:54.208.51.71. The results of
this search identify every website hosted by a specific local website design company. The direct URL follows.
https://www.bing.com/search?q=ip%3A54.208.51.71
IPLocation (iplocation.net)
IPLocation offers unlimited free IP address searches, and queries five unique services within the same search
results. The results are the most comprehensive I have seen for a free website. While GPS coordinates of an IP
address are available, this most often returns to the provider of the internet service. This usually does not identify
the exact location where the IP address is being used. The country, region, and city information should be
accurate. If an organization name is presented in the results, this indicates that the address returns to the
identified company. The exception here is when an internet service provider is identified. This only indicates
that the IP address belongs to the specified provider. Most results translate an IP address into information
including business name, general location, and internet service provider. This can be used to determine if the IP
address that a target is using belongs to a business providing free wireless internet. If you see "Starbucks",
"Barnes & Noble", or other popular internet cafés listed in the results, this can be important intelligence about
the target. This can also confirm if an IP address is associated with a VPN service. The direct URL query follows.
https://www.iplocation.net/ip-lookup?query=70.39.110.83&submit=IP+Lookup
That's Them (thatsthem.com/reverse-ip-lookup)
The previous resources rely on conventional IP address data, which is sourced from various registration
documentation and scanning of servers. Very little information is sensitive or personal in nature. That's Them
enters into an environment that is a lot more invasive. This service, mentioned previously during person, email,

IP Addresses 417

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

and telephone search, collects marketing data from many sources to populate its database. This often includes
IP address information. These details could have been obtained during an online purchase or website
registration. Regardless of the source, the results can be quite beneficial. At the time of this writing, I searched
an IP address associated with a business email that I received. The result identified a person's name, home
address, company, email address, and age range. All appeared accurate. This tool will work best when searching
static business IP addresses, and not traditional home IP addresses that can change often. While I get no results
much more often than positive results, this resource should be in everyone's arsenal. The direct URL follows.
https://thatsthem.com/ip/70.39.110.82
I Know What You Download (iknowwhatyoudownload.com)
While discussing invasive websites, this resource might be the most personal of all. This service monitors online
torrents (ways to download large files which often violate copyright laws) and discloses the files associated with
any collected IP addresses. I searched the previous IP address collected from an associate, and received an
immediate hit. Figure 33.01 displays the result. It identifies that the target IP address was downloading two
specific movies on December 28, 2017 at 9:53 pm. Clicking on the movie title presents every IP address captured
that also downloaded the same file. Again, this will work best with IP addresses that rarely change, such as a
business, organization, or public Wi-Fi network. I have used this to determine the files being downloaded from
the network with which I was currently connected. On one occasion, this revealed an employee that was
downloading enormous amounts of pornography on his employer's network. He should have used a VPN,
which would have masked his online activity from me. In order to see the power of this type of service, try
searching a known VPN address such as an address provided by Private Internet Access (PIA) 173.244.56.138.
While I know that no one reading this book has ever downloaded pirated content, this should serve as a reminder
why VPNs are essential. The direct URL query follows.
https://iknowwhatyoudownload.com/en/peer/?ip=70.39.110.82

Figure 33.01: A search result from I Know What You Download.
Exonerator (metrics.torproject.org/exonerator.html)
The Onion Router (Tor) was explained in Chapter Nine. It is a network that provides anonymity by issuing IP
addresses to users that connect to servers in other countries. If you possess an IP address of your target, but
cannot locate any valuable information using the previous techniques, it is possible that the address was part of
the Tor network and there is no relevant data to be located. Exonerator is a tool that will verify the usage of an
IP address on the Tor network. Provide the IP address and a date of usage, and the service will display whether
it was used as a Tor connection. While a date is required, you could provide the current date if your target time
frame is unknown. Most IP addresses are typically always or never a part of the Tor network.
Wigle (wigle.net)
Wigle is a crowd-sourced database of wireless access points. Users in all areas of the country conduct scans of
wireless devices in their area; identify details of each device; and submit this data to Wigle in order to map the
found devices on the site. This allows anyone to browse an area for wireless access points or search an address
to locate specific devices. Additionally, you can search for either a specific router name or MAC address and
locate any matching devices. The results include links that will display the results on an interactive map. Most of

418 Chapter 33

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

the world has been covered. In order to take advantage of the search features, you will need to register for a free
account. Generic or misleading information can be used that does not identify you.
There are many investigative uses for this service. You can identify the wireless access points in the immediate
area of a target's home. As an example, a search of the address of a gas station revealed a map of it with the
associated routers. In this view, I can identify the router names including potential sensitive information. It
displays wireless router SSID's of AltonBPStore, tankers_network, Big Toe, and others. Clicking View and then
Search in the upper left of the page presents a detailed query engine. A search of tankers_network, as identified
previously in the map view, displays details of the wireless access point. It has a MAC address of
00:1F:C6:FC:1B:3F, WPA encryption, was first seen in 2011, and operates on channel 11.
An investigator could also search by the target's name. This may identify routers that have the target's name
within the SSID. A search of "Bazzell" identifies seven access points that probably belong to relatives with my
last name. These results identify the router name, MAC address, dates, encryption method, channel, and location
of the device. This can easily lead an investigator to the home of a target.
Many internet users will use the same name for their wireless router as they use for their online screen name.
Assume that your target's username was "Hacker21224". A search on Wigle for "Hacker21224" as a router name
might produce applicable results. These could identify the router's MAC address, encryption type, and GPS
coordinates. A search on Google Maps of the supplied GPS coordinates will immediately identify the home
address, a satellite view of the neighborhood, and a street view of the house of the target. All of this intelligence
can be obtained from a simple username. These results would not appear on any standard search engines.
If you find Wigle valuable to your investigations, I recommend you create a free account. While logged in, you
can use their advanced search (wigle.net/search) or submit direct queries via URL as follows.
https://wigle.net/search?ssid=bazzell
https://wigle.net/search#fullSearch?postalCode=62002
Shodan (shodan.io)
Shodan is a search engine that lets you find specific computers (routers, servers, etc.) using a variety of filters.
General search engines, such as Google and Bing, are great for finding websites; however, they do not search
for computers or devices. Shodan indexes "banners", which are metadata that a device sends back to a client.
This can be information about the server software, what options the service supports, or a welcome message.
Devices that are commonly identified through Shodan include servers, routers, online storage devices,
surveillance cameras, webcams, and VOIP systems. Network security professionals use this site to identify
vulnerabilities on their systems. Criminals use it to illegally access networks and alter devices. We will use it to
locate specific systems near a target location. In order to take advantage of Shodan's full search capabilities, you
must create a free account. Only a name and email address is required. The following example will identify how
to locate live public surveillance cameras based on location. The target for this search is Mount Pleasant, Utah.
The following search on Shodan produced 9,684 results.
country:US city:"Mount Pleasant"
There are two flaws with this search. First, you may receive results from other cities named Mount Pleasant.
Second, you will likely receive too many results to analyze effectively. A search of "geo:39.55,-111.45" will focus
only on the specific GPS location of interest (Lat=39.55, Long= -111.45). There were 238 results for this search.
This is much more manageable and all of the results will be devices in the target area. Adding more specific
search criteria will filter the results further. A search of "geo:39.55,-111.45 netcam" identified only one device.
The result displays this device as a "Netcam". It also identifies the internet service provider as "Central Utah
Telephone" indicating the user has a DSL connection.

IP Addresses 419

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

To connect to the device, you would click on the IP address identified as 63.78.117.229. Clicking through each
of these options may be time consuming. You can add a search term to filter your results. Replicating this search
for a GPS location in a large city will produce many results. Clicking the IP address will take you to the page
that will connect to each device. You must be careful here. Some devices will require a username and password
for access. You could try "admin" / "admin" or "guest" / "guest", but you may be breaking the law. This could
be considered computer intrusion. However, many of the webcam and netcam results will not prompt you for
a password and connect you to the device automatically. There is likely no law violation when connecting to a
device that does not prompt you for credentials. Your local laws may prohibit this activity.
Shodan Maps (maps.shodan.io) allows you to conduct any of these searches based on location alone while
Shodan Images (images.shodan.io) displays collected webcam captures from open devices. Figure 33.02
displays a home using an automated lighting and climate control system in Missouri located with Shodan Maps.
These two options are premium services and require a modest fee. All Shodan features allow input of the
following types of information for filtering.
City: Name of the city (ex. City:"San Diego")
Country: 2-letter country code (ex. Country:US)
GPS: Latitude and longitude (ex. Geo:50.23,20.06)
OS: Operating system (ex. Os:Linux)
IP Address: Range (ex. Net:18.7.7.0/24)
Keyword: (ex. Webcam)

:
Shodan Beta (beta.shodan.io) offers complete details of a specified IP address. This can be queried with the
following three URLs.
https://beta.shodan.io/host/147.135.65.22
https://beta.shodan.io/host/147.135.65.22/raw
https://beta.shodan.io/host/147.135.65.22/history
The first presents the standard view while the second offers text-only details which may be more valuable to a
report. The final option looks at all available details about the domain throughout several scans over time. Each
entry displays a date in the format of 2020-04-26T07:49:17 (April 26, 2020 at 7:49 am).
Zoom Eye (zoomeye.hk)
This Shodan competitor provides a similar service, often with unique results. A direct URL query follows.
https://www.zoomeye.hk/searchResult?q=70.39.110.82

420 Chapter 33

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Threat Crowd (ci-www.threatcrowd.org)
As mentioned in the previous chapter, Threat Crowd is a system for finding and researching artifacts relating to
cyber threats. Searching an IP address can reveal an association to malicious software being spread over the
internet. A positive result will display the type of malware, associated domain names, dates of discovery, and any
comments by other researchers. Most readers that actually need this type of service likely already know more
about it than me. However, it should be a consideration when investigating suspicious IP addresses. A URL
query follows.
https://www.ci-www.threatcrowd.org/ip.php?ip=70.39.110.82
Censys (censys.io)
Similarly, Censys is a search engine that enables researchers to ask questions about the hosts and networks that
comprise the internet. Censys collects data on hosts and websites through daily scans of the internet, in turn
maintaining a database of how hosts and websites are configured. Researchers can interact with this data through
a search interface. As an example, a search of 173.189.238.211 reveals it to be associated with a Schneider Electric
BMX P34 2020 device through a Windstream provided internet connection, located near Kansas City, Kansas.
A URL query follows.
https://censys.io/ipv4/70.39.110.82
Ipv6 Addresses
The IP addresses previously mentioned were all version four (Ipv4), such as 192.168.1.1. Due to limited
availability, many providers are switching to Ipv6, which allows many more addresses. A typical example may
appear as 2001:0db8:85a3:0000:0000:8a2e:0370:7334. While many of the utilities mentioned here are adapting
to this input, we should query these types of addresses through designated Ipv6 engines. Some sites may require
either full or compressed IPv6 addresses, and you can convert one format to the other online at
https://iplocation.io/ipv6-expand/. I have tested dozens, and I find the following two to work best, both of
which are included in the search tool.
https://search.dnslytics.com/ip/2001:db8::8a2e:370:7334
https://myip.ms/view/comp_ip6/176883/2001:db8:85a3::8a2e:370:7334
Email Headers
I no longer teach email header analysis in my live courses. The vast majority of users rely on web-based email
such as Gmail or Yahoo. These services do not disclose the IP address of an individual user within the email
headers. The only email headers that I have encountered over the past three years that contained valuable IP
addresses were business users that sent emails within a desktop client such as Outlook. If you would like to
analyze an email header in order to identify the IP address and sender information, you have two options. You
can look through a few sites and teach yourself how to read this confusing data, or you can use an automated
service.
IP2Location (ip2location.com/free/email-tracer) provides a large text box into which an entire email header
can be copied for analysis. The response includes the IP address and location of the sender; interactive map
identifying the originating location; internet service provider; and links to additional information from an IP
search. Anyone wanting more information from an email threat should start here. An alternative site that
conducts similar actions is MX Toolbox (mxtoolbox.com/EmailHeaders.aspx).

IP Addresses 421

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Obtaining a Target's IP Address
You may want to know the IP address of the person you are researching as provided by their internet service
provider. This address could be used to verify an approximate location of the person; to provide law
enforcement details that would be needed for a court order; or to determine if multiple email addresses belong
to the same subject. All of those scenarios will be explained here.
IP Logger (iplogger.org)
For many years, this was my favorite option for identifying the IP address of a target. There are many options
now, and most of them will be explained here. This specific technique involves some trickery and the need to
contact the target from a covert account. For this demonstration, assume your target has a Facebook page that
he checks regularly. You can send him a private message that includes "bait" in the form of an online link. A
detailed set of instructions should explain the processes. The main website presents several options, but only
the "URL & Image Shortener" service will be explained.
Link: You can generate a URL which will redirect to any website that you provide. IP Logger will save the IP
address of each user who clicked the link. In the box provided, enter any address that you want the target to see
when clicking on a link. This could be something generic such as cnn.com. After submitting, you will receive a
series of links. This page also serves as the log of visitors, and I recommend documenting it. In an example, I
received the following link at the beginning of this list.
http://www.iplogger.org/3ySz.jpg
Although the link appears to be a jpg image, clicking this link or typing it into a browser forwards the target to
cnn.com. This action collects his or her IP address, operating system, and browser details. These details, along
with the date and time of capture, can be viewed at the link generated previously. A URL shortening service
such as Bitly (bit.ly) would make the link look less suspicious.
Real World Application: I was once communicating with an unknown subject on a web forum about hacking
and stolen credit card numbers. I wanted to find out his IP address in order to discover his true identity with a
court order. I told the hacker I had an image of a freshly stolen debit card that I was willing to share. He
requested proof, so I created an IP Logger link based on a generic online image, and embedded that link into
the web forum where we were communicating. Within a few moments, I visited the log for this image and
discovered his IP address in Newark, New Jersey.
Canary Tokens (canarytokens.org)
A newer option for IP identification is Canary Tokens. It offers redundant functionality as the previously
mentioned product, but may be more useful to you. Ultimately, you should familiarize yourself with all options
and choose which works best for you. Lately, I have found Canary Tokens to be the superior option of all. It
allows creation of a PDF or DOCX file that contains a tracker, and is the most user-friendly of the services.
After choosing a tracking option, it walks you through the process. I maintain Canary Token files at the following
addresses. They are used as traps for people that conduct Google searches attempting to find my home address.
Opening any of these alerts me to your IP address and general location. At the time of this writing, the most
recent opening of one of these documents occurred only two days prior. The culprit lives in Matawan, New
Jersey, possesses MCI as an internet provider, and had downloaded an Xbox 360 game through a torrent.
https://inteltechniques.com/canary/canary.pdf
https://inteltechniques.com/canary/canary.docx
Remember that VPNs and Tor may create inaccurate results. Use caution when sending trackers, and make sure
you are not violating any laws or internal policies. I find these services slowly becoming less useful.

422 Chapter 33

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

LinkBait (github.com/AmIJesse/LinkBait)
There is a glaring problem with all of these public IP logging services. They are well-known and may be blocked
by email providers. Gmail typically blocks any domains associated with either IP Logger or Canary Tokens. A
tech-savvy target may recognize these tactics which could jeopardize your investigation. This is why I rely on
my own self-hosted option made by my colleague Jesse. The link above includes all files required to host your
own IP Logger on your website. You simply need to copy the PHP file into a web-accessible directory on your
Apache web server, including shared web hosts. I renamed the file to "index.php" and placed it on my website
at https://inteltechniques.com/site/index.php. If you visited that page by clicking a link I had sent to you, a
text file would have been generated in that folder. The title would have included the date and your IP address.
The following represents a partial view of the content submitted by your computer. This page is not currently
live because I do not want to log visitors to my site.
70.39.126.131
Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10.14; rv:81.0) Gecko/20100101
Firefox/81.0
touch: false / mic: Found / gpu: AMD Radeon Pro 560X OpenGL Engine
Screen Height: 1080
Language: en-US
Fonts: 109 fonts: American Typewriter...
Detected OS
= Mac OS X [generic] [fuzzy]
MTU
= 1392
Network link = OpenVPN UDP bs128 SHA1 lzo
MTU not 1500, VPN probable.
"country":"United States"
"regionName":"California","city":"Los Angeles","isp":"Sharktech"
"timezone":"Denver"
browserVersion: 5.0 (Macintosh) / Screen Width: 1920
System Time: 2020-10-14 16:2:6
router: https://192.168.1.1
browser: Mozilla / platform: MacIntel
Discord: Not Running
Logins: Google Services

I would then know that you clicked the link from a Mac computer through Firefox. I would have details about
your hardware and know all of the fonts installed to the operating system. I would know that you are connected
to PIA VPN from a west coast server, but your system time is set to Mountain. I would also know you are
logged in to a Google product. If you would like to see what details your computer would submit to this script,
I have a test page available at the following URL.
https://inteltechniques.com/logger/
This page does not collect your details or store them on my server and nothing is logged. It simply generates the
same queries through JavaScript through your own browser and displays them within your screen. Theoretically,
any website could replicate these tactics and collect data about your visit. This is why investigators should always
use caution and practice good operational security. I dive deep into this topic in my book Extreme Privacy.
IntelTechniques IP Addresses Tool
Similar to the domain tool mentioned previously, this page automates some of the most common IP address
searches. The first box accepts any IP address. Clicking the Populate All button will insert this address into all
the search options where manual queries can be conducted. The final option will open several tabs within your
browser. The online version at https://inteltechniques.com/tools/IP.html is updated often.

IP Addresses 423

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR
GOVERNMENT & BUSINESS RECORDS

Open source government and business information has never been easier to obtain. A combination of a more
transparent government, cheaper digital storage costs, and marketing data leaks has placed more information
online than ever before. There is no standard method of searching this data. One county may handle the queries
much differently than another county, and business records vary by state. The following resources and
techniques should get you started in the United States.
County General Records (www.blackbookonline.info/USA-Counties.aspx)
Counties all over America have digitized the majority of their public records and allow unlimited access over the
internet. Searching for your county's website will likely present many information options. This can become
overwhelming and it can be easy to get lost within the pages of the site. My initial preference when just beginning
an investigation is to use Black Book Online's free county public records page. It allows you to drill down from
state to county. The resulting page isolates all available records for viewing. As an example, I chose Illinois and
then Madison County as my target. I was presented with the following databases, each linking directly to the
source.
Coroner Reports
Delinquent Tax Sale
Government Expenditures
Property Tax Search
Public Employee Salaries

Recorded Documents
Registered Lobbyists
Press Releases
Voter Registration Verification
Voter Registration Addresses

Unclaimed Property
Crime Map
Building Contractors
Building Permits
Foreclosed Properties

County Court Records (www.blackbookonline.info/USA-County-Court-Records.aspx)
A Google search of your county of interest should identify whether an online court records database is available.
As an example, St. Clair County in Illinois possesses a website that has their entire civil and criminal court
records online (co.st-clair.il.us/departments/circuit-clerk/courts). Searching only a last name will present
profiles with full name, date of birth, physical identifiers, case history, fines, pending appearances, and more.
Navigating the website will expose charged crimes even if they were dismissed. This can be extremely useful in
civil litigation. There are several websites that help connect you to publicly available county government records,
such as Black Book Online. It allows you to drill down to your local records. The main page will prompt for the
state desired. The result will be a list of links that access each county's court information. Some rural areas are
not online, but an occasional search should be done to see if they have been added. Repeating my previous
search of Madison County, Illinois revealed the following court related databases.
Circuit Court Complete Docket
Circuit Court Attorney Docket
Family and Civil Pro Se Dockets
Felony State's Attorney Jury Trials
Traffic, Misdemeanor, DUI Docket

Traffic Citations
Crash Reports
Police Blotter
Daily Crime Log
Jail Inmate Search

If the Black Book Online options do not provide optimal results, please consider Public Records Online
(publicrecords.onlinesearches.com) or a new robust online service which appeared in 2021 called Netronline
(publicrecords.netronline.com). This option seems to receive more updates of both content and design than
Black Book Online. Ultimately, all of these simply connect you to the source of the records. Use the option
which works best in your area.

424 Chapter 34

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

PACER (pacer.gov)
PACER is an acronym for Public Access to Court Electronic Records. It is an electronic public access service
of United States federal court documents. It allows users to obtain case and docket information from the United
States district courts, United States courts of appeals, and United States bankruptcy courts. It holds more than
800 million documents. PACER charges $0.10 per page. The cost to access a single document is capped at $3.00,
the equivalent of 30 pages. The cap does not apply to name searches, reports that are not case-specific, and
transcripts of federal court proceedings. Account creation is free and if your usage does not exceed $15 in a
quarter, the fees are waived. I have possessed an account for several years and have never been billed for my
minimal usage. PACER has been criticized for being hard to use and for demanding fees for records which are
in the public domain. In reaction, non-profit projects have begun to make such documents available online for
free.
RECAP (courtlistener.com/recap)
RECAP (PACER backwards) allows users to automatically search for free copies during a search in PACER,
and to help build up a free alternative database at the Internet Archive. It is an extension for the Firefox and
Chrome browsers. Each PACER document is first checked if it has already been uploaded by another user to
the Internet Archive. If no free version exists and the user purchases the document from PACER, it will
automatically upload a copy to the Internet Archive's PACER database. While the browser extension assists
greatly with searching, a search page exists on RECAP at the address above.
UniCourt (unicourt.com)
This court document search site appeared in 2018 and currently possesses an impressive database. The search
options are straightforward, and results appear quickly, but you are limited to three searches without a paid
membership. In my experience, clearing your browser's cache and selecting a new VPN IP address seems to
reset this restriction. This is a premium site with full court documents hidden from guests, but we can obtain a
fair amount of free information. Let's conduct an actual example.
Searching "Facebook" within the official site provides numerous results. However, after clicking through three
case summaries, you will likely receive a notification to purchase a monthly premium membership. This may be
acceptable if you plan to use the service heavily, but there are many additional free resources available. Consider
conducting your queries through Google instead. Since the case summaries are publicly available, Google
appears to have indexed most, if not all, of the pages. The following Google search produced over 10,000 results.
site:unicourt.com "facebook"
The first result connected to the following static URL.
https://unicourt.com/case/ca-la23-adam-blumenkranz-vs-facebook-123515
This page returned the following case details without a subscription or registration.
Case Summary
Case Number
Filing Date
Update Date
Case Status

Case Type
Jurisdiction
Judge Name
Courthouse
County

State
Defendant Names
Plaintiff Names
Respondent Names
Docket Entries

The documents area is restricted, but the docket entries are public. In this case, the details provide dates and
actions taken within the litigation. Below is a partial example. UniCourt is now a staple within my investigations,
but I rely on Google to find a direct link to the data.

Government & Business Records 425

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

03/14/2018
03/14/2018
02/21/2018
02/21/2018

Case Management Statement; Filed by FACEBOOK, INC. (Defendant)
Reply Filed by FACEBOOK, INC.; MARK ZUCKERBERG (Defendant)
NOTICE OF CONTINUANCE; Filed by Attorney for Defendant
Continuance of Hearing and Order; Filed by FACEBOOK, INC.

Judy Records (judyrecords.com)
This service is so good that they were sued for providing too much access. Although the site was shut down for
a period of time, it has since reopened with most of its functionality intact. The search feature accepts traditional
search operators. By placing my name in quotes, I immediately identified an Illinois Supreme Court case in
which I was mentioned. The site is completely free with no business model.
Trellis (trellis.law)
While not as abundant as Judy Records, Trellis does offer value for those seeking court records. If you want to
query via URL, you must add each state indexed by the service, as demonstrated below. A free account is
required to see full court docket information.
https://trellis.law/cases/bazzell?state=az&state=ca&state=ct&state=de&state=fl&state=ga&state=il&state=
ma&state=nv&state=nj&state=ny&state=oh&state=pa&state=ri&state=tx&state=wa
FOIA Search (foia.gov/search.html)
The Freedom Of Information Act (FOIA) allows us to demand government records from various entities. Filing
a specific request exceeds the scope of this book, but you should know that a lot of public information is already
available online. This site appears to rely on Bing to index government websites, so I assumed that this resource
was unnecessary. However, my attempts to replicate some of the results within Google were unsuccessful. As
an example, I searched for "Darrell Bazzell" on the FOIA site and received a specific result from a 2001
committee session. I replicated this search within Google and could not retrieve the same entry. Therefore, this
service should be available within your arsenal of tools. A static submission URL is as follows.
https://search.foia.gov/search?affiliate=foia.gov&query=osint
MuckRock (muckrock.com)
This service buries government entities with FOIA requests and then publishes all responses. A direct URL
search query structure follows.
https://www.muckrock.com/foi/list/?q=inteltechniques
Open Corporates (opencorporates.com)
Practically every state offers a searchable database of all businesses created or registered within the state. This
will usually identify the owner(s), board members, and other associated subjects. Dun & Bradstreet (dnb.com)
offers a business search within the home page, but many registered companies do not participate with them. In
my experience, the best overall business lookup entity is Open Corporates. This free service indexes all 50 states
in the U.S. plus dozens of additional countries. The records usually identify corporate officers' names, addresses,
and other contact details. The basic search option allows queries by business name, entity registration number,
or officer name. Clicking the advanced option allows query by physical address, but requires you to create a free
account. This website is superior to targeted Google queries, because it indexes and scrapes data directly from
government websites. This can assist with identifying historical results that no longer appear within the original
source. I visit this resource every time I encounter a business name during my research, or identify a target that
would likely be associated with an organization. Open Corporates allows search submission via URL as follows.

426 Chapter 34

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

https://opencorporates.com/companies?q=inteltechniques
https://opencorporates.com/officers?q=bazzell
AIHIT (aihitdata.com)
This service is unique in that it uses artificial intelligence (AI) in order to populate and update business records.
I do not know how much of this is legitimate process and not marketing hype, but I consistently find unique
data here. The default search options query business names and registration numbers, and usually provide the
same results as the previous options. However, the "More Fields" area allows entry of an email address,
telephone number, or name of an individual. I have used this option to search personal email addresses and
retrieve associated businesses. Fortunately, AIHIT allows search submission via URL as follows.
https://www.aihitdata.com/search/companies?k=email@gmail.com
https://www.aihitdata.com/search/companies?t=Michael Bazzell
https://www.aihitdata.com/search/companies?c=inteltechniques
OCCRP Aleph (aleph.occrp.org)
This self-described "global archive of research material for investigative reporting" includes numerous business
records, transcripts, and other data sets. All can be filtered to display email addresses, phone numbers, names,
and specific file types. Queries are free, but results might be limited if you are not signed in with a free account.
The query URL structure follows.
https://aleph.occrp.org/search?q=michael%20bazzell
https://aleph.occrp.org/search?q=inteltechniques
Public Accountability (www.publicaccountability.org)
This service allows query of any name or term and provides government licenses, campaign contributions,
federal grants, federal loan details, government employee data, and much more.
Open Payrolls (openpayrolls.com)
Open Payrolls might be the largest searchable nationwide government salary database consisting of nearly 85
million salary records from over 14,800 employers. It allows you to locate employee salaries for federal agencies,
states, counties, cities, universities, colleges, and K-12 schools. A direct query URL follows.
https://openpayrolls.com/search/michael-bazzell
EINTaxID (eintaxid.com)
There is no official way to query a tax ID (EIN) for a company, but this service attempts to uncover those
assigned to large companies. Sites such as Little Sis (littlesis.org) connects the dots between the world's most
powerful people and organizations. Searching a name or company can reveal details associated with donations,
political support, board members, and other relationships. The query URL follows.
https://littlesis.org/search?q=michael bazzell
SSN Verify (www.ssn-verify.com)
A simple way to verify if a social security number is valid is at SSN Verify. This does not provide the personal
information attached to the number, only verification that the number is valid. A typical response will include

Government & Business Records 427

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

the state that issued the number, the year issued, verification that the number was assigned, and a rough
estimated age range of the person assigned the number.
Social Security Death Index (genealogybank.com/explore/ssdi/all)
This public index of death records is stored on a genealogy site. The only required information is the first and
last name. The results will identify birth year, death year, state of last residence, and state of SSN issue.
Legacy (legacy.com/search)
There are many websites that search for death-related information such as social security indexes and ancestry
records. A leader in this area is Legacy. This site indexes online obituaries and memorials from approximately
80 percent of all online newspapers. The results can identify family members and locations.
Asset Locator (www.blackbookonline.info/assetsearch.aspx)
Black Book Online's Asset Locator is the most comprehensive list of sources for the search of real estate,
judgments, bankruptcies, tax liens, and unclaimed funds. This page will allow you to select the type of asset you
are researching and the state of the target. This will then create a new page with all the options for that state. It
will provide direct links to the sites for a search of the target. This often includes online databases of public
employee salaries, vehicle registrations, property tax records, and dozens of other categories.
Voter Registration Records
The elections of 2016 and 2020 caused a lot of controversy in regard to the use and collection of voter
registration data. While these personal details are public record, many people did not believe it was appropriate
for politicians to use this personal data as a part of their campaign strategies. Regardless of your opinion on
these matters, much of the voter registration details are available online. The most beneficial sites I have found
are Voter Records (voterrecords.com) and VoterRef (voteref.com). You can search both by name or browse
by state. Any results will identify full name, home address, mailing address, gender, party affiliation, age, and
relatives. Currently, databases are available for Alaska, Arkansas, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida,
Michigan, Nevada, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Rhode Island, Utah, Washington, and others. NCSL
maintains a list of US states and availability of public data at https://www.ncsl.org/elections-andcampaigns/access-to-and-use-of-voter-registration-lists.
Vehicles
Many people assume that information related to vehicle registration and licensing is only available to law
enforcement through internal networks. While a full driver's license search and complete license plate query is
not publicly available, a surprising portion of related data is online for anyone to view. The following methods
will display all publicly available details.
Department of Transportation (vpic.nhtsa.dot.gov)
The DOT has a website which provides free access to vehicle identification number (VIN) data. All information
on this website is public information, and the data comes from vehicle manufacturers. You can search by VIN
within their database to find detailed vehicle information. I submitted a unique VIN and received the following
response.
Year: 2010
Make: VOLKSWAGEN
Model: JETTA
VIN: 3VWRL7AJ6AM13xxxx

Trim Level: TDI
Style: SEDAN 4-DR
Manufactured: Mexico
Weight: 4,500 lbs

428 Chapter 34

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

The following options also allow you to enter any VIN and retrieve the year, make, and model of the vehicle
associated. The first option will often display estimated mileage based on service records.
Vin Decoderz (vindecoderz.com)
Check That VIN (checkthatvin.com)
Search Quarry (searchquarry.com)

FaxVin (faxvin.com)
Vehicle History (vehiclehistory.com)
VinCheck (vincheck.info)

NICB VIN Check (nicb.org/vincheck)
While the previous searches will identify details about vehicles, they will not display any information about theft
or salvage records. The National Insurance Crime Bureau (NICB) allows a search of any VIN and will display
two unique pieces of information. The VINCheck Theft Record will identify vehicles that have been reported
stolen, while the VINCheck Total Loss Records identifies VINs that belong to salvaged vehicles.
Cycle VIN (cyclevin.com)
VINs from motorcycles may not be searchable on standard VIN engines due to the number of characters in
them. Cycle VIN will display a year and make, as well as any indication that the VIN exists in its proprietary
database. If it does, $25 will obtain title and mileage information. I only use this as a free resource for verifying
motorcycle VINs to the correct year and make.
Vehicle Registration
Several free services identify the year, make, and model of a vehicle after supplying the VIN. However, it is more
likely that we know the license plate registration details rather than a VIN. Fortunately, we have many options
for researching these plates. The following services provide a search option based on the vehicle registration
plate and state. Results are hit-or-miss, and rarely include a name, but many will identify the VIN for further
research.
Auto Check (autocheck.com)
Records Finder (recordsfinder.com/plate)
CarFax (carfax.com/vehicle-history-reports)
Search Quarry (searchquarry.com/vehicle_records)
Free Background Search (freebackgroundcheck.org)
Carvana (carvana.com/sellyourcar/getoffer/vehicle)
VinCheck (vincheck.info/free-license-plate-lookup/)
Vehicle History (vehiclehistory.com/license-plate-search)
Find By Plate (findbyplate.com)
While the previous license plate search websites offer a straight-forward query option, they are limited to the
data available within publicly-traded vehicle databases. California plates often reveal accurate data, but states
such as South Dakota and Montana are not as generous with the sharing of their own registrations. Because of
this, we may want to query services which pay a fee in order to access premium data sets. My favorite of these
is Kelley Blue Book (kbb.com/instant-cash-offer). The premise of this site is to identify the value of your own
vehicle and potentially receive an offer to purchase it from KBB. That may have a benefit to you, but I prefer
to harness the OSINT capabilities of this service.
As a test, I submitted a vehicle's registration number which was displayed on a television show playing in the
background while I wrote this section. The result correctly identified the vehicle as a 2010 Dodge Avenger. This
example was a California plate, so I felt like I was cheating a bit. Instead, I conducted a search of the license
plate "MRBIG" within South Dakota and Wyoming, which are both known to protect vehicle registration data
from public view. The results appear below.

Government & Business Records 429

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

While only a small piece of information, this works in conjunction with other search techniques. After exhausting
all of these searches, you should be able to obtain the VIN, make, model, year, engine, and style of the vehicle.
These options will not typically provide the name of the owner.
O'Reilly Auto Parts (oreillyauto.com)
If the previous search options fail to identify the VIN, year, make, and model of a vehicle based on the license
plate, try O'Reilly. As a service to potential customers, it allows you to enter your license plate in order to identify
applicable parts for your vehicle. Select the "Garage" in the upper-right and enter the license plate and state. I
provided the state of California and the plate of "HACKER". I received the following response.
2007 GMC Sierra 1500 SLE, V8,6.0, 5967,364,Electronic, SFI,GAS, FI,MFI
When I searched the same plate on VinCheck, I received a VIN of 3GTEK13Y87G527460. I now have a decent
beginning to my investigation of a license plate.
Progressive (progressive.com)
While not an official vehicle search, the insurance provider Progressive offers an interesting piece of information.
I first learned about this technique from S.L., a member of my online OSINT forum. When you view the home
page at progressive.com, you are prompted to request a free insurance quote. If you provide the zip code and
address of any target, you receive a summary of the year, make, and model of all vehicles registered at that
address. You can supply any random data besides the physical address and receive the results. This was likely
designed to make the quote process more efficient and accurate, but investigators should appreciate the utility.
Marine Traffic and Boat Information
There is an abundance of details available about global marine traffic within ownership records and real-time
monitoring. Marine Traffic (marinetraffic.com) provides an interactive map that displays the current location of
all registered ships and boats. Clicking on any vessel provides the name, speed, collection time, and destination.
Boat Info World (boatinfoworld.com) allows the search of a boat name and provides the following details.
Boat Name
Boat Owner
Record Date
Registered Address
Hull ID
Hailing Port

Lloyd's Registry Number
Call Sign
Coast Guard Vessel ID
Service Type
Boat's Length
Boat's Gross Tons

Vessel Build Year
Ship Builder
Hull Shape
Propulsion Type

Aircraft Information
Monitoring aircraft during flight and searching historical ownership records is relatively easy. Commercial planes
constantly announce their location with automated reporting systems and tail numbers act similarly to a vehicle's
registration plate. Today, this information is publicly available on multiple websites. Plane Finder
(planefinder.net) displays an interactive global map identifying all known aircraft currently in flight. Hovering
over a selection displays the carrier, flight number, originating departure, destination, speed, and altitude.
Historical ownership records are available on multiple websites and none are completely accurate. I recommend
Black Book Online's aviation page (www.blackbookonline.info/Aviation-Public-Records.aspx). At the time of
this writing, it provided direct links to the following databases.

430 Chapter 34

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Aircraft N-Number Search
Aircraft Ownership Search
Airline Certificates
Airport Profiles

Certified Pilots
Cockpit Voice Recorder Database
Flight Tracker
Military Aviation Crash Reports

Campaign Contributions
Any contributions to political campaigns are public record. Searching this is now easy thanks to three separate
websites. These sites will search using information as minimal as a last name. Including the full name and year
will provide many details about the target. This includes occupation, the recipient of the contribution, the
amount, the type of contribution, and a link to the official filing that contains the information. After an initial
search is conducted, you will receive additional search tabs that will allow you to filter by zip code, occupation,
and year. Melissa Data allows you to search a zip code and identify all political donations for a specified year.
The results from these sites may be redundant, but often contain unique data. Once I know the state where my
target lives, I will search for that state's own campaign contribution portal. For example, if my target were in
Massachusetts, queries through https://m.ocpf.us/reports/searchitems may uncover results for my case.
Open Secrets (opensecrets.org)
Melissa Data (lookups.melissa.com/home/)
Selective Service Verification (sss.gov/verify)
This website requires a last name, social security number, and date of birth of the target. The result will identify
the person's full name, selective service number, and date of registration.
High Programmer (highprogrammer.com/cgi-bin/uniqueid)
Most states use some type of algorithm to create a driver's license number for a person. Often, this number is
generated from the person's name, sex, and date of birth. After you have determined your target's middle initial
and date of birth from the previous websites mentioned, you can use this data to identify the target's driver's
license number. High Programmer will automate this process for the following states.
Florida
Illinois
Maryland

Michigan
Minnesota
New Hampshire

New York
Washington
Wisconsin

BinDB (www.bindb.com/bin-database.html)
While not technically government data, I felt that this option fits best in this chapter. This website will allow you
to enter the first six digits of any credit card number and identify the brand, issuing bank, card type, card level,
country, bank website, and customer care line.
Real World Application: While working in the homicide division, I often identified credit or debit card
numbers of my victims. If the actual card was located, I did not need this service. However, if only the number
was located, this service helped to identify the financial institution and a contact number. In one specific
investigation, I had learned that the victim had eaten at a local restaurant the evening prior to her suspicious
death. Visiting the restaurant allowed me to acquire the debit card that she used for payment. Searching this
number through BinDB identified the issuing bank. Calling presented an automated self-service feature for
members of that bank. Entering the newly found debit card number and the zip code of the victim allowed me
to access the previous 30 days of charges to her account. This identified an unknown ATM withdrawal on the
day of her killing. Retrieving video from that ATM machine displayed a passenger in her vehicle. This initiated
a new investigation which eventually led to the killer.

Government & Business Records 431

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Criminal Information
If a target has a criminal past, there is probably evidence of this on the internet. County court searches will
identify most of this information, but this requires a separate search on each county's website. There are a
handful of services that attempt to locate nationwide information by name. Family Watch Dog
(familywatchdog.us) is one of the leading sites in identifying public criminal information about sex offenders.
The main page includes a "Find Offender" tab. You can search here by address or name. The name search only
requires a last name to display results. This will identify registered sex offenders that match the criteria specified.
This will include a photograph of the target and details of the offense.
Both federal and state prisons offer prisoner details online. The amount of detail will vary by state, but most will
include photographs of the target and details of the crime. In most states, this information is maintained in
public view after the target is released, if the subject is still on probation or parole. Federal prisoners can be
located at www.bop.gov/inmateloc. A first and last name is required for a search. Each state maintains its own
database of prisoner information. Conducting a search on Google of "Inmate locator" plus the state of interest
should present official search options for that state.
VINELink (vinelink.com) is an online portal to VINE, a victim notification network. VINE has been providing
victims and concerned citizens with information for decades, allowing individuals to access reliable information
about custody status changes and criminal case information. After choosing the state of interest, you can select
from the following options.
Find an Offender: Get info and register to be notified of custody status changes.
Find an Offender Court Case: Get info and register to be notified of offender court dates.
Find Sex Offender Registry Status: Get info about sex offender registry status changes.
Find a Protective Order: Get info and register to be notified of protective order status changes.
Warning: Every city, county, state, and country reports criminal matters uniquely. While you may find
something of interest through traditional OSINT resources, absence of online criminal information does not
indicate that a crime was not committed. More often than not, I cannot locate online information about a known
crime or criminal. These resources should be considered secondary to a detailed inquiry through the courts or
law enforcement.
Regional Government Databases
As previously mentioned, when investigating targets who are working or living in the US, I routinely check city,
county, and state databases for pertinent records. Business and licensing information is often maintained by the
office of the Secretary of State. Property tax records are typically maintained at the county level, by the assessor's
office or similar. Counties also often operate jails and public assistance services, although the availability of
public searchable databases will vary depending jurisdiction. Cities will have their own records pertaining to
licensing, permitting, and municipal courts. Once I narrow down a location for my target, a simple search engine
query for publicly available databases for that region often opens up public data sources which I may not have
discovered otherwise.
IntelTechniques Business & Government Tool (https://inteltechniques.com/tools/Business.html)
While minimal, this tool should assist with replicating some of the searches mentioned within this chapter.

432 Chapter 34

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE
VIRTUAL CURRENCIES

In simplest terms, virtual currencies can be spent for goods and services without connection to a person or bank
account. It has no physical presence, and is mostly used online as digital payment. Bitcoin is virtual currency. A
bitcoin address, which is an identifier you use to send bitcoins to another person, appears similar to a long string
of random characters. In our demo, we will use 12t9YDPgwueZ9NyMgw519p7AA8isjr6SMw, which is the real
address that was used to collect ransom from victims after malicious software had taken over their computers.
Think of a Bitcoin address as an email address. That address stores their "virtual" money.
Blockchain (blockchain.info)
This website allows search of a Bitcoin address and displays the number of transactions, total amount of Bitcoin
received ($), final balance, and a complete transaction history. We can track every incoming and outgoing
payment. This will almost never be associated with any real names, but it provides a great level of detail about
the account. We learn that this account has received 19.69355613 Bitcoin worth $1,333,710 USD at the time of
this writing.
Bitcoin Who's Who (bitcoinwhoswho.com)
Our next stop is a service that provides a bit more analysis about the suspect account. We immediately learn
that it is a suspect ransomware account, and that the address has appeared on various news outlet websites.
Furthermore, we see transaction IP addresses, which are likely behind VPNs. Overall, I use Blockchain for
transaction details and Bitcoin Who's Who to get a better idea of why I might care about the account.
BlockChair (blockchair.com)
This service is very similar to Blockchain, but I find it has better representation across multiple virtual currencies.
Additionally, we can query each currency via URL, which will assist in our tools. Let's start with a search of a
Bitcoin address at the following URL.
https://blockchair.com/bitcoin/address/1EzwoHtiXB4iFwedPr49iywjZn2nnekhoj
The results are typical, and include balance and transaction data. The power of BlockChair is the ability to search
Bitcoin, Ethereum, Ripple, Bitcoin Cash, Litecoin, Bitcoin SV, Dash, Dogecoin and Groestlcoin. We will use
the following URLs for each, replacing "xxx" with the target address.
https://blockchair.com/bitcoin/address/xxx
https://blockchair.com/ripple/account/xxx
https://blockchair.com/bitcoin-cash/address/xxx
https://blockchair.com/litecoin/address/xxx
https://blockchair.com/bitcoin-sv/address/xxx
https://blockchair.com/dash/address/xxx
https://blockchair.com/dogecoin/address/xxx
https://blockchair.com/groestlcoin/address/xxx
Chain Abuse (chainabuse.com)
This service focuses on one feature. It notifies you if others have reported a target virtual currency address as
associated with malicious activity. This often provides valuable information about an investigation. Consider an
actual report located at the following URL.

Virtual Currencies 433

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

https://www.chainabuse.com/address/1KUKcwCv64cXQZa4csaA1cF3PPTio6Yt2t
The results include a summary of the activity and the email addresses sending malicious email.
Sep 21, 2019
Sep 21, 2019

sextortion
ransomware

peter6389dd@excite.co.uk
addntfogjnfi@activeware.com

"Hacked computer email"
Claims to hack computer

CloverPool (cloverpool.com)
CloverPool, formerly BTC.com provides a summary and full list of transactions for any BTC, ETH, BCH, LTC,
or ETC address. We can conduct queries directly using the following URL structure.
https://explorer.cloverpool.com/btc/address/xxx
Wallet Explorer (walletexplorer.com)
The previous utilities examined an individual virtual currency account, such as a Bitcoin address. Many people
possess numerous addresses and store them all within a virtual wallet. This is where Wallet Explorer can be
extremely beneficial. While researching one of our target Bitcoin addresses within this free service, the results
identified a wallet of "00037fd441" which contained the target address. Clicking on the link to this wallet revealed
multiple new transactions from additional Bitcoin addresses previously unknown. This step is vital in order to
track all transactions associated with your suspect. The following URLs search an address and a wallet.
https://www.walletexplorer.com/address/1EzwoHtiXB4iFwedPr49iywjZn2nnekhoj
https://www.walletexplorer.com/wallet/00037fd441938ba4
Bitbo (bitbo.io)
The calculator at https://tools.bitbo.io/satoshi-usd/ allows us to convert Satoshi's to USD or Bitcoins.
Breadcrumbs (https://breadcrumbs.app)
Whereas many of the platforms previously discussed are intended for consumers and business, Breadcrumbs is
built for use on investigations. Although it is a premium service, they offer twenty searches a month once you
register for a free account. Account creation is easy and they accept masked emails, such as SimpleLogin. One
nice feature of Breadcrumbs is the inclusion of a customizable graph showing transactions and associated
addresses. This can be very useful in illustrating the movement of funds and can be a nice addition to our case
reports. Breadcrumbs also provides a monitoring feature which tracks activity on a virtual currency address over
time and will generate a downloadable .csv spreadsheet.
Virtual Currency APIs
In order to create the custom search tool presented at the end of this chapter, I needed a very simple way to
query virtual currency addresses for various tasks. Many of the websites which allow searching of Bitcoin
addresses do not permit submission via URL. Instead, I will take advantage of various Application Programming
Interfaces (APIs) which allow us to query directly and receive a text-only result. The following URLs are used
within the tool, with an explanation of each. Each display of "xxx" is where the virtual currency address or
amount would be inserted.
Validation: The following URL provides an indication whether a provided address is valid or invalid. This is a
great first search to make sure you have a proper address. The response will be the Unix date the address was
first seen within the network. An error notifies you of a bad address.

434 Chapter 35

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

https://blockexplorer.com/api/addr/xxx
Value: The following URL presents the current value of one Bitcoin.
https://blockchain.info/q/24hrprice
Received: This URL displays the total amount of Bitcoin received by a specific address. It is important to note
that this amount will be in "Satoshi". A Satoshi is equal to 0.00000001 Bitcoin. Put another way, one bitcoin
contains 100 million Satoshis. This unit of measurement is popular because a single Bitcoin is currently worth
approximately $70,000. The Satoshi is a more precise number We can use the previously mentioned calculator
at bitbo.io to convert BTC to Satoshi units.
https://blockchain.info/q/getreceivedbyaddress/xxx
Sent: This URL displays the total amount of Bitcoin sent by a specific address. It is important to note that this
amount is also presented in "Satoshi" (0.00000001 Bitcoin).
https://blockchain.info/q/getsentbyaddress/xxx
Balance: This utility displays the current balance of an address in "Satoshi".
https://blockchain.info/q/addressbalance/xxx
BTC > USD Value: The following URL will always display the current value of any amount of Bitcoin in USD.
This price fluctuates hourly. Replace "xxx" with your value of Bitcoin.
https://api.coinconvert.net/convert/btc/usd?amount=xxx
USD > BTC Value: The following URL will always display the current Bitcoin value of any amount of USD.
This price fluctuates hourly. Replace "xxx" with your value of USD.
https://blockchain.info/tobtc?currency=USD&value=xxx
Summary: This URL displays a brief summary of a Bitcoin address including total received, total sent, balance,
total transactions, first transaction, and most recent transaction. Replace "xxx" with your target address.
https://chain.api.btc.com/v3/address/xxx
First seen: This Blockchain query displays the date which a virtual currency address transaction was first seen
within the public blockchain. Note that this result will appear in Unix time format, but our tools will allow you
to convert this to traditional time format. Replace "xxx" with your virtual currency address.
https://blockchain.info/q/addressfirstseen/xxx
Investigation Summary
Now that you understand the details available about a virtual currency address, let's run through a typical
investigation. Assume you are investigating a Bitcoin address of 1EzwoHtiXB4iFwedPr49iywjZn2nnekhoj. It
was used as part of an extortion email, and you have been tasked to find any information about the address.
First you input the address into the search tool. The following information would be presented after each of the
options.

Virtual Currencies 435

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

BTC Validation: Valid (The address is a proper format)
1 BTC Price: $19,978.23 (The current value of one Bitcoin)
Satoshi Received: 716409285544 (The total amount of received currency)
Satoshi Sent: 716371585974 (The total amount of sent currency)
Satoshi Balance: 37699570 (The total amount of the current balance)
Satoshi > USD: (Used to convert Satoshi to USD as follows)
Received: $136,925,336.62
Sent: $136,914,950.52
Balance: $7,205.23
Summary:
"address": "1EzwoHtiXB4iFwedPr49iywjZn2nnekhoj",
"received": 716409285544,
"sent": 716371585974,
"balance": 37699570,
"tx_count": 3534,
"unconfirmed_tx_count": 0, "unconfirmed_received": 0, "unconfirmed_sent": 0,
"unspent_tx_count": 3,
"first_tx": "6cc1542feb7abcff6364e0d31fc75097e0ecf7dae897ad6de6a2c1c5a1261316",
"last_tx": "e11525fe2e057fb19ec741ddcb972ec994f70348646368d960446a92c4d76dad"
Creation Date: 1331482301 (Unix time when the address was first seen)
Date Conversion: Mar-11-2012 10:11:41 (Time in UTC)
Blockchain: A detailed list of all transactions.
Chainabuse: One report of malicious activity and a new email address to research.
BitcoinWhosWho: Links to online references to the address on Reddit.
WalletExplorer Address: Transaction details and wallet ID of 00037fd441.
WalletExplorer Wallet: Several pages of additional Bitcoin addresses within the suspect's wallet.
You could now repeat the process with the new Bitcoin addresses with hopes of identifying more email
addresses. The email address search tool may identify further information about your target. While this is all
very time consuming, the tools should simplify the queries.
Scam Search (scamsearch.io)
This free service was previously explained as a resource for searching email addresses, usernames, and telephone
numbers to identify association with online scams. It can also be used to query virtual currency addresses.
Searching "1FVuyuSN41aa3JN9sn8qkuD2PmaMEMHHnc" reveals email addresses, IP addresses, and
locations associated with an online extortion suspect.
IntelTechniques Virtual Currency Tool
This online (https://inteltechniques.com/tools/Currencies.html) or offline tool simplifies the various
techniques explained in this chapter. Each option, including API requests, open in a new browser tab.

436 Chapter 35

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

SECTION III

LEAKS, BREACHES, LOGS, & RANSOMWARE
The tenth edition of this book had a single section devoted to data leaks, breaches, and logs. It was possibly the
most controversial section, and contained the content which was most discussed and debated. This new edition,
which contains nine chapters dedicated to these topics, attempts to expand on the original teachings.
Obligatory Warning: The techniques that you will read about in this section are for educational use only. Many,
if not all, of the methods described here could violate organizational policy if executed. While I will only discuss
publicly available data, possession could violate your security clearance or be determined illegal by state or federal
law. Distribution (not necessarily possession) of the types of content that will be discussed here may be illegal
in most cases. However, I will explain ways in which you can apply these practices in a legal way, and keep
yourself employed. Overall, please do not take any action from this instruction unless you have verified with
your organization's legal counsel or supervisory personnel that you have the authority to do so. Please do not
let this warning persuade you to abandon the guide. I promise there is something here for everyone.
In previous books, I discussed the services Have I Been Pwned (HIBP) and others as online resources for
compromised email search. These services possess huge databases of publicly available content which were
originally stolen from the host companies and distributed over the internet. When you search an email address
on these services and are informed that it was compromised within the LinkedIn data breach, this means that a
partial copy of this stolen data resides within these breach lookup services. HIBP and others are often applauded
as a great resource to monitor your own accounts for any reported compromises. Well, what if we created our
own unredacted collection of this data? Is there additional value? I believe so.
This is where things get tricky. While you can find copies of thousands of stolen databases all over the internet,
what are the legalities of downloading and possessing the data? First, let me say that I am not an attorney and I
offer no legal advice. I have spoken with many attorneys and prosecutors about this, and the feedback was
similar from each. If the data is publicly available, possession alone would likely be legal. This is similar to viewing
an email stolen from Hillary Clinton posted on WikiLeaks or an internal document stolen from Google posted
on a blog. If you do not violate the laws and policies applicable in your city, county, state, or country when you
encounter this publicly available, yet stolen, data, then you could likely get away with viewing stolen credentials
existing in the various database leaks online.
What matters most is that you never take any illegal action with the data which you possess. In a
moment, I will explain how to access valid email addresses and passwords of billions of accounts. Using this
data as an investigation technique is one extreme, but attempting to use this data to access someone's account
is another. There is no situation where casually gaining access to a target's account is acceptable, unless you have
a valid search warrant or court order to do so. Since some of you are in law enforcement, this chapter may
identify new strategies for you when you have the legal authority to access an account. We will start with some
very basic legal "leaked" data in just a moment.
Some will argue that this type of book is reckless and teaches criminals how to do bad things. I disagree. The
criminals are way ahead of us. They have been using and sharing these techniques for many years. We can either
ignore this type of data and hope for the best, or we can face it head on and be better investigators. I choose
the latter. I once again encourage you to generate your own opinions as you read along. You may disagree with
me at times, which is ideal. That means you are really thinking about how all of this applies to you. Please
continue to read with an open mind and willingness to try new things.

Section III 437

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX
INVESTIGATIVE BENEFITS

Before proceeding, we should discuss some definitions for the types of data which will be discussed and
beneficial uses for each. We can then tackle the hardware and software requirements. First, let's define the scope.
There are many lengthy definitions and explanations of this type of data, but let's keep things simple. For the
purposes of this guide, the following apply.
Leaks: This type of data is accidentally released, or "leaked", through public online resources. It could be public
voter data which was legally acquired and then shared online; a marketing database of public information which
was archived through a third-party site; a misconfigured database which is publicly leaking all details if you know
where to look; or a plethora of other possibilities. The common theme is that no one intentionally compromised
a secure server and stole anything. Of the types of data, this is the most likely to be legally accessed.
Breaches: This type of data takes us into the criminal world. Breaches occur when a criminal compromises a
source of data illegally and copies the content. Examples include the Twitter and LinkedIn breaches where
people's email addresses and passwords were stolen and published online. There are now tens of thousands of
data breaches floating around, which have introduced billions of plain-text passwords for the majority of people
online. While accessing or downloading this publicly-available data might not get you into legal trouble, further
publishing it might. Also, your organization's policies might prevent you from this access. Possession and
research of this data is extremely common, even by us law-abiding internet citizens. More warnings are to come.
Logs: This data, sometimes referred to as "Stealer Logs" or "Password Logs" is illegally obtained from infected
machines. This occurs when a criminal tricks a victim into installing a virus which extracts data and sends it to
an accessible third-party server. This often includes stored passwords, session cookies, documents, photos, and
other sensitive information. This may sound like a rarity, but hundreds of thousands of victim's logs are uploaded
every day. This type of data can expose the passwords of people who are not within any known data breaches,
and the content is much more likely to be accurate.
Ransomware: This type of data is also illegally acquired. Criminals install a virus within a company's network;
infect many machines; make a copy of all data; encrypt all files on the network; and hold the decrypted copies
hostage. They then offer to decrypt all data for a ransom, and threaten to publish the stolen content if payment
is not received. Every day, new private company data is published online for anyone to see. This often includes
passwords, sensitive documents, and copies of passports.
Offense: There are many reasons for interest in leaks, breaches, logs, and ransomware. I always split them into
the sides of "offense" and "defense". Let's discuss a few of both, beginning with offense.
Identify Home Addresses: Some people do a very good job of keeping their names and home addresses off
of the internet. You may strike out with people search websites. However, they often slip-up when ordering
products to their home or registering to vote. Breach and leak data will often disclose true home addresses when
no other online resource was successful.
Identify Alias Account Holders: In a later chapter, I will explain how I uncover the true owners of many
"burner" email addresses due to common recycling of passwords. When my suspect uses a junk email account,
and it appears within a data breach, I may see his password is "badguy432!@". When I discover an additional
email address which had a password of "badguy432%$", I call that a lead. A surprising number of suspects will
use the same password across their real account and those used for criminal purposes. Once their information
appears within multiple data breaches, we can put together the pieces. I will provide many examples later.

438 Chapter 36

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Associate Social Network Accounts to People: Every day, my company uses breach data to connect a social
network account to a real person. When a service has a data breach, the otherwise hidden email addresses and
cellular telephone numbers are often disclosed along with the username for the product. This can immediately
uncover the account holder's true identity. When used in conjunction with the previous two examples, we often
solve entire cases from breach data alone.
Identify Telephone Number Owners: Very few of us own a landline these days which is listed in a phone
book. Many of us use VOIP numbers and prepaid cellular plans in order to protect ourselves. Criminals also do
this. When I want to identify the owner of a telephone number harassing a client, I assume the standard OSINT
techniques will fail. However, I typically identify some valuable information about these number from within
breach data.
Machine Identifiers: When my target shows up within stealer logs, I am often presented a unique hardware
identifier and screen capture of their desktop. This is priceless information which would never show up within
a website. Over the past year, stealer logs have been the most beneficial type of data to acquire for us.
Identify Additional Email Addresses: Once you know a target's unique username, searching that detail within
breach data often reveals additional email addresses very similar to the username. This can allow us to pivot to
new target data which could quickly open up an investigation.
Business Details: If you are investigating a company which has suffered a data breach, possessing the stolen
data can reveal much more than any website or business listing page. Knowing the number of customers, types
of encryptions, and other details can provide more value than public data.
Defense: The following are only a few defense considerations.
Identify Stolen Assets: If you are employed by a company which has suffered a data breach, you may want to
track down the stolen data. This helps understand the magnitude of the breach better than any claims or
demands from the criminal. I believe every victim of a data breach should investigate the incident and obtain
the data being shared publicly. This is one of our most requested services by clients.
Aid Disclosure Notifications: When a company is hit with a cyber-attack, there are many laws and regulations
which require notification to those impacted by the stolen data. Knowing the exact data being shared within
criminal groups can help identify the proper disclosure requirements for impacted victims.
Defend Future Attacks: I rely on our daily update of leaks, breaches, logs, and ransomware in order to protect
my clients. Every week, we are able to notify a potential victim of newly exposed information which could be
devastating to them if abused. In many cases, we can intercept this data before the criminals begin to use it. We
can then help the client block access before bad things happen.
These are only a few benefits to this type of data. I query our leaks, breaches, logs, and ransomware data every
day. My staff uses it to quickly identify new leads and to protect our clients. I cannot overstate the value of this
data, and the value of possessing your own offline copy.
Many online services which provide breach data queries are very limited. Most start as a free service but then
move to a paid model. Your organization may have policies preventing the purchase of stolen data. Most of
these services require an online account in order to conduct any queries. Your organization might prohibit this
type of access, and you risk the service collecting and analyzing your target queries. Finally, many of these
services eventually shut down. What would happen if your favorite breach data search engine disappeared
tomorrow? By the end of this guide, I hope that you have no concern for this.
We have a lot to discuss, and I am excited to work through the process together.

Investigative Benefits 439

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN
HARDWARE CONFIGURATION

Let's have a conversation about hardware. If you begin acquiring this type of data, it can become overwhelming
very quickly. Every day, our systems ingest anywhere from 50 GB to 5 TB of data. Storing and processing this
amount of data can be both time consuming and resource intensive. Even if you stick to public leaks, the data
can quickly fill your drives. Because of this, there are many hardware considerations. Don't worry, I offer
affordable solutions.
First, your selection of computer is vital. The following may sound contradictory to previous teachings, but I
no longer recommend a virtual machine for large data collections. Downloading huge files within a VM will be
slightly slower than on a host machine. Decompressing large files within a VM will be much slower, and VM
disk space will be quickly depleted. You could connect an external drive to the VM for storage, but the data
transfer speed will be a huge bottleneck to the overall efficiency of data queries. Unless you are simply dabbling
in this area, I would stay away from VMs while trying to conduct any extensive breach work.
Much like my opinions about investigative actions within OSINT Techniques, 10th Edition, I also never
recommend using your primary personal host computer for this type of work. I would never download breach
data onto the same machine which I use for personal communications, banking, or other private tasks. This is
because the type of data we will be discussing is full of bad players, malicious files, viruses, and other shady
concerns. I would never jeopardize the host operating systems of my personal machines to the risks associated
with stolen data. What do I do? I possess a machine solely for breaches, leaks, logs, and ransomware. It possesses
minimal applications and blazing fast hardware. When I am not actively downloading data, it is offline. However,
that may be extreme for you.
In the previous book, I stressed the importance of a dedicated OSINT computer which possessed virtual
machine software for investigations. In some scenarios, I have no objection to also using this OSINT machine's
host operating system for breach data collection, but there are caveats which I will explain in a moment.
In a perfect world, you have a macOS or Linux machine dedicated to breach data collection and analysis, a
macOS or Linux machine dedicated to OSINT research, and another macOS or Linux machine for personal
use. However, I realize that is asking a lot and I understand that we do not live in a perfect world. If your
dedicated OSINT machine has Linux or macOS as the host operating system, I believe it is acceptable to use it
for the techniques explained throughout this guide. I also respect that many readers will prefer Microsoft
Windows due to familiarity and availability. Let's dive deeper into all of these considerations.
Apple macOS: In previous chapters, I praised macOS as a great operating system for OSINT machines. I stand
by this. The blazing fast virtual machines and Android emulation cannot be beat by Linux or Windows. The
hardened operating system is considered by many, including me, to be more secure than Linux or Windows (but
not as private as Linux). This OS also works well for data collection, with modification.
The disk speed should be your highest priority. Once you possess hundreds of gigabytes of data, queries will
take some time. As you work with larger datasets to make them more efficient to query, the disk speed will
determine if a command executes within seconds, minutes, hours, or days. I never recommend a "spinning disk"
hard drive, such as a standard 2.5" or 3.5" SATA drive. At a bare minimum, I recommend a newer Solid-State
Drive (SSD) for the operating system. This will be used to download data and to work with active files.
I believe any MacBook Pro with a newer M series processor (M1, M2, M3) is optimal for the tasks presented
here. The internal storage drives for these systems are all comparable to newer NVMe drive speeds (7,000
MB/s), and more than sufficient for our needs. Internal drives for macOS systems prior to the M series
processors are fast, but typically cap at 2,500 MB/s. Much older machines which possess spinning disks or early

440 Chapter 37

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

SSDs will not be suitable. I present more on disk speed in a moment. I recommend at least 16 GB of RAM,
with 32 GB preferred. Overall, I believe a newer M Series MacBook Pro is the optimal machine for breach data
collection. It will be fast and fluid, and many people are already familiar with navigating the system. However,
any Linux computer comes in at a very close second place, as explained next.
Linux: If you have a Linux-capable machine available to dedicate to data collection, you will also be safe from
most threats. The processor speed is not the biggest concern, but it should be considered. If you can, upgrade
to a computer which is capable of housing an NVMe drive directly onto the motherboard. This small device
which resembles a stick of RAM can have read and write speeds of up to 7,000 MB/s. Let's compare them.
Average USB 3.0 Flash Drive:
Traditional Spinning Disk Hard Drive:
Solid-State Drive (SSD):
PCIe Gen 3.0 NVMe Drive:
PCIe Gen 4.0 NVMe Drive:

125 MB/s
135 MB/s
600 MB/s
3500 MB/s
7000 MB/s

In other words, a modern NVMe drive will provide 60 to 70 times faster data access. When you start dealing
with large data sets, you will want to squeeze every drop of data bandwidth possible. Computer RAM is also
important, and quite inexpensive. The more RAM you have, the more data which can be manipulated at a faster
rate. At a minimum, I believe you should possess 16 GB of RAM, but I prefer 32 GB.
I do not have any brand loyalty for Linux machines for this purpose. I care more about the hardware
specifications. Any processor on a motherboard which supports PCIe Gen 4.0 NVMe Drives will probably be
sufficient for the tasks. Machines without this will also perform well, you will only see a speed decrease when
processing large amounts of data. For many years, I conducted this type of work without a 7,000 MB/s drive.
When I began, I was using slow spinning drives. If you can, start with existing repurposed hardware and identify
your own needs.
For most Linux breach data machines, I recommend the latest Long-Term Support (LTS) version of Pop!_OS
or Ubuntu (I prefer Pop!_OS). They will have most of the utilities we need by default, and adding the others
will be easy. They can also be installed on practically any hardware with default configuration. If you prefer
another flavor of Linux, it should also work the same.
Microsoft Windows: I would never consider a Windows host computer for data collection. However, I will
provide tutorials to make them work. The problems are two-fold. First, data manipulation and queries are
typically slower within Windows than Linux or macOS, and configuring your system to replicate the commands
within other operating systems will take some effort. However, we can get past that. My big complaint is risk.
Most of the shady data which we will acquire has been stolen from Windows machines.
Often, we encounter virus files which were involved in the theft. We do not want to infect our own Windows
machines while attempting to build our data collections. We encounter stealer log criminals who infect their
own Windows systems and upload stored credentials every day. I do not want you to join their ranks. If you are
very careful, you can make Windows work for you throughout this guide, but you have been warned. I highly
recommend dedicating a Linux or macOS system for this purpose.
I know that the data I download is toxic, but I don't care. If I encounter a virus included within some stealer log
data, I know it is likely targeted toward the Windows operating system and would have no impact on my macOS
or Linux machines. If I encountered a rare macOS or Linux threat, I know that there is no personal information
on this machine which could expose me. If the machine becomes infected, it is no big deal to wipe it out and
reinstall the OS.

Hardware Configuration 441

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

External Drives
I suspect many readers are not ready to commit to new hardware with multiple large internal NVMe drives for
these tasks. Therefore, I want to offer some considerations which cost less. If you are just beginning your journey
into data collection, consider a proper external drive for storage of your content. You can use your fast internal
drive for downloading and processing of your data, and then move your final product to an external drive. This
USB drive will be slower than anything internal, but we will only use it when we need to query the data. Once
we build our databases which index all data, the query speed will be very similar to that of an internal drive. I
would never consider a mechanical or flash drive for this process. Instead, I would rely on fast portable SSD.
For most readers, I recommend a 4 TB external USB-C SSD.
I have had great success with the SanDisk Extreme Portable SSD (amzn.to/3yPcMJ2) and the SanDisk Extreme
PRO Portable SSD (amzn.to/3MKbvZl). The "Pro" version boasts twice the speed of the regular version (2,000
MB/s vs. 1,000 MB/s), but this can be misleading. Many computers do not support "USB 3.2 Gen 2x2", and
your computer may only take advantage of half the advertised speed anyway. Do your research first. Even the
standard version should provide 1,000 MB/s of read access, which is eight-times faster than most mechanical
drives. You may encounter many reports of SanDisk SSD failures. This was a valid concern for a large batch of
devices, but was then corrected with a firmware update. Some reports claim there is still a problem with these
drives. Always check for firmware updates when you buy any device. I have never had any issues with mine, but
I have also had success with the SAMSUNG T7 Shield 4TB SSD ($240 - amzn.to/3SBo7qM). Again, do your
research.
Also consider disk space. While the $90 1 TB drive might be enticing, how quickly will you fill it up? I believe
the SanDisk 2 TB Extreme Portable SSD (amzn.to/3yPcMJ2) is a great starter drive. It can be purchased for
$125 and should be compatible with any modern computer. The 4 TB model (amzn.to/3sADepQ) typically
costs $250, but gives you double the storage space. I will be using the SanDisk 4 TB Extreme Portable SSD
(amzn.to/3sADepQ) for all of my demonstrations, but any SSD should work. Always check the USB
connections. If your computer only possesses a USB-A port, then you want to make sure you buy a drive which
includes this connection. I always prefer a USB-C port on the computer and direct USB-C to USB-C cable to
make that connection to the external drive. Do your homework before you commit.
Once you have an SSD full of exciting data, you will want to make a backup. Any drive could fail, and we do
not want to start over. I possess a 4 TB traditional spinning disk as my backup drive. These can be found online
and in retail stores for less than $100. I will be using a Toshiba Canvio Basics 4 TB Portable External Hard
Drive (amzn.to/3sBAJUk) for my demonstrations. Since it is only used for backup data, and I will never query
directly from it, speed is no concern. Once you have your external drives available, they should be reformatted
and encrypted. In later chapters, I explain how to use an external USB SSD for fast breach queries and a cheaper
drive for backups. It is vital to encrypt the data within these drives. What if they are lost, stolen, or seized? We
should protect this type of sensitive data. I always recommend encrypting drives before they store any data.
External Apple macOS Drives
Encrypting external drives within macOS is not always easy. Sometimes, macOS hides the settings we need to
protect an external device. As an example, I inserted a USB SSD which was formatted as "FAT32", which is
common for universal drive access. I wanted to erase the drive and encrypt it. However, the Disk Utility
application (Applications > Utilities) only displayed the following options. Right-clicking the drive in Finder also
did not present an option to encrypt the drive.

442 Chapter 37

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

The first step to take within the Disk Utility application is to select "Show All Devices" under the "View" menu.
Next, select the device (not the formatted volume) within the left menu and click the "Erase" button. This may
still only present volume formats which cannot be encrypted. Be sure to change the "Scheme" to "GUID
Partition Map". You should now see an option of "APFS (Encrypted)" under "Format". This option will encrypt
the entire external drive with macOS encryption. I believe this is the best option for users who will only need to
access this drive from a macOS system. If you want to follow along with my tutorials and use my script, make
sure to name the drive "DATA" and any backup drive "BACKUP".

External Linux Drives
Linux systems are more user-friendly for encrypting external drives. The following applies to Pop!_OS and
Ubuntu, but the steps should be similar for most Linux systems.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

In Ubuntu, launch "Files" and right-click your external drive.
Select "Format" and provide a name of "DATA" for your SSD.
Choose "Internal disk for use with Linux systems only (Ext4)".
Select the "Password protect volume" option.
Click "Next" and supply a secure password when prompted.
Confirm the password when prompted.
Click "next" until you reach the "Format" option and click it.
Repeat the process for your backup drive, but name it "BACKUP".

When you encrypt the drives, the process may take some time to complete. You will need to unlock it with the
password every time it is inserted into your machine.

Hardware Configuration 443

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

External Windows Drives
This is where things get tricky. If you have a professional version of Windows, then you should be able to rightclick the drives within Explorer and "Turn On BitLocker". This is always the preferred option. If BitLocker is
not available on your system, you could encrypt the entire disks with VeraCrypt, but this can present more
problems. I have seen many drives with full-disk encryption via VeraCrypt within Windows refuse to unlock,
and then have severe speed issues whenever things properly functioned. This is yet another reason I prefer to
stay away from Windows for this type of work.
Hardware Summary
Is this all overkill? Possibly. It depends on how much you rely on this type of data. Could you get by with just
using more traditional hardware for this task? Absolutely. It will only take more time to download, decompress,
process, clean, store, and query the data every day.
If you begin to rely on this data often, you might find yourself looking at faster machines with embedded ultrafast storage in order to make the process more tolerable. A MacBook Pro with 4 TB of internal 7,000 MB/s
storage is a luxury, but you will pay for it. A Linux machine with a 4 TB internal NVMe drive will be more
affordable, and just as fast. However, I want to be realistic. The current most affordable MacBook Pro with 4
TB of internal storage is $3700. A 4 TB External SSD is less than $250. The latter is more approachable.
There is no harm using older equipment in order to understand the strategies presented within this section. The
limit to your resources will become apparent as soon as you start dealing with large data sets.
As an example, I downloaded 250 GB of compressed stealer logs to an older Intel-based MacBook Pro laptop
with a 2,100 MB/s internal SSD. The decompression of the data took over an hour. Parsing the passwords from
the text files took another four hours. I replicated the exact same process on both a new MacBook Pro and a
new Linux machine with a PCIe Gen 4.0 NVMe Drive. The decompression on each took a few minutes, and
the extraction of passwords took less than ten minutes.
I deal with enough data to justify the expense of a dedicated machine for this purpose. When we start talking
about stealer logs, the vast number of files alone can be a bottleneck on most machines. It is common to extract
over two million very small files within a single compressed archive.
I will now assume that you have chosen a computer, operating system, external drive for storage, and external
drive for backups. We can now begin configuring our software.

444 Chapter 37

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT
SOFTWARE CONFIGURATION

Once you have your desired computer, you should configure the software required for the lessons within this
guide. If you are using a Linux machine for these tasks, you already have most of the utilities needed for our
commands. Programs such as cut, sed, and awk are included within most Linux systems. However, others are
not. This chapter will separate all required configurations by operating system. I will tackle all necessary
modifications to macOS, Linux, and Windows in their own sections. Once you have completed this chapter, all
remaining tutorials should work the same on each operating system. However, your desktop may appear
different than mine.
Apple macOS
The first application I install on any new macOS operating system is a package manager called Homebrew, often
shortened to Brew. This application is very beneficial when there is a need to install utilities which would usually
already be present on a Linux computer. It also simplifies installation of applications which would otherwise
require manual download or access to Apple's App Store. Brew is my favorite software for macOS computers.
The easiest way to install Brew is to visit the website brew.sh then copy and paste the following command into
the Terminal application (Applications > Utilities > Terminal). After completion, you are ready to use Brew to
install and update applications.
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.
com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
You will likely receive a notice from macOS that you need to install "Developer Tools". Click "Install" and
"Agree", then allow the process to complete. After Brew installation is complete, you will likely be presented
with one or two commands which need to be manually executed within Terminal. My installation presented the
following notice.

This is unique to my installation, as my chosen username was "ventura" at the time. Copy any commands
presented here and paste them within the same Terminal window, executing each by striking return. Let's test
everything with a few commands.
•
•
•
•

brew doctor - This command confirms that Brew is configured properly and that all paths are set.
You should receive a notice that "Your system is ready to brew".
brew update - This command checks for any pending updates to Brew itself. You should receive a
response of "Already up to date".
brew upgrade - This command updates any installed programs. You should receive no response
since we have not installed anything.
brew analytics off - This command disables Brew's embedded analytics which monitor the
number of times an application is installed using Brew. These metrics are only used to understand how
users interact with the product, but I prefer to limit my exposure.

If everything is working, you are now ready to use Brew as a software installation repository. Treat this as a
replacement for the App Store, but it does not require an Apple ID. If you are using a macOS host which already

Software Configuration 445

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

possesses Brew, your results will appear slightly different than mine. However, there is no conflict with these
tutorials and those within the book. Let's use Brew to install our first application.
brew install wget
This command ensures the Wget is installed, which we will use to download data from the internet within
terminal. Next, we should install Ripgrep. This is a faster version of Grep, which queries any file or folder for
specific text. We will use this to conduct general queries within specified large data sets when we need quicker
results than a standard text search.
brew install ripgrep
While Ripgrep is much faster than a standard Grep query, it has limitations. We will install Qgrep to take our
queries to the next level. Qgrep allows us to create compressed databases of our data and receive search results
in a fraction of the time Ripgrep takes to go through all of the data. First, navigate to the following URL within
your browser.
https://github.com/zeux/qgrep/releases/tag/v1.3
Download the most recent "macos" zip file to your default "Downloads" folder. Then, execute the following
within Terminal.
mkdir ~/Documents/Qgrep
cd Downloads
unzip qgrep* -d ~/Documents/Qgrep
chmod +x ~/Documents/Qgrep/qgrep
The first command creates a new directory titled "Qgrep" within the Documents folder of the current user. The
second command navigates to the Downloads folder. The third command unzips the file which you
downloaded, and places the data into the new folder you created in your Documents. The final command makes
the Qgrep file (program) executable.
Apple systems already possess sed, awk, cut, and many other commands which we will use throughout this
guide. However, we should not use these default applications. The macOS versions of these programs are slower,
less robust, and possess fewer features than the traditional Linux versions. Therefore, we need to download
better options and make them the default for our usage. Let's start with "Sed". This program will be essential
for replacing, removing, and modifying text within large data files. The following command installs the
application.
brew install gnu-sed
You can now use Sed, but you must use the command "gsed" if you want to use the "GNU" version which is
identical to the default Linux options. Executing "sed" within Terminal will still rely on the macOS version,
which is undesired. The following command will tell us how to change this.
brew info gnu-sed
You should receive something similar to the following.
GNU "sed" has been installed as "gsed".
If you need to use it as "sed", you can add a "gnubin" directory to your
PATH from your bashrc like:

446 Chapter 38

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

PATH="/opt/homebrew/opt/gnu-sed/libexec/gnubin:$PATH"
Copy and paste the "PATH" line into Terminal and press Return. You should now have "sed" as the new
version, but let's test with the following command.
sed --version
The result should include something similar to "sed (GNU sed) 4.9". If you see an error, you are still using the
macOS version. However, we have a new problem. If you were to completely close Terminal and open a new
instance, Apple's version of Sed will become the default again. This is quite an annoyance, but easily repaired.
Instead of simply executing the previous "PATH" command, we must create a hidden file in your home directory
called .zshrc (assuming you are using the latest version of macOS). We can do this with the following command.
touch ~/.zshrc
Next, we must open this file inside of a text editor to modify it with the following command.
open -a TextEdit ~/.zshrc
Finally, paste the previous PATH command into this file and save it, but do not close it. We should now be able
to close and open Terminal and see that the new version of Sed is the default. Let's replicate this process and
install a better version of Awk, which is a scripting language used for manipulating data. We will use it to sort
our large stealer logs later. First, take a look at the default version with the following command.
awk --version
The result should appear similar to the following.
awk version 20230909
This confirms we are using the default macOS version of Awk. The following command installs the GNU
version of Awk.
brew install gawk
We can now execute this new version of Awk with "gawk" inside of Terminal. However, "awk" will still rely on
the macOS version. The following command will tell us how to change this.
brew info gawk
You should receive something similar to the following.
GNU "awk" has been installed as "gawk".
If you need to use it as "awk", you can add a "gnubin" directory to your
PATH from your ~/.bashrc and/or ~/.zshrc like:
PATH="/opt/homebrew/opt/gawk/libexec/gnubin:$PATH"
Paste this PATH command on a new line into the .zshrc file which we previously created and save the file. Close
and reopen Terminal and you should now have "awk" as the new version, but let's test with the following
command.
awk --version

Software Configuration 447

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

The result should include something similar to "GNU Awk 5.3.0". If you see anything similar to "awk version
20230909", you are still using the macOS version. Let's do this again with the Cut command, which will be vital
for extracting columns of data later.
The following command installs the GNU version of Cut, along with many other valuable programs.
brew install coreutils
We can now execute this new version of Cut with "gcut" inside of Terminal. However, "cut" will still rely on
the macOS version. The additional programs within this repository will also require you to append "g" before
each execution. The following command will tell us how to change all of these utilities to the default GNU
version.
brew info coreutils
You should receive something similar to the following.
Commands also provided by macOS and the commands dir, dircolors, vdir
have been installed with the prefix "g".
If you need to use these commands with their normal names, you can add a
"gnubin" directory to your PATH with:
PATH="/opt/homebrew/opt/coreutils/libexec/gnubin:$PATH"
Paste this PATH command on a new line into the .zshrc file which we previously created and save the file. Close
and reopen Terminal and you should now have "coreutils" as the new version, but let's test with the following
command.
cut --version
The result should include something similar to "cut (GNU coreutils) 9.4". If you see an error, you are still using
the macOS version. This should also make the GNU version of Sort and other utilities the default. Perform one
last test with the following command.
sort --version
The result should include something similar to "sort (GNU coreutils) 9.4".
At this point, my .zshrc file appeared as follows. If you are using a macOS host which was used to create an
OSINT build following the previous book, you may see extra lines in the file, which are fine.
PATH="/opt/homebrew/opt/gnu-sed/libexec/gnubin:$PATH"
PATH="/opt/homebrew/opt/gawk/libexec/gnubin:$PATH"
PATH="/opt/homebrew/opt/coreutils/libexec/gnubin:$PATH"
When we start applying our techniques to automated scripts, we will need a program called Zenity to present a
selection menu. It can be installed in macOS with the following command (Zenity is already present within
Pop!_OS and Ubuntu).
brew install zenity

448 Chapter 38

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

FreeFileSync
Later in this guide, I will explain the importance of data backups. For now, install our synchronization program,
FreeFileSync, with the following steps.
•
•
•
•
•

Navigate to https://freefilesync.org/download.php.
Download the macOS version.
Double-click the downloaded file to extract the installer.
Double click the "FreeFileSync" package.
Complete the installation with the default options.

Telegram
This is the only program which I have reservations about. While it will be vital for our acquisition of data, it also
presents mild risk. Telegram is the wild west. Anything goes. There is no content moderation or policing of any
kind. You can find anything there, even things which should not be found. I do not believe the Telegram
application itself is harmful, but there is no lack of viruses available to download within it. This is why I prefer
to conduct data collection on an isolated machine away from my personal documents and financial logins.
Telegram can be installed with the following Homebrew command.
brew install --cask telegram
Transmission
Many large data sets will only be available as a torrent file through the BitTorrent file distribution system.
Transmission is our best software for this purpose. It can be installed within macOS with the following
command.
brew install --cask transmission
jq
The application jq is a lightweight and flexible command-line JSON processor. We will later use it to parse long
JSON entries into a single line of data. It can be installed within macOS with the following command.
brew install jq
Tor Browser
Your stock web browser can only access public websites. This web browser can do the same, but can also access
sites on the Tor network. When we get into ransomware conversations and data collection, this will be required.
It can be installed with the following command.
brew install --cask tor-browser
Python
Your macOS system should now have Python ready within Homebrew, but we can make sure with the
following commands
brew install python
brew unlink python && brew link python
python3 -m pip install pip
Software Configuration 449

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

BBEdit
I highly recommend the free version of BBEdit (barebones.com/products/bbedit) for all macOS users. It opens
incredibly large files and allows you to easily view and modify the content. I know of no other text viewer which
will open a 5 GB file in seconds and allow immediate find and replace functionality.
Linux
Linux users are all set on most of the software requirements, but there are a few programs which we will need
to install. We should first make sure our system is updated and then confirm that we have two essential programs
installed with the following commands within Terminal. I highly recommend that you add a shortcut to Terminal
within your Linux Dock. For Pop!_OS and Ubuntu, you can do this by clicking the nine dots in the Dock;
navigating to Terminal; right-clicking the Terminal icon; and selecting "Add to Favorites".
sudo apt update
sudo apt upgrade -y
sudo apt install -y wget
sudo apt install -y curl
sudo apt install -y python3-pip
The first two commands update our Linux software. The third command ensures the Wget is installed, which
we will use to download data from the internet within terminal. The final command installs Curl, which will also
help us retrieve data within Terminal.
Next, we should install Ripgrep. This is a faster version of Grep, which queries any file or folder for specific
text. We will use this to conduct general queries within specified large data sets when we need quicker results
than a standard text search.
sudo apt install -y ripgrep
While Ripgrep is much faster than a standard Grep query, it has limitations. We will install Qgrep to take our
queries to the next level. Qgrep allows us to create compressed databases of our data and receive search results
in a fraction of the time Ripgrep takes to go through all of the data. First, navigate to the following URL within
your browser.
https://github.com/zeux/qgrep/releases/tag/v1.3
Download the most recent "ubuntu" zip file to your default "Downloads" folder. Then, execute the following
within Terminal.
mkdir ~/Documents/Qgrep
cd Downloads
unzip qgrep* -d ~/Documents/Qgrep
chmod +x ~/Documents/Qgrep/qgrep
The first command creates a new directory titled "Qgrep" within the Documents folder of the current user. The
second command navigates to the Downloads folder. The third command unzips the file which you
downloaded, and places the data into the new folder you created in your Documents. The final command makes
the Qgrep file (program) executable.

450 Chapter 38

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

FreeFileSync
Later in this guide, I will explain the importance of data backups. For now, install our synchronization program,
FreeFileSync, with the following steps.
•
•
•
•
•
•

Navigate to https://freefilesync.org/download.php.
Download the Linux version.
Right-click the downloaded file within Files and select "Extract Here".
Double-click the new FreeFileSync folder.
Right-click the FreeFileSync file and choose "Run".
Complete the installation with the default options.

Note that FreeFileSync does not play well with ARM-based processors, but a typical Linux Intel or AMD laptop
should not have any issues. Some software app stores have FreeFileSync ready to install, which is much easier.
Telegram
This is the only program which I have reservations about. While it will be vital for our acquisition of data, it also
presents mild risk. Telegram is the wild west. Anything goes. There is no content moderation or policing of any
kind. You can find anything there, even things which should not be found. I do not believe the Telegram
application itself is harmful, but there is no lack of viruses available to download within it. This is why I prefer
to conduct data collection on an isolated machine away from my personal documents and financial logins. If
you are using Ubuntu, you can install Telegram with the following command.
sudo snap install telegram-desktop
If you are using a Linux system without Snap, then the following applies.
•
•
•
•
•
•

Navigate to https://desktop.telegram.org.
Expand the "Show All Platforms" option.
Click "Get Telegram for Linux" to download the file.
Right-click the downloaded file within Files and select "Extract Here".
Double-click the "tsetup" and "Telegram" subfolder.
Right-click the Telegram file and choose "Run".

Transmission
Many large data sets will only be available as a torrent file through the BitTorrent file distribution system.
Transmission is our best software for this purpose. It can be installed within Pop!_OS and Ubuntu with the
following command.
sudo apt install transmission
jq
The application jq is a lightweight and flexible command-line JSON processor. We will later use it to parse long
JSON entries into a single line of data. It can be installed within Linux with the following command.
sudo apt install -y jq

Software Configuration 451

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Tor Browser
Your stock web browser can only access public websites. This web browser can do the same, but can also access
sites on the Tor network. When we get into ransomware conversations and data collection, this will be required.
The Linux installation of Tor Browser changes often. Always follow the latest instructions on their official
website at https://tb-manual.torproject.org/installation/.
Microsoft Windows
I want to stress again that conducting breach data work within Windows is risky. It is also more complicated.
While the following steps will configure your system to replicate most of the techniques within the remaining
chapters, expect occasional hurdles. The experience with Windows will never be as fluid as Linux or macOS.
During the Mac setup, we used Homebrew as a package manager. For Windows, we will use Chocolatey. It can
be installed with the following steps.
•
•
•

Click the Windows menu button (lower-left) and type "powershell".
Right-click on Windows PowerShell and select "Run as Administrator".
Enter the following command and press Enter (Confirm if required).

Set-ExecutionPolicy AllSigned
•

Execute the following single command within PowerShell.

Set-ExecutionPolicy Bypass -Scope Process -Force;
[System.Net.ServicePointManager]::SecurityProtocol =
[System.Net.ServicePointManager]::SecurityProtocol -bor 3072; iex
((New-Object
System.Net.WebClient).DownloadString('https://community.chocolatey.org/
install.ps1'))
If everything is working, you are now ready to use Chocolatey as a software installation repository. You do not
need to open PowerShell any more. We will use Command Prompt to install our desired applications.
•
•
•

Click the Windows menu button (lower-left) and type "cmd".
Right-click on Command Prompt and select "Run as Administrator".
Enter the following commands and press Enter after each.

choco install -y wget
This command ensures the Wget is installed, which we will use to download data from the internet within
terminal. Next, we should install Ripgrep. This is a faster version of Grep, which queries any file or folder for
specific text. We will use this to conduct general queries within specified large data sets when we need quicker
results than a standard text search.
choco install -y ripgrep
While Ripgrep is much faster than a standard Grep query, it has limitations. We will install Qgrep to take our
queries to the next level. Qgrep allows us to create compressed databases of our data and receive search results
in a fraction of the time Ripgrep takes to go through all of the data. First, navigate to the following URL within
your browser.
https://github.com/zeux/qgrep/releases/tag/v1.3

452 Chapter 38

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Download the most recent "windows-x64" zip file to your default "Downloads" folder. Then, execute the
following within Command Prompt.
mkdir C:\users\%username%\Documents\Qgrep
cd C:\users\%username%\Downloads
choco install -y unzip
unzip qgrep* -d C:\users\%username%\Documents\Qgrep
The first command creates a new directory titled "Qgrep" within the Documents folder of the current user. The
second command navigates to the Downloads folder. The third command installs the unzip program. The fourth
command unzips the file which you downloaded, and places the data into the new folder you created in your
Documents.
Windows systems do not possess sed, awk, cut, and many other commands which we will use throughout this
guide. The following commands install the applications which will replicate the actions within the previous Linux
and macOS tutorials.
choco install -y sed
choco install -y awk
choco install -y curl
choco install unxutils
FreeFileSync
Later in this guide, I will explain the importance of data backups. For now, install our synchronization program,
FreeFileSync, with the following command. You may be required to manually confirm the installation and then
exit any popup window.
choco install -y freefilesync
Telegram
This is the only program which I have reservations about. While it will be vital for our acquisition of data, it also
presents mild risk. Telegram is the wild west. Anything goes. There is no content moderation or policing of any
kind. You can find anything there, even things which should not be found. I do not believe the Telegram
application itself is harmful, but there is no lack of viruses available to download within it. This is why I prefer
to conduct data collection on an isolated machine away from my personal documents and financial logins.
Telegram can be installed with the following Chocolatey command.
choco install -y telegram
Transmission
Many large data sets will only be available as a torrent file through the BitTorrent file distribution system.
Transmission is our best software for this purpose. It can be installed within Windows with the following
command.
choco install transmission

Software Configuration 453

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

jq
The application jq is a lightweight and flexible command-line JSON processor. We will later use it to parse long
JSON entries into a single line of data. It can be installed within Windows with the following command.
chocolatey install jq
Tor Browser
Your stock web browser can only access public websites. This web browser can do the same, but can also access
sites on the Tor network. When we get into ransomware conversations and data collection, this will be required.
The Windows installation executable can be found at https://tb-manual.torproject.org/installation/.
Virtual Private Network (VPN)
This is a vital layer of protection when working with leaks, breaches, and logs. We should start with an extended
understanding of the Virtual Private Network, which I will only present as VPN for the rest of this guide. Let's
work through the "what" before we tackle the "why" and "how".
First, let's take a visual look at a traditional home network configuration without any protection. Your home
internet connection begins at the modem, which could be a fiber, cable, satellite, or DSL connection. It is the
first device within the home which accepts data from your provider and makes it available to your devices. From
there, most people possess a Wi-Fi router which wirelessly broadcasts the availability of internet access to any
other device in the home. Any device connected to your internet service is using the same public Internet
Protocol (IP) address. When your laptop, tablet, or any other internet-capable device connects to any website
or service, it shares the same public IP address assigned to your home internet connection. In many cases you
are the only person in the world using this IP address at any given time.
I estimate that 99% of households possess a similar scenario to this example. Some may argue that there is no
threat in sharing your true IP address with every site you visit and service you use. I disagree. While a true IP
address does not disclose the home address of the user directly, it does present numerous threats, as outlined
next.
•

•

•

Internet Activity: Assume that I am suing you through civil court, and I have convinced a judge to
grant me a court order to collect your internet activity. Since I know where you live, I can assume the
provider of your internet service. A court order could be issued to your ISP for your internet activity.
If your ISP logs your traffic, which most do, the response would tell me every domain which you visited
and the dates and times of occurrence. I could use this to prove you were visiting specific websites or
transmitting large amounts of data to designated services. I have witnessed child custody disputes enter
online history as evidence, which was then presented without any context to discredit a parent's abilities
to care for a child.
Search Queries: When you connect to Google and conduct a search for "inteltechniques", the response
URL presented to you, including the search results from the query, is
https://www.google.com/search?q=inteltechniques. Does your Internet Service Provider (ISP) know
you conducted a search on Google? Yes. Do they know you searched for "inteltechniques"? No. This
is because Google encrypts the actual search URL. The provider of your internet connectivity can only
see the domain name being accessed. It cannot see any details about specific pages or any credentials
entered. This is why https versions of websites are so important. Your browser can see this entire URL,
but it does not directly share any details with your provider. However, if a site does not include proper
SSL protocols, then any search query on that site could be captured by your ISP.
Location: Next, assume I want to know where you live. I know your email provider is Gmail, and a
subpoena to them would reveal your IP address at a specific date and time. If this IP address belongs

454 Chapter 38

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•

•

•

to your internet service provider, a second subpoena will disclose the address of service (your home).
This could be applied to any website you have ever visited.
Fingerprinting: Every website you visit collects and stores your IP address. If you are the only person
in the world with that address, they know when you return to the site and any activity conducted. They
know every click you make, and attribute that to you. This is one way so many websites seem to know
what you are searching, buying, and discussing before you provide the full details within your devices.
Download History: Shady law firms monitor questionable files such as pirated movies, music, and
other media. Once an IP address is seen downloading content without authorization, they issue
subpoenas to identify the home with the offending connection. They then issue threats of lawsuits
unless an extortion is paid. Does your nephew use your home Wi-Fi without supervision at any time?
You could be liable for any of his activity.
Breach Data: Every day, services are breached and the databases they possess are published online.
Almost all of these include data containing the home IP address of the user. If you have followed my
other guides to possess a private home which is not publicly associated with your name, this could
unravel all of your hard work. I can search your name within breach data and see your true home IP
address. I can then use the previous methods to discover your home address. If you have multiple
accounts in alias names, I can tie them all together thanks to your unique public IP address.

If you believe any of this could be a threat to you, then you need a properly configured VPN. VPNs provide a
good mix of both security and privacy by routing your internet traffic through a secure tunnel. The secure tunnel
goes to the VPN's server and encrypts all the data between your device and that server. This ensures that anyone
monitoring your traffic before it reaches the distant server will not find usable, unencrypted data. Privacy is also
afforded through the use of a distant server. Because your traffic appears to be originating from the VPN's
server, websites will have a more difficult time tracking you, aggregating data on you, and pinpointing your
location. Let's now revisit the previous threats with the assumption a VPN was used.
•

•

•
•
•
•

Internet Activity: Your ISP cannot see your internet activity when a VPN is used. They only see that
a connection was made to the VPN, and then all traffic is encrypted. They have no log of your online
activity. Reputable VPN companies have a "No Logging" policy which prevents them from storing the
IP address assigned to you at any given time. They would be unable to identify your traffic from
everyone else.
Search Queries: After connecting to your VPN, you conduct the same search as before. Does your
ISP know you conducted a search on Google? No. Does your VPN provider know you conducted a
search on Google? Yes. Does your VPN provider know you searched for "inteltechniques"? No. If you
encounter a website without proper SSL, your queries will be visible to the VPN provider, but not
attributed directly to you.
Location: VPNs offer numerous server locations which you can select and change at any time. You
can make your website traffic appear to be occurring from London, New York, Los Angeles, Australia,
or any location in between. No online service will ever know your true location.
Fingerprinting: The IP address provided by the VPN will be shared with hundreds or thousands of
other users at any given time. However, websites will then rely on other ways to try to track you. We
will tackle this later.
Download History: When a law firm subpoenas your VPN IP address to begin their extortion
campaign, they will discover the owner of the address is a VPN company which cannot provide the
information they need. They will move on to the next victim.
Breach Data: When you appear in the next data breach, the IP address associated with your account
will be a VPN provider, and that address will be useless to anyone wanting to use this information in a
malicious manner.

VPNs are not a perfect anonymity solution. It is important to note that VPNs offer you privacy, not anonymity.
The best VPNs for privacy purposes are paid subscriptions with reputable providers. There are several excellent
paid VPN providers out there and I strongly recommend them over free providers. Free providers often

Software Configuration 455

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

monetize through very questionable means, such as data aggregation. Paid VPN providers monetize directly by
selling you a service, and reputable providers do not collect or monetize your data. Paid providers also offer a
number of options which will increase your overall privacy and security.
I think I have worked through the "what" and "why", it is now time to tackle the "how". This is where you must
select a VPN provider. If you already possess a VPN service which you like, then you should proceed with that
option. Please do not change providers solely because of my preference. However, please be informed of my
considerations when choosing a VPN provider and ensure that your selection passes all of the tests.
Recommending a VPN provider today is similar to claiming a preference for the best version of Linux. No
matter what I say, I will offend someone. Please note that any reputable VPN provider is better than none at all.
However, I do believe there are some much better than others. Okay, enough beating around the bush. I
currently use and recommend Proton VPN as my exclusive VPN provider, and almost all of my clients possess
a Proton VPN account. Please allow me to explain my opinions, and my reasons for not recommending your
favorite service. Overall, I mostly care about the following categories when choosing a VPN provider.
•

•

•

•

No Logging: As stated previously, most reputable VPNs offer a "No Logging" policy which prevents
them from saving logs about customer usage. However, some VPN companies claim this logging policy
without following it. To be fair, the idea of absolute zero logs is a myth. There must be some sort of
logging of connections for the service to function. I care mostly about whether the service stores these
logs and has access to them when demanded. Services such as PureVPN have been caught giving away
logs of user activity when demanded by court order, and breaches have disclosed that other services
such as Fast VPN store user data indefinitely. There is no way to truly know the logging of your VPN
data, so we should all monitor any news about this data being released. Proton VPN (and many others)
have never had a known exposure of user logs. Proton VPN's logging policy can be found online at
https://protonvpn.com/support/no-logs-vpn.
Audits: This is where we can have some comfort. Since we are not able to monitor VPN servers directly,
we must rely on third-party audits of services. Any reputable VPN provider will not only hire companies
to audit their service, but will also publicly share those audits with the world. In April of 2022, Proton
VPN announced that they hired Securitum to conduct a full audit of their logging practices. Proton
shares the audits for all of their products (Mail, VPN, Calendar, and Drive) on their official website
located at https://proton.me/blog/security-audit-all-proton-apps. I never trust any company to abide
by their rules. I place more trust in the third parties allowed to access the code.
Open Source: When VPN companies provide their application's source code publicly, it allows anyone
to examine the code for any malicious intent. I do not have the abilities to do this myself, but I appreciate
that many other people much smarter than I am are scrutinizing the code of these services. However,
we never truly know if the open-source code is the same as what is being used in the live environment.
This is why those audits by third parties are so important. Publicly disclosing the code of a VPN
application is a nice layer, but I do not care about that as much as the other categories presented here.
Jurisdiction: This will vary for every reader. You might want to consider the legal jurisdiction of your
provider. Many privacy purists are very picky about the location of a VPN company's headquarters. Do
you live in the United States and worry that your government will execute federal court orders to obtain
your activities? Then you may not want to choose a U.S. service (or any service within cooperating
jurisdictions). Proton VPN is hosted in Switzerland, and they only respond to Swiss court orders. They
cannot disclose any user activity, but they could disclose payment details or account identifiers if forced.
However, I believe that we place too much emphasis on jurisdiction. If you are using a U.S. server,
there could always be infiltration regardless of the jurisdiction. Any country could decide to cooperate
with your country at any time. I would rather rely on a Swiss company than a Russian or Chinese
provider which may not be following any rules. As a U.S. citizen, I do prefer my provider to be outside
of U.S. court order authorization, especially for civil cases. However, I am not naive. If my government
placed all of their power into investigating me, I am sure that Swiss (or any other) courts would not
protect me. My chief threat is not the government. It is data breaches, ISPs, and online services. If you
are truly worried your government is monitoring you at all times, a VPN will not save you.

456 Chapter 38

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•

•

•
•

Ownership: Who owns your chosen VPN service? Is it a small independent company with a handful
of employees or a large conglomerate which owns 20 VPN brands? The first option may seem better
since only a small group of people can access your data, but some may find the second option better to
disappear within the thousands of other users. I prefer something in between. I prefer the VPN
company to be independently-owned and not a brand under a larger VPN umbrella company. However,
I also want a large user base to exist so that my traffic can disappear within all of the other activity.
Proton VPN works for me.
Advertising: If you search for "VPN reviews" online, you will immediately find numerous "unbiased"
review sites. However, if you look closely, you will see something peculiar. The same handful of VPN
providers seem to make the list every time. Also, these providers are never the services commonly used
within the privacy communities. This is because these are mostly paid placements. In some cases, large
VPN companies own the entire website and simply recommend their own products. I ignore all VPN
review sites. I also ignore any providers which participate in this activity. This is another reason I prefer
Proton VPN. They do not create fake review sites to push their product.
Connection Options: Most VPN providers offer several servers within numerous countries. This is
not unique to Proton VPN, but I am happy with their selection.
Firewall Capabilities: Most reputable VPN providers allow their product to be used within a home
firewall. If you are unsure, look for tutorials from your chosen provider by searching the VPN name
along with "pfSense" or "OpenVPN". Within my testing, Proton VPN works very well with firewall
software.

I should now explain my reasons for choosing Proton VPN over other respected providers. The first to discuss
is Mullvad. Proton VPN and Mullvad are commonly the most recommended VPN providers within various
privacy communities. I believe the privacy policies of Mullvad are great, and I have no concern over their
presence in Sweden. My issue is with the reliability of the service. I tested Mullvad in late 2021 and late 2022. In
2021, I experienced slow speeds and dropped connections while using their official application. In 2022, this
seemed to have been fixed, but I could not maintain a reliable connection within my firewall via OpenVPN.
Many others have complained of the same failures online. A VPN is no good if it fails. If you use Mullvad and
have no issues, I see no reason for you to change. Since I have experienced bad results with their service and
support, I choose Proton VPN. I also do not like that anyone can brute force Mullvad user numbers to access
an account without password.
I should address an important disclosure. Most VPN companies offer an affiliate program which rewards people
for introducing their product to new users. I have had an affiliate partnership with both Proton VPN and PIA
for several years. If you use my referral at https://go.getproton.me/aff_c?offer_id=26&aff_id=1519, Proton
knows that you were referred by me, and I receive a small one-time financial reward. I receive absolutely no
details about you or your order.
Some will say that this affiliate payment is the only reason I recommend their product. My response to that is
three-fold. First, I would not risk my reputation recommending a product which I do not use and trust. Second,
PIA was paying me more for a referral than Proton VPN, and I have stopped recommending PIA for many
users. Finally, another VPN company offered me the highest reward ($60) for every referral, but I would never
use their product. Therefore, I declined the offer.
I would recommend Proton VPN without the affiliate partnership, but I want to be transparent about our
relationship. I also allow these affiliate payments to directly support our efforts to keep this guide updated. If
you sign up for Proton VPN and want to support my show, please use the previous referral link. If you cringe
at the idea of using any referral link, then you can find the absolute same pricing by simply purchasing from
protonvpn.com, and I receive nothing. I was not paid anything by Proton VPN for inclusion in this guide. I
maintain a page which always displays my VPN preferences at https://inteltechniques.com/vpn.html. It
also contains any affiliate links.

Software Configuration 457

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

When purchasing a VPN service, you will need to make payment online. This is tricky because we want a VPN
to hide our traffic, but then we have to tell the company something about us when we make the payment. This
leaves a digital trail which could be tracked back to us. Therefore, you need to consider your own threat model
when paying for a VPN service.
I prefer to pay via Bitcoin from my offline software wallet stored on my computer. There is no Bitcoin exchange
involved and I can provide any name desired for the VPN. Proton maintains a website for instructions to pay
for service via Bitcoin on their site at https://protonvpn.com/support/vpn-bitcoin-payments.
If you have the ability to pay via Bitcoin from a local wallet, I believe you should. However, that does not make
you magically invisible. You will still be connecting from your home internet connection, so the VPN provider
will always see that unique identifier. You will also be paying bills in your name, sending email from your account,
and conducting other sensitive activity while connected to this VPN. My point is that VPNs do not make us
bullet-proof. This is why we choose providers with proper privacy policies, but we never expect to be completely
untraceable.
Because of this, I do not have a strong objection to purchasing your VPN service with a standard credit card.
Since Proton VPN has a respected no IP logging policy, they can never translate a public-facing VPN IP address
back to your home address. They can also never translate your true home IP address to a VPN address once
used. In other words, Proton VPN could never provide the internet activity associated with a name, or the user
of specific access to a website.
Some will scoff at these remarks. Some will say that you should only pay for a VPN with cash in the mail (some
services do offer this). However, I believe it is overkill. The digital trail will still be present. If you are a fugitive
looking for a way to check your email without getting caught, a VPN is not for you. If you are looking to prevent
abusive technologies from monitoring your online activity, a VPN can be quite helpful.
Once you have purchased a VPN service, you need a way to connect to it for daily use. For most readers, and
almost every client I have consulted, I recommend possessing the standard application provided by the VPN
company on any device where it might be needed. These branded apps should suffice for most needs. Proton
VPN can be downloaded from https://protonvpn.com/ for both mobile and desktop devices. Once installed,
simply provide your account credentials and you can launch your VPN connection.
While I am at home, I rely on a network-wide firewall with VPN, as explained within my digital guide Extreme
Privacy: VPNs & Firewalls. When I am on this home network, I do not need any VPN application running on
my devices. I only need to launch them when I am away from home and need VPN protection (or prefer a
different IP address than that which is in use at my home).
I strongly advise that you always protect your internet usage through a VPN while conducting any of
the tasks described throughout this guide.
It is now time to practice our Terminal commands and work with some data. Please do not skip the following
chapter! The included tutorials explain usage of several important commands which will be abbreviated in later
chapters about leaks, breaches, logs, and ransomware. At the minimum, please familiarize yourself with the
overall techniques.

458 Chapter 38

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE
TERMINAL COMMANDS

In the previous print edition of this book, I offered several Terminal commands which helped clean specific
data sets. Those commands are still here within this new digital edition, but I want to offer more explanation
and tutorials. Mastering Terminal commands will make your journey into data collection much easier. Therefore,
this chapter has two goals. First, I want to dive into each command which we will use throughout this section
to offer better understanding of the actions instead of the results. Second, I want to offer numerous practice
examples which allow you to test what you have learned before moving on.
Everything in this chapter should be conducted within Terminal. For Linux and macOS users, that means
opening the Terminal application and inputting text directly into the window. For Windows users, that means
opening Command Prompt and replicating each command. Note that Windows file paths require a backslash
(\) instead of the traditional forward slash (/). As long as you are working within the target directory, this should
not be much of an issue. Please note my previous warnings about data work within Windows.
Let's start with something basic. The cd command allows us to change the working directory within Terminal
while the ls command displays the contents of the current directory. We have already relied on this heavily in
the first section of this book, but let's revisit to make sure we are all capable of the task. Open Terminal within
macOS or Linux and execute the following commands, striking Enter/Return after each.
ls
cd /
ls
The first command should have displayed the files within your home directory, which may have identified folders
such as Desktop, Documents, Downloads, and other default directories. The second command changed the
directory to the root of your operating system, and the third command should have revealed a different set of
folders. Next, let's replicate this within Command Prompt in Windows.
dir
cd \
dir
The first command should have displayed the files within your home directory, which may have identified folders
such as Desktop, Documents, Downloads, and other default directories. The second command changed the
directory to the root of your operating system, and the third command should have revealed a different set of
folders. Notice the backslash for Windows instead of the forward slash.
Since we will mostly be working within the home directory, Linux and macOS users can use the tilde (~) in the
upper left area of your keyboard to navigate to the default home directory, regardless of the computer username.
An example follows.
cd ~/
If you wanted to navigate directly to the Downloads folder within your home folder, you would conduct the
following.
cd ~/Downloads
Navigating to your Documents or Desktop would be as follows.

Terminal Commands 459

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

cd ~/Documents
cd ~/Desktop
Windows users have another hurdle here. It does not accept a tilde, and insists on "%username" to change into
the default user's home directory. The same commands as before would appear as follows.
cd C:\users\%username%\
cd C:\users\%username%\Downloads\
cd C:\users\%username%\Documents\
cd C:\users\%username%\Desktop\
We can now use the mkdir (make directory) command to create a new folder titled "Datatest" within our
Documents folder with the following macOS/Linux command.
mkdir ~/Documents/Datatest
We can switch to this folder with the following.
cd ~/Documents/Datatest
We can use the rm (remove) command to delete this folder. Execute the following.
rm ~/Documents/Datatest
You should have received an error about Datatest being a directory. This is because rm by itself can only delete
a file. The following command will delete the folder and all contents. Be careful with this.
rm -r ~/Documents/Datatest
If you wanted to move a folder instead of delete it, the following will make a directory called Datatest within
your Documents folder and move it to your Downloads folder.
mkdir ~/Documents/Datatest
mv ~/Documents/Datatest ~/Downloads/Datatest
Windows users have more hurdles. The same commands as before would appear as follows. Note that the final
two lines are one single command.
mkdir C:\users\%username%\Documents\Datatest
cd C:\users\%username%\Documents\Datatest
rm -r C:\users\%username%\Documents\Datatest
mkdir C:\users\%username%\Documents\Datatest
mv C:\users\%username%\Documents\Datatest
C:\users\%username%\Downloads\Datatest
I will assume that you can now navigate through directories within Windows systems. While all of the following
commands will function within any operating system, any path changes will only be presented for macOS and
Linux machines. Use these lessons to replicate on Windows when needed.
The Cat command (short for concatenate) reads data from a file and provides its data as output. It can be used
to view the contents of an existing file or combine several files into one. We will mostly focus on the latter, but

460 Chapter 39

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

let's try both. Within Terminal (or Command Prompt), navigate to your Downloads folder to conduct the
following.
cd ~/Downloads
curl -O https://inteltechniques.com/data/osintdata/cat-1.txt
curl -O https://inteltechniques.com/data/osintdata/cat-2.txt
cat cat-1.txt
The first command switched our working directory to the Downloads folder. The next two commands
downloaded two files which I have on my website. The final command displays the content of the first file,
which should appear as follows.
1
1
1
Your first simple assignment (Assignment #1) is to display the content within the second file downloaded. All
commands for these practice exercises are within the final page of this chapter. Your results should appear as
follows.
2
2
2
We now want to combine these two files into one file called cat-final.txt with the following command.
cat cat-1.txt cat-2.txt > cat-final.txt
Your result should appear as follows.
1
1
1
2
2
2
You could add as many files as desired before the ">" which would be combined into the designated file. We
will use ">" often, which is basically telling Terminal to output the data into a specific file. Let's remove the
three files with the following commands.
rm cat-1.txt cat-2.txt cat-final.txt
It is now time to test your abilities. I have four files at the following locations:
https://inteltechniques.com/data/osintdata/cat-1.txt
https://inteltechniques.com/data/osintdata/cat-2.txt
https://inteltechniques.com/data/osintdata/cat-3.txt
https://inteltechniques.com/data/osintdata/cat-4.txt
Attempt to download these four files within your Downloads directory, combine them all into a new file called
cat-test.txt, delete the four files downloaded, and display the content within the newly-created file. Again, the
commands for this are at the end of the chapter, this is specifically Assignment #2.

Terminal Commands 461

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Did you see 1's, 2's, 3's, and 4's within the file? If so, you passed. The Cat command may seem simple and
unnecessary, but I promise it will pay off. When we start downloading hundreds of small log files which need
combined into one, this utility will be vital.
The next command will probably be the most used in your arsenal. Sed, short for stream editor, is used to
perform basic text transformations on an input file. It allows us to replace specific text throughout an entire file
with different text or nothing at all. It is similar to "find and replace" within a text editor, but it is much faster
without file size restrictions. When we need to modify a 100 GB file, we will use Sed since that file could not be
opened through a traditional text editor. Some examples should help explain.
Assume you have a large file titled customers.csv with thousands of lines similar to the following.
username:test1,email:test@gmail.com,password:pass123,ip_address:10.2.2.3,phone:5551212,id:32
username:test2,email:test2@gmail.com,password:pass456,ip_address:10.2.2.4,phone:5551213,id:33
This might actually be acceptable for most data collection enthusiasts, but I am bothered by the wasted data.
The presence of "username", "email", "password", etc. on every line is unnecessary. If this file only contained
200 entries, it would be no big deal. If the file contained 500,000,000 lines and had a size of 200 GB, we would
really be wasting drive space. Our queries would also take much longer due to the searching of unneeded data.
Let's fix this with the following command.
sed "s/username//gI" customers.csv > customers-cleaned.csv
We should now dissect this command.
sed
"s/
username/
/
g
I"
customers.csv
>
customers-cleaned.csv

The command executable.
The command to substitute.
The text we want to find.
The text we want to replace (nothing in this example).
The command to replace every occurrence in the document.
The command to ignore case (UPPERCASE = lowercase).
The input file.
The command to output to another file.
The output file name.

The result of this command would be the following.
:test1,email:test@gmail.com,password:pass123,ip_address:10.2.2.3,phone:5551212,id:32
:test2,email:test2@gmail.com,password:pass456,ip_address:10.2.2.4,phone:5551213,id:32
This removed "username" but left the colon (:) in the line. We could have modified our query better with the
following.
sed "s/username\://gI" customers.csv > customers-cleaned.csv
The results would now appear as follows:
test1,email:test@gmail.com,password:pass123,ip_address:10.2.2.3,phone:5551212,id:32
test2,email:test2@gmail.com,password:pass456,ip_address:10.2.2.4,phone:5551213,id:33
Notice the presence of the backslash (\) before the colon. This is because a colon is not a standard letter or
number. We must always "escape" any special characters with a backslash. I rarely conduct a Sed operation with
both an input and output file. I prefer to edit the files "in-place" with the "-i switch. Note that the "I" option at
the end only works for the GNU version of Sed, which we previously installed. The following command would

462 Chapter 39

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

replicate our modification to the customers.csv file without the need to create a new file, and would ignore all
case (UPPERCASE or lowercase).
sed -i "s/username\://gI" customers.csv
Linux and macOS users should have no problem with this command. Windows users have yet another hurdle.
The "-i" is not allowed within Windows, as that version of Sed does not include the in-place option. Windows
users will need to modify their commands to match the previous example which creates a new file with the
omitted details. Did I mention that I prefer macOS and Linux machines? The following command would remove
the information and create a new file within Windows.
sed "s/username\://gI" customers.csv > customers-cleaned.csv
It is now time to practice. Your assignment (#3) is to download the file from the following URL and remove
"username:", "email:", "password:", "ip_address:", "phone:", and "id:" from it using Sed. Don't forget to escape
the underscore (_). This will require eight commands (found on the last page of this chapter) including the
instructions to switch to your Downloads directory and download the file. For extra credit, Cat the file to view
the contents.
https://inteltechniques.com/data/osintdata/sed-customers.csv
Your result should appear as follows.
test1,test@gmail.com,pass123,10.2.2.3,5551212,32
test2,test2@gmail.com,pass456,10.2.2.4,5551213,33
If you had a 200 GB original file, your new file would be almost half of the size. This is a substantial savings of
disk space, and will be vital once you start collecting large data sets. We are barely scratching the surface with
the power of Sed. Consider the following examples, assuming you want to modify a file titled 1.txt. If this all
seems overwhelming, please do not worry. We will conduct many more examples using real data throughout the
rest of this section.
Replace "OLD" with "NEW":
sed -i "s/OLD/NEW/gI" 1.txt
Replace all commas with hyphens:
sed -i "s/\,/\-/gI" 1.txt
Remove all data until the first comma:
sed -i "s/^\([^,]*,\)//gI" 1.txt
Remove all data until the first colon:
sed -i "s/^[^:]*://gI" 1.txt
Remove all single quotes:
sed -i " s/\'//gI" 1.txt
Remove all double quotes:
sed -i "s/\"//gI" 1.txt
Remove all data between "A" & "B:
sed -i "s/\(A\).*\(B\)/\1\2/" 1.txt
Remove all data between "{" and "}":
sed -i "s/{[^}]*}//gI" 1.txt
Remove all digits between commas:
sed -i "s/\,[0-9]*\,//gI" 1.txt
Remove any line beginning with "A":
sed -i "/^A/d" 1.txt
Remove empty lines:
sed -i "' '/^$/d" 1.txt
Remove first 10 lines:
sed -i "1,10d" 1.txt
Remove first ten characters:
sed -i "s/^.\{10\}//" 1.txt
Remove everything after the last "_":
sed -i "s/_[^_]*$//" 1.txt
Remove hyphens from phone numbers: sed -i "s/\([0-9]\{3,\}\)-/\1/g" 1.txt
I realize we are getting very technical early in this guide. If you feel overwhelmed, don't worry. I promise this
will make more sense when we deal with real data.
Before we move on, we should discuss the likelihood of errors on macOS and Linux machines due to unreadable
characters. If your downloaded data includes non-ASCII characters, such as ¡, µ, ¶, and many others, the Sed
command may not function. This is especially true for the Cut and Sort commands. Therefore, we should start

Terminal Commands 463

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

preceding every command with "LC_ALL=C" within macOS and Linux. This command sets the system's
language to ASCII. This should avoid character errors and, in some cases, make our queries faster. Let's apply
it to our next tutorial about the Cut command.
Cut is extremely powerful. It allows us to easily remove entire columns of a comma separated value (CSV) file
without the need to identify specific text with Sed. Assume you have downloaded a file titled cut-1.txt with text
similar to the following.
internal_id,customer_id,email,password,value
1,kjh234g5,test1@gmail.com,pass123,ydt-655-hhjk4-yui7-6ddgghejkr776djhdi8f
2,asd9f87,test2@gmail.com,pass456,ydt-655-hhjk4-yui8-6ddgghejkr776djhdi8f
3,;l2k3j45,test3@gmail.com,pass789,ydt-655-hhjk4-yui9-6ddgghejkr776djhdi8f
You might have no need to store the "internal_id", "customer_id", and "value". We often see large data sets
with too much content which will never be beneficial to us. This is where Cut comes in. It allows us to select
specific columns to extract while ignoring the others. My command to extract only the desired columns would
be the following.
LC_ALL=C cut -d, -f3,4 cut-1.txt > cut-2.txt
We should understand each part of the command, as follows.
LC_ALL=C
cut
-d,
-f3,4
cut-1.txt
>
cut-2.txt

Sets character type to avoid errors (macOS and Linux).
The "cut" command.
Identifies the delimiter, which is a comma here (,).
Identifies the desired columns to keep, by number.
Identifies the input file.
Directs the result to output somewhere.
Determines the new file name.

The results of this command are as follows.
email,password
test1@gmail.com,pass123
test2@gmail.com,pass456
test3@gmail.com,pass789
Assignment #4 will test your understanding of the Cut command. Your assignment is to extract only the "email",
"password", and "phone" columns using the Cut command from the file located at the following URL. Your
result file should be titled cut-cleaned.txt.
https://inteltechniques.com/data/osintdata/cut-1.txt
The original data appears as follows.
internal_id,email,customer_id,password,phone,value
1,test1@gmail.com,kjh234g5,pass123,202-555-1212,ydt
2,test2@gmail.com,asd9f87,pass456,202-555-1213,ydt
3,test3@gmail.com,l2k3j45,pass789,202-555-1214,ydt
Your final result should appear as follows.
email,password,phone

464 Chapter 39

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

test1@gmail.com,pass123,202-555-1212
test2@gmail.com,pass456,202-555-1213
test3@gmail.com,pass789,202-555-1214
Later in this section, we will use the Cut command to extract desired columns from numerous files in one
command. Next is an equally vital command called Sort. This allows us to not only sort the contents of a file
alphabetically, but it also removes duplicate lines when we provide specific parameters. This is important because
a lot of the data we will acquire is full of redundant entries eating up your valuable disk space. Assume you have
a file called sort.txt which contains the following content.
test1@gmail.com:pass123
test2@gmail.com:pass456
test1@gmail.com:pass123
test2@gmail.com:pass456
test1@gmail.com:pass123
The following command would remove the duplicates; sort the remaining content alphabetically; and create a
new file called sorted.txt.
sort -u sort.txt > sorted.txt
This new file would have only the following content.
test1@gmail.com:pass123
test2@gmail.com:pass456
Windows users should have noticed an error with this command. That is because Windows wants "/unique"
instead of "-u" to complete the command. Windows hurdles seem to be the common theme here, and Windows
users would execute the following command.
sort /unique sort.txt > sorted.txt
This was a very basic example, but you will encounter extremely large data which will need more tweaking. The
following is my preferred command when I need to sort large data. This command will only work on macOS
and Linux systems.
LC_ALL=C sort -u -b -i -f -S 80% --parallel=8 sort.txt > sorted.txt
The following is a breakdown.
LC_ALL=C
sort
-u
-b
-i
-f
-S 80%
--parallel=8
sort.txt
>
sorted.txt

Sets the character type to avoid errors.
The "sort" command.
Instructs to only save unique entries (no duplicates).
Ignores leading blanks.
Ignores non-printable characters.
Ignores case when UPPERCASE and lowercase are the same.
Sets buffer size to use 80% of the system's RAM.
Uses 8 processor threads to run processes concurrently.
Identifies the input file.
Directs the result to output somewhere.
Determines the new file name.

Terminal Commands 465

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

I chose 8 threads because my machine can support it. You may need to lower or raise this number based on
your own hardware. I believe 80% of RAM buffer will work fine on most machines. It is now time for you to
test your skills. Assignment #5 challenges you to sort a file titled sort-1.txt located at the following URL.
https://inteltechniques.com/data/osintdata/sort-1.txt
Download this file to your Downloads folder; sort for unique entries and save the file as sort-2.txt; remove the
original file; and display the content of the new file within Terminal. The results should appear as follows.
test1@gmail.com:pass123
test2@gmail.com:pass456
test3@aol.com:pass789
test3@gmail.com:pass789
Sometimes, you will encounter data which is simply too large to process. I once retrieved a 260 GB text file full
of names, DOBs, and SSNs which possessed several duplicates. Sorting a 260 GB file on a machine with 8 GB
of RAM will likely crash the computer and required a reboot. I never like to sort files which are more than twice
as large as my amount of RAM. Since I possess 32 GB of RAM in my machine, I try to keep my sorting limited
to files which are under 64 GB each. However, I was able to successfully sort a 100 GB Stealer Logs file with
32 GB of RAM, as explained in a later chapter, but the process was quite taxing on my drive. Sometimes, I need
to split a large file into several pieces, and then sort those pieces back into one file which excludes all duplicates.
To do this, we must first understand the Split command.
Split allows us to turn one large file into several smaller files. There are many options with this command, but
we will focus only on those most relevant to our use. Assume I have a 260 GB file titled SSN.txt in my
Downloads directory which contains thousands of duplicate entries. I will first split this one file into multiple
files, each containing 25 GB of data (25,000,000,000 bytes), with the following commands.
cd ~/Downloads
split -C 25000000000 --additional-suffix=.txt SSN.txt
The result should be multiple files titled xaa.txt, xab.txt, xac.txt, etc., which each have a 25 GB file size. We can
now sort each of these independently with the following macOS/Linux command.
for f in x*.txt; do LC_ALL=C sort -u -b -i -f -S 80% --parallel=8
sorted_$f; done

$f >

This command finds all files which begin with "x" and end with ".txt" inside the working directory; executes our
sort command on each file; saves each result with "sorted" added to the beginning of the file; and quits when
finished. The result is several files titled sorted_xaa.txt, sorted_xab.txt, sorted_xac.txt, etc. Each file has been
sorted to only contain unique entries, with all duplicates removed. We can now use our sort command with the
merge flag (-m) to quickly merge all sorted files into one large file which only contains unique entries
(macOS/Linux).
LC_ALL=C sort -S 80% --parallel=8 -m -u sorted* > SSN-Sorted.txt
LC_ALL=C
sort
-S 80%
--parallel=8
-m
-u
sorted*
>

Sets the character type to avoid errors.
The "sort" command.
Sets buffer size to use 80% of the system's RAM.
Uses 8 processor threads to run processes concurrently.
Merges pre-sorted files into one
Instructs to only save unique entries (no duplicates).
Identifies all input files which start with "sorted".
Directs the result to output somewhere.

466 Chapter 39

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

SSN-Sorted.txt

Determines the new file name.

Notice I omitted the flags for ignoring some characters since we have already sorted those out in the previous
command. With my data example, the file of SSN entries went from 260 GB to 210 GB by removing duplicates.
We will revisit all of this when we start sorting large files of stealer log data. I understand the frustration of
Windows users. While we can make most of these commands work, there will always be hurdles. The remaining
chapters of this book will allow Windows machines to acquire all of the data presented. However, minimizing
and cleaning that data will be troublesome. I encourage Windows users to focus more on data acquisition than
processing the content. Queries will work fine in future chapters, but the time required to search the data will
be more. All of this will always be easier for macOS and Linux users.
It is now time to test your skills. Assignment #6 brings together a lot of what you have learned in this chapter,
and we will be using real breach data. This will require a lot of work, but it will be great exercise for future
demonstrations. I have a 19 MB file at the following URL which contains true Whois data. We will get much
more of this data later, but this is a good way to test our skills. Inside this file is many names and addresses of
domain owners who did not protect the information. However, it also contains many duplicates and columns
of data which are unneeded.
https://inteltechniques.com/data/osintdata/Whois.txt
Your challenge is to conduct the following.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Download the file into your Downloads directory.
Remove all double quotes (") from the file.
Extract the "domain_name", "registrant_name", and "registrant_address" columns into a file titled
"who.txt".
Split the who.txt file into 1 MB chunks.
Delete the Whois.txt and who.txt files.
Sort each split file for unique entries, each saved as a file beginning with "sorted".
Merge the "sorted" files into one file called Whois-Sorted.txt.
Remove the sorted* and xa* files.

Your Whois-Sorted.txt file should be 1.1 MB and include entries similar to the following.
00000777.com,Peng Goh,G.P.O. Box 732
0012222.com,Peng Goh,G.P.O. Box 732
0013333.com,Peng Goh,G.P.O. Box 732
This file is not very useful, but it served as a good demonstration. We will identify much better data sets later.
The splitting of such a small file and then merging the contents was unnecessary, but I wanted you to practice
these steps for preparedness when large data is acquired.
We will use the Awk command several times throughout this section. There are unlimited uses for this utility,
but let's take a look at one way it may be beneficial. Assume you have a large file with entries similar to the
following.
test1@gmail.com:pass123
test2@gmail.com:pass456
null
test3@gmail.com:pass789
null
test4@gmail.com:pass321

Terminal Commands 467

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Many times, we will encounter data which has empty, or "null" lines which eat up space for no reason. Using
Awk, we can remove any lines which do not contain a specific character. The following would remove any lines
which do not contain a valid email address, with "@" inside the line, within a file titled awk-1.txt, which is saved
to awk-2.txt.
awk '/@/' awk-1.txt > awk-2.txt
The result follows.
test1@gmail.com
test2@gmail.com
test3@gmail.com
test4@gmail.com
Another utility I often use is Word Count (wc). The following commands display the number of lines within
our files.
wc -l awk-1.txt
wc -l awk-2.txt
The results from these two files were "6" and "4" respectively. I often use this to determine how many entries
are within a data breach. As I am writing this, I found a data leak from a person search website. The file was
over 100 GB, and the wc command revealed it possessed 21,304,654 entries.
You should now practice querying data. We previously installed Ripgrep, which allows us to quickly search
within any data type for results matching our query. A typical query, which would search through all data within
a file titled passwords.txt for the word "michael", would appear as follows. Excluding the file name would search
all files within the working directory.
rg -a -F -i -N michael passwords.txt
The following is the breakdown.
rg
-a
-F
-i
-N
michael
passwords.txt

The command to launch Ripgrep.
The switch to search all data as text.
The switch to treat the pattern as a literal string.
The switch to ignore case.
The switch to exclude the line number.
The search term.
The file to search.

In this demonstration, I added a switch (-) for each option, which is overkill. We can add all of the options
within one command and only one switch. In other words, our original Ripgrep query of rg -a -F -i -N michael
passwords.txt can be replicated much more simply as rg -aFiN michael passwords.txt. Ripgrep is a very powerful
query tool with many options. Let's work through the most common query parameters which we will use over
the next several chapters.
rg -aFiN T@Gmail.com Search EXACTLY t@gmail.com or T@GMAIL.com
rg -aiN Test@Gmail.com
Search ALL test and gmail and com
rg -aFN T@Gmail.com Search ONLY T@Gmail.com and not t@gmail.com
rg -aFi Test@Gmail.com Search EXACTLY test@gmail.com and show line #
rg --help
Show Ripgrep help menu

468 Chapter 39

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Each of these commands will search within all of the files contained in the current folder. If you are in Terminal
within your Downloads folder and conduct these queries, they will search every file present within that folder,
which may be undesired. As you begin to collect multiple large files, you will want to specify the file desired.
The following would only search through a specific voter file.
rg -aFiN Test@Gmail.com Voter-FL-2018.txt
If you want to search two specific pieces of data within a single file, the following would apply. It would display
only lines within our file which contain BOTH "Michael" and Bazzell".
rg -aFiN "Michael" | rg -aFiN "Bazzell" Voter-FL-2018.txt
If you want to search two potential pieces of data within a single file, the following would apply. It would display
only lines within our file which contain EITHER "Bazel" or Bazzell".
rg -aFiN "Bazel|Bazzell" Voter-FL-2018.txt
Overall, we will almost always use the combination of rg -aFiN "target". You can play with this now against any
test files you have downloaded. I think we are finally ready to start acquiring some real data.
I think I have exhausted the patience of many readers who want to dive into data acquisition. There are many
more commands which will need explained and tested, but we can tackle those within the remaining chapters.
The following page provides the solutions to the assignments presented within this chapter. The following
chapter finally begins our journey into data collection.
Assignment #1
cat cat-2.txt
Assignment #2
cd ~/Downloads
curl -O https://inteltechniques.com/data/osintdata/cat-1.txt
curl -O https://inteltechniques.com/data/osintdata/cat-2.txt
curl -O https://inteltechniques.com/data/osintdata/cat-3.txt
curl -O https://inteltechniques.com/data/osintdata/cat-4.txt
cat cat-1.txt cat-2.txt cat-3.txt cat-4.txt > cat-test.txt
rm cat-1.txt cat-2.txt cat-3.txt cat-4.txt
cat cat-test.txt
Assignment #3
cd ~/Downloads
curl -O https://inteltechniques.com/data/osintdata/sed-customers.csv
sed -i "s/username\://gI" sed-customers.csv
sed -i "s/email\://gI" sed-customers.csv
sed -i "s/password\://gI" sed-customers.csv
sed -i "s/ip\_address\://gI" sed-customers.csv
sed -i "s/phone\://gI" sed-customers.csv
sed -i "s/id\://gI" sed-customers.csv
cat sed-customers.csv
Assignment #4
cd ~/Downloads
curl -O
LC_ALL=C cut -d, -f2,4,5 cut-1.txt > cut-cleaned.txt

-1.txt

Terminal Commands 469

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

cat cut-cleaned.txt
Assignment #5
cd ~/Downloads
curl -O
-1.txt
LC_ALL=C sort -u -b -i -f -S 80% --parallel=8 sort-1.txt > sort-2.txt
rm sort-1.txt
cat sort-2.txt
Assignment #6
cd ~/Downloads
curl -O
sed -i "s/\"//g" Whois.txt
cut -d, -f2,11,13 Whois.txt > who.txt
split -C 1000000 --additional-suffix=.txt who.txt
rm Whois.txt who.txt
for f in x*.txt; do LC_ALL=C sort -u -b -i -f -S 80% --parallel=8 $f >
sorted_$f; done
LC_ALL=C sort -S 80% --parallel=8 -m -u sorted* > Whois-Sorted.txt
rm sorted* xa*

470 Chapter 39

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER FOURTY
DATA LEAKS

The chapter on data breaches and leaks within the previous edition of this book began with a demonstration
involving voter data. I included links to websites which hosted the entire voter databases of nine states. The
person who hosted those sites had filed FOIA requests for the public voter data, and published the results when
received. In early 2022, all nine sites began forwarding to a genealogy site which did not possess any voter data.
However, data never dies.
In early 2023, a new site called BreachForums (breachforums.is) surfaced to replace the previously-seized
BreachForums (breached.to) site which was created to replace the previously-seized RaidForums
(raidforums.com) site. The latest site is basically a clone and serves as a marketplace for breaches and leaks. I do
not recommend visiting this site until you have a full understanding of the consequences. I also do not
ever recommend purchasing credits which allow download of stolen data. There is no need, as we will access
the data in other ways without paying criminals through a shady website.
In June of 2022, BreachForums released an official database of complete voter registration details from twentyeight states. This included the original leaked data I discussed in the previous edition, plus numerous additional
states acquired from other leaks. All of this data is technically public, but it was never meant to be published in
this way. The original source of this voter data was official government agencies, and the data was obtained
legally. The publication in this format is likely against some, if not all, state laws.
If you believe possession of this type of invasive data is illegal, consider Ohio's stance. If you navigate to
https://www6.ohiosos.gov/ords/f?p=VOTERFTP:HOME:::::: and click on the "Statewide Voter File" tab, you
can download the entire database of registered voters directly from the official Ohio government domain. This
is truly public data and avoids the use of third-party providers.
The data set for Washington state is also available from the government if you promise not to further distribute
or
sell
the
content.
You
can
download
the
entire
database
directly
at
https://www.sos.wa.gov/elections/vrdb/extract-requests.aspx.
Other states' voter databases are also out there, and we will find them together. The data sets include millions
of people's names, dates of birth, and home addresses (some otherwise unpublished), along with numerous
email addresses and cellular telephone numbers. I hope by now you could see how this might be beneficial to
online investigations. Let's begin with some official data from Ohio.
I navigated to https://www6.ohiosos.gov/ords/f?p=VOTERFTP:HOME:::::: and clicked the "Statewide Voter
Files" tab. I then downloaded all four options which consisted of approximately 425 MB of compressed data.
After decompressing the files, I was presented 4.6 GB of text files, each beginning with "SWVF". Now, let's
apply the lessons learned within the previous chapter to slim down this data. First, I combined all four files into
one file titled Ohio.txt with the following Terminal command while in the Downloads directory.
cat SWVF* > Ohio.txt
I then removed the unnecessary individual files with the following.
rm SWVF*
I now want to view the contents of the new text file, but it is quite large. While my computer could open this
entire file within a text editor, it is never a good idea. When we start downloading 50 GB files, we will crash our

Data Leaks 471

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

computers if we try to open them. Instead, we will use Ripgrep. The following command displays only the first
two lines within Terminal.
rg -m2 "" Ohio.txt
The result is overwhelming, as each line of this text file is enormous. However, this is a digital guide, so I will
include the entire output on the following page. The first 80% of the file is line one while the last 20% is line
two. The first line identifies the column headers (descriptions), while the remaining lines are the actual content.
This first line can be quite helpful. It allows us to understand what the data is and why we may want it. The
second line was modified for publication here.
We can see the valuable data within the second line. Most of the beneficial content is at the beginning. For this
demonstration, I only want the names, addresses, and dates of birth of the voters, so I will eliminate all undesired
data with the following Cut command.
cut -d, -f4,5,6,8,12,13,14,15,16,17 Ohio.txt > Ohio-clean.txt
This extracts only columns 4, 5, 6, 8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, and 17, saving that data to a new file called Ohioclean.txt. The output is similar to the following.
"SMITH","DAVID","E","1975-05-20","33 MAIN","","WINCHESTER","OH","45697",""
Compare that to the ortiginal entry as follows.
"OH0016289533","01","3086","SMITH","DAVID","E","","1975-05-20","1991-10-08","ACTIVE","R","33
MAIN","","WINCHESTER","OH","45697","","","","","","","","","","","","","","","","02","04","SOUTHER
N OHIO ESC","","","ADAMS COUNTY/OH VALLEY LSD (ADAMS)","","LIBERTY
TOWNSHIP","01AAI","05","90","14","LIBERTY
TOWNSHIP","","","R","X","","","R","X","","X","R","X","","","","X","","R","X","","","X","","","R","","X","
","","","","","X","R","","","X","R","","X","R","X","","","","X","R","X","","","X","R","","","X","","","X","R",
"","X","","","X","R","X","","","","X","R","R","X","","","X","","","X"
I do not like all of those unnecessary quotes, so I will remove them with the following command.
sed -i "s/\"//gI" Ohio-clean.txt
The result is as follows.
SMITH,DAVID,E,1975-05-20,33 MAIN,,WINCHESTER,OH,45697,
Not only is that cleaner, but the 4.6 GB file is now only 549 MB. I believe this file is finished, and it can be
added to our external SSD. The easiest way to do this is via the default file explorer application for your operating
system. I prefer to create a new folder at the root of my external SSD titled "Voter" for this type of data. If you
named this external drive "DATA", as previously explained, we can search the file with the following commands
within macOS.
cd /Volumes/DATA/Voter
rg -aFiN Bazzell Ohio-clean.txt
As a reminder, the first command navigated to our external drive. The easiest way to do this is to type "cd",
followed by a space, and then drag the desired folder from the Finder into the Terminal box. This also works in
Pop!_OS and Ubuntu, however, the Linux command to change into the external drive is different.

472 Chapter 40

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

cd /media/$USER/DATA/Voter
rg -aFiN Bazzell Ohio-clean.txt
This "rg" command queries our file for the presence of "Bazzell". The following is the redacted result.

Many states either offer their voter registration as a download option within their website or via a request directly
to their offices. If I can extract raw data from the official source, that is always preferred, but I never make any
requests to the government. The data is almost always floating around other places. Currently, you can download
110 GB of voter registration data from the BreachForums site previously mentioned. I cannot provide a direct
link to the content, but I can help you find it. The following Google query should provide an abundance of links
to investigate.
site:breachforums.is voter
One of the first results during my test was titled "USA Voter Databases Collection" which contained full voter
registration files for 28 states. However, one must possess eight "credits" in order to download the data. I never
recommend purchasing credits, as this gives money to criminals and is often unnecessary. Most of these breach
forums allow users to earn credits for free by posting and commenting within various areas of the site. One
should be able to generate eight credits by leaving eight comments within an area about recent events. This is
quite annoying, but it should get the job done. I typically try to find alternative sources, such as Telegram.
We previously installed Telegram onto our devices. However, you must possess a Telegram account in order to
access any data. This requires registration through the Telegram mobile app. This can be completed from a
mobile device or an Android emulator, as explained in OSINT Techniques, 10th Edition. If Telegram requires a
phone number for your account, they should accept Google Voice and other VoIP numbers. Creating the
account can be a pain, but the effort is justified.
Once you have Telegram Desktop open and logged in to an active account, we can begin searching. First, query
"Open Data" within the search field and look for a room similar to the following.

Once you see the room, click the "Join Channel" option to save it to your favorites. Next, search for "voter"
within the search field and scroll down to the "Messages" section of the results. This immediately displayed the
following.

Data Leaks 473

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Clicking these links opened that portion of the channel. This presented three interesting compressed voter
registration databases. Mine appeared as follows.

Clicking the down arrows began the download process. The first file contained Colorado voter data. After
decompressing the 676 MB 7z file, I possessed 3.1 GB of data. If desired, you could replicate the previous demo
to combine and clean all of the data. Repeating the process and searching for "Data Stream" then "Voter"
presented the following. Within a few minutes, I had downloaded six state's voter rolls.

You will likely find that many of the voter data sets on Telegram are outdated. Some are from 2015 or earlier.
Since voter registration data is always changing, you may want to research newer sources. In 2020, RaidForums
offered a huge download consisting of current voter registration from 19 states. That website is now gone, but
the data lives on. Shortly after the domain was seized, someone created a torrent file which allows download of
every official data set from the defunct website.
I am not allowed to provide a direct link to this data, but I can tell you how I found it. Searching "Raidforums
databases" produced over 100,000 results, most of which provided no valuable content. However, the following
search within Google produced ten interesting results.

474 Chapter 40

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

raidforums "magnet:?" database 2020
The "magnet:?" term forces Google to only display results which include that specific text with those characters.
This will identify sites which contain an actual torrent link within them, instead of sites which simply discuss the
data. The first two links both offered a torrent magnet link, similar to the following fictitious example.
magnet:?xt=urn:btih:651570d629b83e95353c47f9e1
I copied and pasted this data into my browser, which then prompted me to choose an application to open the
data stream. I chose Transmission (some systems will choose this by default). This launched Transmission and
prompted me to choose the download location. If you have modified your default Transmission settings, your
experience might be different. I chose my Downloads folder and clicked "Open". The torrent file was added
and launched. I double-clicked the torrent and clicked the "Files" tab. It took a few minutes for the metadata to
be retrieved, but I eventually saw a list of data within this torrent.
I immediately deselected all of the files. In some systems (macOS), you may see a button labeled "None" which
will do this for you. Within others (Linux), you will need to deselect the highest "Database Leaks" checkbox.
This prevents immediate downloading of all 486 GB of this data. After I deselected all boxes, I scrolled down
to the "Voter Databases" folder and selected it. My system began downloading the data from all states, including
millions of people's names, home addresses, and dates of birth.
I hope you can now see the value of voter data, but we are just getting started. It is important to note that each
state stores their data in a unique format. The Ohio example was just to begin the conversation about merging
and cleaning of data. There is much more to discuss. Many of the voter files are already stored within commaseparated value files (CSV). Ripgrep will easily search through those for you and you may not need to take any
further action. Some are text files with a slightly different format. Please remember that this tutorial is not
intended to provide a single solution to all data you might encounter. We are only dipping our toes into the
world of leaked data.
I have collected CSV files of leaked data which possessed over 200 columns of data. Many times, the majority
of this content is not valuable and taking up precious space. The smaller your files are, the faster you can search
them with Ripgrep. I could replicate this for the other state sets if desired. I could also clean up all of the other
states and make one huge file called Voter.txt if I really want to minimize things. As you see, there are always
many ways to do this.
Consumer Data
You may have noticed the wealth of information within the previously explained torrent file. Most of the
databases within this download contain user credentials and fit better in the next chapter. However, let's focus
on some more data within this torrent before we move on. I began the download for the USA Consumer data.
We never truly know the source of any data leak, but these were supposedly extracted from an unknown
consumer reporting agency through a poorly configured server.
The USA Consumer file contains almost 12 million entries, each of which displays the email address, full name,
home address, and telephone number of all victims. The website which they used to enter information was also
collected. A typical entry appears as follows.
wjan@yahoo.com,Jane,Burns,26 Main St,CA,Fullerton,94011,,,(650) 7222000,http://www.coolsavings.com,Coupon Offers
Next, I opened Telegram and searched for a popular channel called "LEAKS AGGREGATOR" and joined. I
then searched for "consumer" and perused the options. I found a series of files titled "2021_1_USA_Consumer",

Data Leaks 475

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

each of which appeared to be for a specific state. The Texas collection was so big it needed split into two
compressed files, totaling 2.5 GB. The decompressed files were almost 20 GB, and were split into 21 CSV files.
Each contained 414 columns of text, including full names, home addresses, email addresses, telephone numbers,
and interests.
I went ahead and downloaded all nine files, which contained consumer data for eight states. This presented 5.56
GB of compressed data which decompressed to 59 GB of CSV files. I then conducted the following to clean
the data, based on the previous tutorials. First, I needed to Cat all the files into one large file. Since the files are
spread over multiple subdirectories, I needed to modify my commands. Below is a partial screen capture of the
files located within the Telegram Desktop folder located in my Home Downloads folder.

I executed the following command, which combined all of those files, regardless of being in subfolders, into
one 59 GB file called 1.txt.
cd ~/Downloads/Telegram\ Desktop
cat * */* > 1.txt
The "* */*" command basically tells Terminal to look into the current folder and one level deep into any
subfolders. I then cleaned the data with the following commands.
cut -d, -f3,4,5,8,10,17,18,43,410,411,412 1.txt > 2.txt
sed -i "s/\"//gI" 2.txt
mv 2.txt ~/Downloads/Consumer-Cleaned.txt
rm -r *
Based on the previous tutorials, can you identify each command's usage? The first command cut the columns
in which I was most interested from the original file into a file called 2.txt. The second command removed all
of the quotes. The third command moved my cleaned file into my Downloads directory with a more descriptive
name. The final command deleted all of the files which I no longer need in the original folder, making it ready
for the next attack. The final file was 1.6 GB, containing 31,631,871 entries, which each appeared as follows.
personfirstname,personmiddleinitial,personlastname,housenumber,streetname,state,ZipCode,FullPhoneNumb
er,email,datasource,ip
SMITH,J,MIKE,64,Main,VT,05488,8028682000,me@hotmail.com,diaperbeagle.com,24.127.95.2
This type of consumer data is all over the internet. Most of it contains enormous amounts of unhelpful data,
but you may want to archive the original versions of everything you find. In this case, we went from 59 GB to

476 Chapter 40

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

just over 1 GB, and maintained the most commonly searched data. Let's go ahead and query for anyone with
my last name with the following commands.
cd ~/Downloads
rg -aFiN bazzell Consumer-Cleaned.txt
The result should include the following redacted sample.

Marketing Lists
Let's move on to something in a grey area. There are many companies that collect millions of email addresses
and create spam lists. These then get sold to companies selling fake pharmaceuticals or designer handbags, and
those unwanted messages end up in your inbox. We are all on a spam list somewhere. These are very expensive
to buy, especially the good ones. One such database is the Kyle Data, or "Special K", spam list. This database
contains 178,288,657 email addresses. There are no passwords, but it does contain other sensitive data. In
November of 2015, a web page at updates4news.com temporarily possessed active links to this entire data set.
This page is long gone by now. Fortunately for us, the Wayback Machine archived all of it. The following direct
link displays hundreds of CSV spreadsheets, each containing millions of email addresses.
https://web.archive.org/web/20151110195654/http://www.updates4news.com:80/kyledata/
If desired, you could use the Firefox extension called DownThemAll to automatically download all of this data
overnight into a folder on your desktop titled "SpecialK". You could also grab it from the previously explained
torrent file. You could then execute a command through Terminal within that folder of cat * >
SpecialK.txt. The result would be a single file, 19.73 gigabytes in size. That is very big, but also very
powerful. Let's take a look at the content. Assume I was looking for a target who possessed an email address of
robynsnest2006@yahoo.com. Assuming that I had made a single file titled SpecialK.txt within my Downloads
folder on my machine, my commands in Terminal would be as follows. The result of the search is directly after
the search command.
cd ~/Downloads
rg -aFiN robynsnest2006@yahoo.com SpecialK.txt
MANHATTAN BEACH, robynsnest2006@yahoo.com,yahoo.com, Robyn Bazzell, 2015-04-07, 72.129.87.179,
paydayloaneveryday.com, CA, 90266
This tells me that my target lives in Manhattan Beach, CA 90266. Her name is Robyn Bazzell, and on
04/07/2015 her marketing data was collected from the website paydayloaneveryday.com. At the time, her
computer IP address was 72.129.87.179. We basically just converted an email address into a full dossier on our
target. This type of data is simply not available on public websites. If you doubt the validity of this data, please
consider searching your own content. This is only one of dozens of interesting databases stored within the
Wayback Machine. It is up to you to exercise your skills from this guide to locate them all.
Social Security Death Index (SSDI)
Hopefully, you agree that possessing your own collection of this type of data could be useful. Let's add another
collection of publicly available data. An individual previously purchased the entire Social Security Death Index,
which is public data, and uploaded it for public consumption. This entire database can be downloaded from the
public Archive.org at https://archive.org/download/SocialSecurityDeathIndex/2013-05-31/. After
downloading the multiple files, you can combine them as stated previously into a single file and name it SSDI.txt.

Data Leaks 477

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Assuming you placed the text file in the Downloads folder, the following commands would navigate to the
folder and search for anyone in the file with my last name.
cd ~/Downloads
rg -aFiN bazzell SSDI.txt
The results will include multiple entries with the following format.
433220353 BAZZELL

DOROTHY

S

0118201303191921

The first set of numbers is the Social Security Number of the deceased individual, followed by the last name,
first name, and middle initial. The last set of numbers represents the date of death (01/18/2013) and the date
of birth (03/19/1921). I am bthered by these unnecessary tabbed spaces. The following command will replace
each tab with a comma, which compresses the data and makes it easier to read. This is much cleaner and will
make future search results easier to digest. Note that the spaces in the command are created by pressing the
control, v, and tab keys at the same time. This represents a "tab" to the command.
sed -i "s/

/\,/gI" SSDI.txt

The result would appear as follows.
433220353,BAZZELL,DOROTHY,S,0118201303191921
Let's recap where we are at right now. You might have single, very large, text files that each include all of the
registered voter data for various states. These often include dates of birth, names, telephone numbers, addresses,
and email accounts. You also have the entire SSDI. You can now search through all of that data with a simple
search. If you wanted to identify any entries within all of the files inside a specific folder, with a last name of
Bazzell, the following would be the most appropriate search. You could also now search by social security
number, date of birth, or date of death.
rg -aFiN Bazzell
SnapChat Numbers
Let's conduct another Archive.org demonstration. This one is quite dated but allows us to add some historical
phone data to our collection. In January 2014, Snapchat had 4.6 million usernames and phone numbers exposed.
The breach enabled individual usernames, which are often used across other services, to be resolved to phone
numbers. This file is titled SnapChat.7z and can be found online at archive.org/download/SnapChat.7z. This
link contains the entire breach inside one text file. Conducting the following search would query a specific
Snapchat username for any leaked data. Directly after this command is the result.
rg -aFiN mikenap115 SnapChat.txt
('21220392XX', mikenap115, '', '')
This identifies the cellular telephone number of our target to include 212-203-92xx. While the last two numbers
are redacted, you could try all 100 combinations within the previously discussed telephone search options. It is
a great start. You could have also conducted this query on websites which possess this data. However, those
sites require an absolute username. It cannot search partial names. If we only knew that our target had a
SnapChat name that included the term "topher4", this database would provide the following users of interest.
('30351923XX', 'topher451', '', ''),
('41572499XX', 'topher413', '', ''),

478 Chapter 40

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

('71974140XX', 'topher456', '', ''),
('75426428XX', 'topher481', '', ''),
We can also now search by telephone numbers. If you know your target has a cellular number of 303-519-2388,
you could conduct the following search, with the partial result appearing after.
rg -aFiN 30351923XX SnapChat.txt
('30351923XX', 'topher451', '', ''),
('30351923XX', 'ben_davis', '', ''),
('30351923XX', 'rosemcdonald', '', ''),
('30351923XX', 'cuzzycook', '', ''),
('30351923XX', 'angelgallozzi', '', ''),
('30351923XX', 'kmo85', '', ''),
('30351923XX', 'rinisob', '', ''),
Your target may not appear in the results, but minimal investigation could result in a powerful new lead. You
should note that the full numbers were never publicly leaked, and the group that conducted this attack redacted
the results to exclude the last digits.
Public Data Sets (Usenet)
Many large data sets which are beneficial to investigations are not technically "leaks". This chapter has focused
mostly on data which was never meant to become publicly available. However, there are numerous archives full
of public information which should be considered for your data collection. Most archives cannot be searched
through traditional resources such as Google. Instead, we must acquire the data, condense it, and conduct our
own queries. As a demonstration, I will explain how I utilize Usenet archives as a vital part of my investigations.
Usenet was my first introduction into newsgroups in the early nineties. My internet service provider allowed full
access to thousands of topics through Outlook Express. I could subscribe to those of interest and communicate
via email with people from all over the world. This sounds ridiculously common today, but it was fascinating at
the time. I located a newsgroup about my favorite band, and I was quickly trading bootleg cassettes and
exchanging gossip about the music industry. I was freely sending messages without any consideration of any
abilities to permanently archive everything.
Today, the Internet Archive presents huge repositories of data containing over thirty years' worth of Usenet
messages. It is presented in over 26,000 archives, each containing between 1 to 20,000 files. It is massive, and
would take years to download manually. Fortunately, we can use a download script created by the Internet
Archive to automatically obtain all desired data.
The following tutorial will install the necessary software into our macOS or Linux machine; download the entire
Usenet archive; extract email addresses and names of each member; acquire newsgroup data to associate with
each person; and condense the data into a usable format. This will take some time and may be overwhelming
for some readers at this stage. The final product is worth the effort, and I offer a download link at the end if
you want to avoid the hassle. If you are up for the challenge, please follow along to learn how to deal with large
Archive.org data sets. Let's begin.
First, we need to install the Internet Archive script within our macOS or Linux machines. Unfortunately, this
tool is unreliable within Windows. Enter the following Terminal commands for Linux systems.
sudo apt update
sudo pip install -U internetarchive

Data Leaks 479

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Conduct the following within macOS.
brew install internetarchive
We now have the application installed and ready to use from any folder. Next, we need to identify the Internet
Archive collections which we want to acquire. For this demonstration, I will focus on the following two data
sets.
https://archive.org/details/giganews
https://archive.org/details/usenethistorical
These are two independent Usenet archives. Each contains unique records and some redundant data. Let's take
a look at the second collection. The first folder is titled Usenet-Alt and contains over 15,000 files extracted from
decades of conversations within the "Alt" communities. Opening the file titled alt.2600.fake-id.mbox reveals
names, email addresses, dates, and entire messages dating back to 1997. The following is an excerpt.
From: "David N." <david.nine@juno.com>
Subject: Need Fake Texas DL
Date: 1998/07/11
Newsgroups: alt.2600.fake-id
I need a quality bogus TX DL for my 17 year old sister. Can you help me out?
Possessing a database of every email address and name from thirty years of Usenet posts can be very beneficial.
Downloading every message can be overkill. This entire data set is over a terabyte in size. Instead of trying to
download everything, I only want specific portions of the data. The Giganews collection includes two files for
each archive. The first is the "mbox" file which includes the full messages along with user information. These
are very large and could take months to download. The second is a "csv" file which only includes the date,
message ID, name, email address, newsgroup, and subject of each post. This is a much more manageable amount
of data which includes the main information desired (name and email address). We will only download the
minimal information needed for our purposes.
First, we must create a text file which includes every archive within each collection. The following commands
navigate to your Desktop and create text files for the Giganews and Usenet Historical archive.org data sets.
cd ~/Desktop
ia search 'collection:giganews' -i > giganews1.txt
ia search 'collection:usenethistorical -i > usenethistorical1.txt
Let's dissect the Internet Archive commands. "ia" is the application, "search" identifies the type of query,
"collection:giganews" identifies the target data on archive.org, "-i" instructs the application to create an item list,
and " > giganews1.txt" provides the desired output. These text files on your Desktop contain the names of all
the archives within the collections. The following is an excerpt.
usenet-alt.2600
usenet-alt.2600a
usenet-alt.2600crackz
We can now instruct Internet Archive to begin downloading the necessary files. The following command
downloads only the "csv" files from the Giganews collection. It can take several hours if you have a slow internet
connection. If you do not have sufficient space within your VM, consider saving these to an external drive as
previously instructed.
ia download --itemlist giganews1.txt --glob="*.csv.gz"

480 Chapter 40

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

You should now have thousands of folders, each containing multiple compressed CSV files. This is not very
useful or clean, so let's extract and combine all the valuable data. The following command will decompress all
the files and leave only the actual CSV documents. It should be executed from whichever directory contains all
of the downloaded folders. In my demonstration, it is in the Desktop.
gunzip -r .
"gunzip" is the command to extract the data from the compressed files (use "unzip" if your macOS machine
does not recognize this command), "-r" conducts the command recursively through any sub-folders, and " ."
continues the action through every file. Below is a modified excerpt from one of the files. It identifies the date
of the post (12/04/2003), name of the author (John Smith), email address associated with the account (Johnsmith@smh.com), specific newsgroup used (microsoft.windowsxp), and the subject of the post (Help me!).
#date
from
newsgroups
smith@smh.com> microsoft.windowsxp

Subject
Help Me!

20031204

John Smith <John-

We still have thousands of files, which is not ideal. The following command will combine every CSV file into a
single text file titled Giganews2.txt. Furthermore, it will only extract the columns of data most valuable to us, as
explained afterward.
find . -type
Giganews2.txt

f

-name

\*.csv

-print0

|

xargs

-0

cut

-f1,3,4,5

>

Let's break down each portion of this command, as it can be quite useful toward other data sets.
find
.
-type f
-name \*.csv
-print0
|
xargs -0
cut -f1,3,4,5
>
Giganews2.txt

This is the command to "find" data to manipulate.
This instructs the command to find all files.
This searches for a regular file type.
This filters to only find a specific file extension (csv).
This directs output to a file instead of the screen.
This is a "pipe" character which separates commands for instruction.
This builds our next command from the previous data as input.
This extracts only the data from columns 1, 3, 4, and 5 from each CSV.
This instructs the command to send the data to another file.
This identifies the output file name.

The final result should be a very large file which contains all of the valuable content from within every
downloaded file. In a moment, we will use this data to research our targets. The Usenet Historical collection is
stored in a different format, so these instructions will need to be modified. The following steps will extract the
beneficial data from that collection, and should appear similar to the previous actions. First, we must download
the entire archive with the following command.
ia download --itemlist usenethistorical1.txt --glob="*.zip"
Next, we must extract the "mbox" files from their compressed containers with the following.
find . -name "*.zip" -exec unzip {} \;
Finally, we must extract the "From:" line from each file with the following command.
rg -aFiN "From: " > UsenetHistorical2.txt

Data Leaks 481

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

This leaves us with a single large file titled UsenetHistorical2.txt. Below are a few lines.
alt.2600.mbox:From: "Bill Smith" <momop@mvc.biglobe.ne.jp>
alt.2600.mbox:From: "yosinaga jackson" <purizou@geocities.co.jp>
alt.2600.mbox:From: "yosinaga jackson" <purizou@geocities.co.jp>
We do not have as many details within this data set as we did with the Giganews option. However, possessing
the names, email addresses, and newsgroups provides a lot of value. Both the Giganews2.txt and
UsenetHistorical2.txt files possess many duplicate entries wasting valuable space. You might consider the
following command which combines both files into one file while removing all duplicate lines.
sort -u -f Giganews2.txt UsenetHistorical2.txt > UsenetFinal.txt
We now possess a single file, quite large in size, which possesses the names, email addresses, and interests of
most users of the Usenet system over a thirty-year period. Now, let's discuss ways this can be used during
investigations. Assume you are researching a target with my last name. When using Ripgrep, your command is
as follows.
rg -aFiN bazzell UsenetFinal.txt
The result includes the following partial data.
microsoft.public.pocketpc,Steven Bazzell steveill@yahoo.com
sci.bio.microbiology,cbcWiW@UJOMHEH.EDU.TW Wayne A. Bazzell,M.P.S.E
sci.crypt,cbcWiW@UJOMHEH.EDU.TW Wayne A. Bazzell,M.P.S.E
sci.crypt,General Darcy J. Bazzell corporation@incidentally.mi.us
The first line identifies Steven Bazzell in the Usenet group of microsoft.public.pocketpc while using an email
address of steveill@yahoo.com. You could search by names, email addresses, partial email addresses, domains,
etc. I have successfully used my own Usenet archive in the following scenarios.
•
•
•
•
•

When searching a unique target name, I have uncovered old email addresses which led me to otherwise
unknown social network profiles.
When searching an email address, I have identified various interests of the target, determined by the
newgroups to which he or she has posted.
When searching an email address, it serves as a great way to verify a valid account and establishes a
minimum date of creation.
When searching a domain, I often identify numerous email addresses used by the owner.
When conducting background checks on targets over the age of 40, I often identify email addresses
connected to questionable interests. While investigating a potential police officer, I located evidence he
had previously posted images to a child pornography newsgroup. This was confirmed during the
interview.

These collections possess over 43 million unique email addresses. You may be questioning the justification of
the time it would take to create your own archive. While I encourage you to replicate the steps here as an
educational opportunity, I also respect the difficulty involved. Therefore, I have made my own Usenet file
available for download at the following URL.
https://mega.nz/file/mSJGGDYI#oNIeyaG2oIHcHQFfGeFuq3zxUp_cCgARVf6bQNqp9ls

482 Chapter 40

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

The file contains only the name, email address, and newsgroup fields from both collections in order to keep the
size minimal. I have removed all duplicates and cleaned the file formatting to exclude any unessential data. It is
12 GB compressed to 3 GB. I hope you find it to be useful.
We have only discussed a few databases stored within archive.org. I promise you there are many others
containing sensitive details which would help greatly within your investigations. Conducting searches for any
specific breached databases displayed on notification websites such as haveibeenpwned.com/PwnedWebsites
should reveal interesting results.
Open Databases
The next time you hear about a "misconfigured server" which exposed millions of customer details, this is also
likely a data leak. Our best tool to find this data is Shodan (shodan.io), and you will need to be logged in to a
free or paid account to conduct these queries. I will focus only on open Elasticsearch databases for now, which
are extremely easy to access. Our Shodan search is as follows.
product:elastic port:9200 [target data]
As a demonstration, I want to search for open Elasticsearch databases which contain an index titled "Customer".
Think of an index as the title of a table or section of the database. The following search on Shodan produces
over 200 results including an index titled "customer".
product:elastic port:9200 customer
The first result during writing was an open database with 401 GB of data. I have redacted the IP address and
modified each address throughout this example. I will use a fictitious address of 34.80.1.1 throughout the entire
demonstration. The following figure displays this result. Clicking the red square with arrow next to the redacted
IP address connects to the database within your browser in a new tab. The second figure displays this result.
This confirms that the database is online and open.

Data Leaks 483

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Next, we want to obtain a list of all indexes within this database. These titles are often indicative of the content.
The following URL queries this data based on a target IP address of 34.80.1.1. The result can be seen in the
following figure.
http://34.80.1.1:9200/_cat/indices?v
We now know there are several indexes which can be viewed. The first is titled "customer", but only contains a
small amount of data (68 kb). Near the middle, we see an index titled "memberdisplayname20190903" which
contains 124 MB of data including customer usernames. Some of these indexes contain email addresses and
other sensitive data. Let's focus on the index titled "bank". We can view the content with the following URL.
http://34.80.1.1:9200/bank/_search?size=100
This combines the IP address (34.80.1.1), necessary port (9200), name of the index (bank), and instructions to
display the first 100 records (/_search?size=100). If we wanted to view the maximum number of entries visible
within the browser, we would query 10,000 records with the following URL.
http://34.80.1.1:9200/bank/_search?size=10000
The second figure displays actual redacted results from this query. It identifies the first name, last name, email
contains

484 Chapter 40

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Open Databases Issues
There are many complications with acquisition of open Elasticsearch data. The first is the record limitation.
Displaying results within a URL limits the results to 10,000 records. Modifying the URL as described previously
presents all data possible within the browser. Saving this page stores all of the content for future queries.
However, many of the data sets I find contain millions of records. A Python script which parses through all
results and stores every record is most appropriate, and is explained in a moment.
Next are the legal considerations. Technically, this data is publicly available, open to anyone in the world.
However, some believe the act of manipulating URLs in order to access content stored within a database exceeds
the definition of OSINT. I do not agree, but you might. I believe most of this data should have been secured,
and we should not be able to easily collect it. The same could be said for FTP servers, paste sites, online
documents, and cloud-hosted files. I believe accessing open databases becomes a legal grey area once you decide
to use the data. If you are collecting this content in order to sell it, extort the original owner, or publish it in any
way, you are crossing the line and committing a crime. I remind you that the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act
(CFAA) is extremely vague and can make most online activity illegal in the eyes of an aggressive prosecutor.
Become familiar with the data access laws in your area and confirm that these techniques do not violate any laws
or internal policies.
My final reminder and warning is that I am not an attorney. I am not advising that you conduct any of these
methods on behalf of your own investigations. I am simply presenting techniques which have proven to be
extremely valuable to many investigators. If you believe that accessing an open (public) Elasticsearch database
is legal in your area, and does not violate any internal policies, it is time to parse and download all content.
Elasticsearch Crawler (github.com/AmIJesse/Elasticsearch-Crawler)
In early 2019, I was made aware of an open Elasticsearch database which exposed sensitive data associated with
57 million people. In most cases, these records contained personal information such as first name, last name,
email address, home address, state, postal code, phone number, and IP address. These types of records are
extremely helpful to me as an investigator. Connecting personal email addresses with real people is often the
best lead of all online research. I had found the database on Shodan using the methods discussed here.
Specifically, I searched for an index titled "Leads" and sifted through any results of substantial size. Once I had
located the data, I was desperate to download the entire archive. With a browser limit of 10,000, I knew I would
need the help of a Python script.
I reached out to my friend and colleague Jesse and explained my scenario. Within a few moments, he sent me a
small Python script. This file is now a staple in my data leaks arsenal of tools. He has agreed to share it publicly,
please use it responsibly. It can be installed within Linux with the following commands.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs
git clone https://github.com/AmIJesse/Elasticsearch-Crawler.git
cd Elasticsearch-Crawler
pip install nested-lookup
pip install release
You are now ready to download an entire Elasticsearch open database and specify which fields should be
acquired. Note that you must open Terminal and navigate to your script in order to launch this utility. The
following commands from within Terminal will launch the script.
cd ~/Downloads/Programs/Elasticsearch-Crawler
python crawl.py

Data Leaks 485

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

This will present several user prompts to enter the target IP address, index name, port number, and fields to
obtain. Let's walk through a real demonstration in order to understand the application.
I logged in to a free Shodan account and searched "product:elastic port:9200 leads" without the quotes. One hit
was an Elasticsearch server in India. This database appeared to contain test data, so I will not redact any of the
results. The IP address was 111.93.162.238 and the database was approximately 1 GB in size. Clicking the red
square within the result on Shodan opened a new tab to the following address.
http://111.93.162.238:9200/
The brief response confirmed that the server was online. The URL discloses the IP address (111.93.162.238)
and port (9200). This is the default port and is almost always the same. Now that I had the IP address, I launched
a new browser tab and navigated to the following address.
http://111.93.162.238:9200/_cat/indices?v
This connected to the IP address (111.93.162.238) and port (9200), and then conducted a query to display all
public indexes (/_cat/indices?v). The result included the following.
index
imobilestore
testcsv
easyphix
index_test
crazyparts
valueparts
mobilemart
leads

store.size
1.3mb
190.7 kb
1.8mb
7.2 kb
503.5 kb
2.3mb
1.7mb
280.8 kb

I usually look at both the names and the sizes. If I see an index titled "Customers", I know it usually contains
people's information. If it is only 1 kb in size, I know it is too small to be of any use. When I see any index with
multiple gigabytes of data, my curiosity kicks in and I want to see the contents. For this demonstration, let's
focus on the index of our original search of "leads". I navigated to the following URL.
http://111.93.162.238:9200/leads/_search?size=100
This connects to the target IP address (111.93.162.238) and port (9200), loads the desired index (leads) and
displays the first 100 results (/_search?size=100). This is usually sufficient to see enough target content, but this
can be raised to 1000 or 10000 if desired. Below is a record.
"_index": "leads","_type": "leads",
"_id": "PXIhqmUBcHz5ZA2uOAe7",
"_source": {"id": "86",
"email": "test80@agencyinnovations.com",
"first_name": "test80","last_name": "test80",
"phone": "32569874",
"ip": "0.0.0.0",
"orgname": "Sales Arena",
"isDeleted": false,
"created_at": "2018-09-05 19:57:08",
"updated_at": "2018-09-05 19:57:08",

486 Chapter 40

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

This is obviously test data, but assume it was a record containing a real person's name, email address, and phone
number. Also assume there were over a million records within this index, which is quite common. We could
save this page, but would be forced to save the undesired fields such as "tags" and "_source". Also, the data
would be in a difficult format to search. This is where our new Python script is helpful. You have already
launched the crawl.py script, and should have been presented with a prompt for the IP address of the target.
The following displays each entry I submitted for this demonstration.
IP address: 111.93.162.238
Index name: leads
Port (Default is 9200): 9200
Field values to obtain (submit an empty line when finished):
Value: email
Value: first_name
Value: last_name
Value: phone
Value:
After being prompted for the IP address (111.93.162.238), it asked me for the target index name (leads) and port
number (9200). It then prompted me to enter the first field I wanted to acquire (email). Since I entered a field,
it then prompted for the next field (first_name). The tool will continue to ask for field names for as long as you
provide them. Notice there is an empty line in the last "Value". This empty result tells the script you are finished,
and it begins collecting the data. When finished, a text file will be saved in the same directory as your script. In
this example, it was at ~/Downloads/Programs/Elasticsearch-Crawler/111.93.162.238-leads.txt. The title of
the file was automatically created to reflect the IP address and name of the index. The following are the first
three lines of this text file.
test65@agencyinnovations.com,test65,test65,987485746
test22@agencyinnovations.com,test22,test22,124958616
test69@agencyinnovations.com,test69,test69,2145968
If this were real data, you would see millions of people's email addresses, names, and telephone numbers. There
are likely hundreds of legitimate databases on Shodan right now, just waiting to be found. The next time you
see a news article about a security researcher who found an exposed database containing millions of sensitive
records, it is very likely that Shodan and a similar script was used. If your downloaded file contains random text,
you have likely encountered a patched version of Elasticsearch. At the time of this writing, Elasticsearch
databases version 6.4.0 and newer were blocking the script. Anything older worked fine.
I predict we will see fewer open databases in the future. While we still hear about sensitive leaks every week,
word is spreading and companies are locking down their data. This is a good thing for all of us. Until then, I will
continue to search.
The JSON Dilemma
If you are lucky, you will always find a nicely organized CSV file with your new data, ready for "cutting" and
storing. However, that is not always the case. Many times, you will encounter JSON data. At first, it may seem
impossible to clean and minimize. The following is a partial example of JSON data extracted from a large file.
"status": 200,
"likelihood": 6,
"data": {
"id": "qEnOZ5Oh0poWnQ1luFBfVw_0000",
"full_name": "sean thorne",
"first_name": "sean",

Data Leaks 487

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

"middle_initial": "f",
"middle_name": "fong",
"last_initial": "t",
"last_name": "thorne",
"gender": "male",
"birth_year": 1990,
"birth_date": null,
"linkedin_url": "linkedin.com/in/seanthorne",
"linkedin_username": "seanthorne",
"linkedin_id": "145991517",
"facebook_url": "facebook.com/deseanthorne",
"facebook_username": "deseanthorne",
"facebook_id": "1089351304",
"twitter_url": "twitter.com/seanthorne5",
"twitter_username": "seanthorne5",
"work_email": "sean@peopledatalabs.com",
"personal_emails": [],
"mobile_phone": "+14155688415",
The full portion for this single entry would have filled four pages in this book. Now imagine that the data set
included 100 million entries. That would be 400 million pages if you wanted to print the data. If you were to
query this selected data with Ripgrep, it would either only present the line where something was found (without
any other data), or the entire entry (several pages of compacted text). If I searched "sean@peopledatalabs.com"
via Ripgrep, the result might be "work_email": "sean@peopledatalabs.com" if the data was separated with line
breaks. We would not receive all of the other associated content. You could use a lot of sed commands to try
and move each piece of data into one line for queries, but that would be time consuming and unnecessary.
When I encounter JSON data, I rely on jq (stedolan.github.io/jq/). Since we previously installed jq, we are now
ready to launch it within Terminal (or Command Prompt). Assume we have a large file of JSON data, which
contains the previous file structure, titled people.json. The following command would begin our extraction.
jq --raw-output
'"\(.data.first_name),\(.data.last_name),\(.data.gender),\(.data.birth_
year),\(.data.birth_date),\(.data.linkedin_username),\(.data.facebook_i
d),\(.data.twitter_username),\(
.data.work_email),\(.data.mobile_phone)"' people.json > people.txt
Let's dissect this:
jq
--raw-output
'"
\(.data.first_name),
\(.data.last_name),
\(.data.gender),
\(.data.birth_year),
\(.data.birth_date),
\(.data.linkedin_username),
\(.data.facebook_id),
\(.data.twitter_username),
\( .data.work_email),
\(.data.mobile_phone)
"'

This command launches jq.
This outputs pure text without formatting.
This begins our string.
This extracts the first name field.
This extracts the last name field.
This extracts the gender field.
This extracts the birth year field.
This extracts the birth date field.
This extracts the linkedin username field.
This extracts the facebook field.
This extracts the twitter field.
This extracts the work email field.
This extracts the phone field (no trailing comma).
This ends our string.

488 Chapter 40

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

people.json
>
people.txt

This identifies the input file.
This notifies of an output request.
This identifies the new output file.

The result appears below.
sean,thorne,male,1990,null,seanthorne,1089351304,seanthorne5,sean@peopl
edatalabs.com,+14155688415
If you had a JSON file with 100 million entries, you might have several billion lines of unsearchable data. You
would now have a single text file with the 100 million total entry lines, only containing your desired content.
Notice in my command that I have "data" preceding each field request (\(.data.gender)). That is
because those fields are under a section titled "data" within my JSON example on the previous page. If there
was a section called "data" which contained a section called "people" which then contained a field called
"gender", that field request would appear as follows.
\(.data.people.gender),
An entire chapter could be devoted to jq and its usage. If you find this tool valuable, I encourage you to visit
the Github page for the project. It includes complete usage and tutorials. Now, let's test jq with some real data.
The following pages access data leaks or previously public information.
People Data Labs Scrape (PDL)
In 2019, a security researcher claimed to have scraped an open database of over 1.2 billion PDL records including
names, locations, and social network content. This data set is still floating around, and it is valuable. I know of
someone who joined a channel called "Data stream" on Telegram and searched "people data labs". This person
received a result of a torrent file called "PeopleDataLabs_416M.json.7z.torrent". They downloaded this file and
opened it via Transmission, which downloaded an 11 GB compressed file. Extracting the file resulted in a new
folder with a single file titled PeopleDataLabs_416M.json which contained 67 GB of data. Someone else had
already parsed the JSON data to a single line for each entry, which appeared similar to the following.
{"a":"san francisco, california, united
states","t":["14155688000"],"e":["sthorne@xxregon.edu","sean@peopledatalabs.com","sean@txxxentiq.co"],"l
iid":"seanthorne","linkedin":"https://www.linkedin.com/in/seanthorne","n":"sean thorne"}
This format could be sufficient for most readers, and no cleaning would be required. Since I try to eliminate any
unnecessary data, I would consider the following commands, which will get rid of the brackets, quotes, and
category identifiers.
sed -i "s/[\{]//gI" PeopleDataLabs_416M.json
sed -i "s/[\}]//gI" PeopleDataLabs_416M.json
sed -i "s/[\[]//gI" PeopleDataLabs_416M.json
sed -i "s/[\]]//gI" PeopleDataLabs_416M.json
sed -i "s/\"//gI" PeopleDataLabs_416M.json
sed -i "s/a\://gI" PeopleDataLabs_416M.json
sed -i "s/t\://gI" PeopleDataLabs_416M.json
sed -i "s/e\://gI" PeopleDataLabs_416M.json
sed -i "s/liid\://gI" PeopleDataLabs_416M.json
sed -i "s/linkedin\://gI" PeopleDataLabs_416M.json
sed -i "s/n\://gI" PeopleDataLabs_416M.json

Data Leaks 489

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Each command will take some time due to the size of the file. Each process on my MacBook Pro required ten
minutes to complete. Notice the first four commands include brackets ([]) around the characters I want to
remove ({}) and ([]). This is required with some special characters, especially any type of opening or closing
bracket. I hope you see by now that many of these demonstrations are not necessarily to help you collect and
clean data leaks, but more to teach you the commands which will be most helpful to overcome obstacles in your
own data collection journey.
The result should be a 50 GB text file. The following Ripgrep command would search my last name through
the data.
rg -aFiN bazzell PeopleDataLabs_416M.json
LinkedIn 2021 Scrape
In 2021, an unknown group released a huge data set which contained over 400 million user profiles from
LinkedIn. Profiles are public, so the headline did not seem interesting at first. However, this data included over
140 million email addresses and numerous cellular numbers associated with the profiles. That caught my
attention. It is suspected that the data was acquired by querying email addresses and cellular numbers from
previous leaks through the official LinkedIn API in order to identify the associated profiles. Additional public
data was then used to connect Facebook and Twitter accounts. The result was 1.4 TB of JSON files which
contained the personal email addresses and cellular numbers of many LinkedIn users. I wanted it, but in a better
format.
Currently, there is an active Torrent containing the entire data, which consists of 700 compressed files, each
approximately 300 MB in size and titled similar to "part-00055.gz", for a total of approximately 200 GB. Once
extracted, the data is 1.4 TB, and the files are titled similar to "part-00055" with no file extension. Searching
"400M LinkedIn Torrent" on Google should begin your hunt, or searching the previous file name might lead
you to a torrent. There is also a copy available on "NitroFlare", but the free download tier can be quite slow.
Searching "Linkedin Scrapped Data 2021" should find it. I downloaded the Torrent in an afternoon. I then
decompressed all the files.
Each file contains JSON entries which possess a lot of redundant data I do not want in my final copy, similar
to the previous example. However, I do want the fields titled first_name, middle_name, last_name, gender,
birth_date, linkedin_username, facebook_username, twitter_username, work_email, mobile_phone,
location_name, phone_numbers, and emails. I placed all of the "part" files in my Downloads folder and executed
the following from that path.
jq --raw-output '"\(.first_name),\(.middle_name),\(.last_name),
\(.gender),\(.birth_date),\(.linkedin_username),\(.facebook_username),\
(.twitter_username),\(.work_email),\(.mobile_phone),\(.location_name),\
(.phone_numbers),\(.emails)"' part* > LinkedIn.txt
This created a single file titled LinkedIn.txt, which only contained my desired data. It was 49.68 GB in size and
possessed 400,101,052 entries. It contained a lot of entries containing "null" which offered no value, so I
removed them with the following.
sed -i "s/null\,//gI" LinkedIn.txt
The final result was a single 37.46 GB file. I can query this data within a few seconds and only see valuable
information. That is a big difference from querying the original 1.4 TB data, which took up to an hour per query
and displayed 90% useless data. The following is a slightly modified and redacted (xxx) entry from the new file.
It displays my target's first name, middle initial, last name, gender, date of birth, LinkedIn username, Facebook
username, Twitter username, location, telephone number, and email address.

490 Chapter 40

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

chelsea, a, jansen, female, 1982-0x-xx, chelsea-jansen-685axxx,
chelsea.
jansen.xxx, chelseaxxx, hartland, connecticut, +18608191xxx,
cjansen@xxx.org
I can now associate the name, email address, cellular number, Twitter account, Facebook account, or date of
birth with any of the other details. I can query a name and often identify the email address behind it. I can query
a Facebook username and possibly identify the true person or date of birth. When I find a target on LinkedIn,
I can query the unique portion of the URL (chelsea-jansen-685axxx) and see all information from
this leak, including a valid email address. While this content does not possess all data within every field, it has
been quite beneficial to my investigations. Consider the following examples.
•
•
•

I searched the LinkedIn profile "seitzjustin" through the data and received the user's full name, Twitter
handle, location, and a new email address from a custom domain which I did not previously possess.
Historical records of this domain identified a physical address and telephone number.
While stranded after a canceled flight, I queried the LinkedIn username of the airline's CEO and
identified a personal Gmail account and cellular number. I made direct contact requesting a solution.
A client was receiving harassing messages via Twitter. The Twitter handle of the suspect was associated
with a LinkedIn profile and a 33Mail email address. The subdomain of the email address was only
assigned to this subject, and a query through additional breach data revealed online profiles associated
with the true name.

I hope you can see the power of this type of data. Cleaning the set from 1.4 TB to 37 GB took some time and
effort, but I now have a small file for my queries, which completes in less than 30 seconds from an external
SSD. I placed this file in the "People" folder of my external drive, which is explained later.
IntelligenceX Scrape
In 2021, a disgruntled IntelX customer "scraped their scrapes". Today, the 80,000 copied documents, which
were originally scraped from Pastebin before they terminated their free API, have been merged into one folder
possessing sensitive data associated with 46 million email addresses. Many people have successfully downloaded
the 1.6 GB compressed file titled "intelx_scraped, pass pompompurin.7z" from the popular Telegram channel
called "LEAKS AGGREGATOR". Those who did reported that the file could be decompressed with a
password of "pompompurin", but the compression program Keka was required for macOS users. The result
was over 7 GB of text files. Let's make them easier to use. Navigate to the folder which stores the 87,813 files
and conduct the following.
cat * > _IntelX.txt
I set you up for failure here. There are too many files for the Cat command. Instead, we must create a command
which "finds" all of the files first, and then allows Cat to do its job.
find . -name '*' -exec cat {} \; > ~/Downloads/IntelX.txt
I instructed my machine to find every file in the directory (*), and then execute (exec) the Cat command, but
save the result to a different folder (~/Downloads/IntelX.txt). The resulting file is the same size as the original
files, but easier to work with. However, it is a mess of Pastebin scrapes which have no email addresses. I only
want lines which include an email address, and no lines which do not include an email address. Therefore, the
following command extracts any line which includes "@" and saves it to a new file.
cd ~/Downloads
awk '/@/' IntelX.txt > IntelX2.txt

Data Leaks 491

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

The result is a 4.27 GB file. It still includes a lot of junk, but we can now sort for unique entries to remove any
duplicates with the following.
LC_ALL=C sort -u -b -i -f -S 80% --parallel=8 IntelX2.txt > IntelX3.txt
This brought us down to 2.5 GB, which is manageable. Searching my last name with Ripgrep revealed hundreds
of email addresses and credentials, as seen below (redacted).

Telephone Number Leaks
Some of the leaks previously mentioned include telephone number details, but that type of content was not the
main attribute of the data. On the contrary, there are several large leaks which focus exclusively on telephone
numbers, and I find these very valuable. In fact, I query target telephone numbers almost as much as I search
for email addresses. Many people possess numerous "burner" numbers which are not registered to them, and
do not return any results within online searches. However, many of these people will rely on those numbers
throughout various social networks and websites, causing them to appear within various leaks, breaches, and
logs, wh
ther.
There ar
names. I
followin
channels

de "cell" and "phone" within the file
everal results. The two visible in the
GGREGATOR" and "Data stream"

The 2.6
d protected. Downloading the image
directly above the download link identified the password (t.me/HadesBreaches), which produced an 11.5 GB
CSV file. The 3.1 GB USA Cell files produced a 19.82 GB CSV file. After closer examination, these files
contained identical data, but the first option (183M USA CELL) did not contain quotation marks or other
unnecessary characters. Therefore, I deleted the second set of data. A random (modified) entry appeared as
follows.
MIKE,COLE,105 VALLEY DR,HOUSTON,TX,77042,7135910000,
MIKE.COLE@GMAIL.COM,AT&T MOBILITY,MALE

492 Chapter 40

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

In this scenario, I now possess the names, physical addresses, and email addresses associated with 183 million
cellular numbers in America. As a further value, I can see the service provider for each number. I can use Ripgrep
to query through the data.
Facebook Telephone Number Leaks
In 2021, someone published the personal data of 533 million Facebook users, which included cellular telephone
numbers associated with most of the accounts. The exposed data included account information from 106
countries, including over 32 million records on users in the US and 11 million on users in the UK. Most records
included telephone numbers, Facebook IDs, full names, locations, and birthdates. As you may have guessed,
the data is now widely available online. A quick search within the "Open Data" channel for "facebook dataset"
on telegram revealed the files for each country, as seen in the following partial image.

Each country possessed its ow
new text files totaling 3.28 GB

nded to eight

cat USA* > Facebook
A typical entry appeared as foll
17244540000:9304000:Sara:Ro
This displays the cellular telep
did not see much value in clean
directly to each user. In this fa
I combined all country sets int

very victim. I
RL navigates
user's profile.

find . -name '*.txt'
I am always skeptical of this typ
entry, such as the previous exa

r in a random
explained in

"caller_name": "SARA ROSE",
Instagram Telephone Number Leaks
The previous Facebook leak was due to a poorly secured server. At one time, people could execute bulk queries
of telephone numbers against the Facebook Application Programming Interface (API) and receive the profile
IDs. Most of these holes have been plugged, but much data still flows freely. I have seen many Instagram
telephone leaks which were likely obtained through the same technique. During this writing, I found two
compressed files within the LEAKS AGGREGATOR Telegram channel.

Data Leaks 493

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

The 86
modifi

containing 4,939,354 entries. The following is a

nast@c
This produces data which can be queried by email address, telephone number, or Instagram username. The "5
Million" file contained identical data with different file names. This is very common as people republish the data
in order to appear as if they possess something special. Attempting to identify redundant data before you add it
to your collection is important to reduce query times.
Searching "Instagram" or "IG" within your subscribed Telegram channels can produce valuable data for
download. This is why it is so important to join as many data-related channels as possible. This widens the net.
You will often identify breaches which have nothing to do with Instagram, yet still possess Instagram user data.
During this writing, I received several search results of breached SQL files which contained entries for Instagram
profile IDs as part of their data collection about their customers. SQL files are discussed later in the breaches
chapter.
Telemetry (telemetryapp.io)
This service requires an account before searching, but allows five free queries per day. You can enter any term
and identify Telegram rooms which contain your information. This will never be complete, but it may locate
information about your target which could not be found otherwise.
Whois Information: Previously, I presented a small text file which possessed Whois information to be used to
test your data manipulation skills. Whois data can display the historical registrations of domains in order to
identify the owners, even if they currently use domain registration protection strategies. The easiest way to
accumulate your own Whois data is through Telegram. As long as you are subscribed to the LEAKS
AGGEGATOR channel, searching "whois" should display several gigabytes of compressed Whois content. If
you have a BreachForums account, entire Whois databases are plentiful, but you must have credits to access
them (never pay for credits). Some readers have located a thread there which only requires you to leave a
comment in order to access the "Intelligence X (intelx.io) Leaked Data", which contains the entire 280GB
collection of 62 million registration records. Others report that item "e6LEmohVwywg0z" on biteblob.com
offers the data.
Summary
We have only begun the journey into leaked data. I have personally obtained, cleaned, stored, and queried tens
of thousands of valuable data leaks as part of my online investigations. At least once a week, I identify my target's
home address through leaked data after all online efforts have been exhausted. I have had countless suspects
remove all of their details from people search websites in order to disappear, but they can never edit my own
data collection. Aside from the data presented here, there are countless copies of other data sets floating around.
It is now up to you to locate and clean the data. Later, we will use a script to help us quickly query all of the data
leaks you locate.

494 Chapter 40

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER FOURTY-ONE
DATA BREACHES

Now that you understand the basics of searching and modifying data, we should discuss the true value of this
technique. Until now, we have only experimented with publicly-available data. The real power lies within the
stolen databases that are now publicly available which I am about to discuss. There are usually two types of
people that download these databases. The first are amateur criminals that use the data to illegally obtain account
access to victims' accounts by supplying the usernames and passwords from one service into another service.
As an example, if a criminal learns your username and password that you used on LinkedIn, he or she may try
that same combination on Twitter. We will never do this, as it is illegal and unethical.
The second group of individuals who download this data are security researchers. Numerous private
organizations authorize employees to collect this stolen information and use the data to make their own systems
more secure. I personally know of many researchers who download this data, protect it from further distribution,
and only use it in an ethical manner. This is the only acceptable use of this data. For those that still believe that
we should not access stolen databases released to the public, consider one last argument. Tens of thousands of
criminal hackers use this content to "dox" people every day. Doxing is the act of exposing personal information
about a victim online. This is a very common tactic used against law enforcement officers when an event such
as an officer-involved shooting happens. The government employees' passwords often get leaked on Pastebin
or other similar sites. This stolen data is already out there, and it can never be secured. We should embrace the
same techniques used against us when researching criminals. Enough warnings. Use your best judgment.
By now you may just want to know where to obtain these databases. The source websites which allow download
of this stolen data get shut down often. However, the magic of internet archives can help us regain the data. The
next exercise also involves archive.org. Specifically, data from LinkedIn. This version surfaced in 2017 and does
not possess any passwords. It contains only LinkedIn user ID numbers and the associated email addresses.
While this type of data was included within the original 20 GB LinkedIn breach, it was excluded from the popular
password dumps which can be found online today. Since it does not contain passwords, it can be found on the
Wayback Machine. At the time of this writing, the direct link to download the entire user ID database could be
found at https://archive.org/details/LIUsers.7z.
Decompress this file to your Downloads folder. The text file contains the email addresses and user ID numbers
extracted from the full LinkedIn breach. It is nothing more than each email address used to create a specific
profile ID number. The following search within Terminal would display the results of a target email address,
and the response is directly after the command.
rg -aFiN janewilson@microsoft.com linkedin_users.txt
1332567, janewilson@microsoft.com
You now know that your target's user ID number is 1332567. This data alone is not very helpful. Let's consider
another perspective. Assume you find your target's LinkedIn profile page, and you want to know the email
address used to create the account. Right-clicking on the profile allows the option to display the "Source Code"
of the profile. Searching the term "member:" within this code presents numerous occurrences of that term. The
occurrence toward the end should appear similar to "member:1288635". This tells you that the member ID for
your target is 1288635. The following displays the email address associated with that number, with the results
immediately below.
rg -aFiN 1288635 linkedin_users.txt

Data Breaches 495

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

1288635, John.h.007@gmail.com
I have used this technique numerous times over the past several years. During one investigation, I located the
LinkedIn profile of my target. I had previously found no email addresses connected to him. By looking at the
source code of the LinkedIn profile, I could see his user ID. Searching that user ID within this LinkedIn data
provided the personal email address used to create the account. That email address led to old passwords, which
led to additional email addresses, as explained in a moment. Obtaining a confirmed personal email address can
lead to numerous new investigation techniques. Note that member numbers only exist for accounts prior to
2015.
Credentials
Now that we are dipping our toes into the waters of "stolen" data, we should consider the big breaches. You
have likely heard about LinkedIn, Dropbox, Myspace and Adobe being hacked. All of those breaches have been
publicly released by various criminal organizations. At the time of this writing, most remaining sites which
possessed this huge collection of stolen data had been shut down. However, the data lives on. Numerous
"hacking" groups have collected tens of thousands of breached databases, both large and small, and combined
them into credential lists. These lists contain only the email addresses and passwords of billions of accounts.
They do not identify which breach each credential originated, but the data is extremely valuable for investigators.
Before we analyze the content, we must obtain a full copy of the data. This is where things get tricky (again).
My attorney says I cannot HOST links to any of this content, which I understand. She also says that I cannot
display any direct links to an identifiable breach, such as LinkedIn or Adobe. This would make me a target for
a lawsuit, and seems like great advice. My only option is to "identify public resources which link to data without
attribution of a specific originating source". In other words, I can tell you where you may find this "Combo List"
content, but it is up to you to take action to obtain it. Let's connect our VPN; understand any employer policies
which might prevent the following actions; and tiptoe into the world of stolen credentials.
COMB (Compilation Of Many Breaches)
In 2021, an unknown group of credential thieves created a huge collection of 3.2 billion credentials consisting
only of email address and password combinations. This data set was titled "Compilation Of Many Breaches",
otherwise known as "COMB". There have been numerous other combo lists released in previous years, such as
Anti-Public, Exploit.in, and others. However, this set included a better search structure and ability to conduct
queries within seconds. Some people may find that searching for "CompilationOfManyBreaches.7z" within
Google might lead you to a copy. Others report that the following queries will display the torrent file for this
data.
site:github.com "CompilationOfManyBreaches.7z"
site:github.com "1.4 billion"
At the time of this writing, the single result from this search possessed a torrent file which could be opened with
a torrent software application such as Transmission. This program will download the 20 GB file to your
computer. Depending on your internet connection, this entire download can take minutes, hours, or days to
finish. If possessing user credentials violates your security clearance or organizational polices, do not proceed
with this download.
Let's assume you now have a drive with the entire contents from COMB. The result is a 20 GB compressed
file which contains all 3.2 billion credentials. The file itself is titled "CompilationOfManyBreaches.7z". If you
chose to download this file, it must be decompressed. I prefer a utility such as 7-zip for Linux and Windows, or
Keka for Mac. Upon decompression, you might be prompted for a password. A Twitter post located at
https://twitter.com/BubbaMustafa/status/1370376039583657985 claims the required archive password is
"+w/P3PRqQQoJ6g". Once decompressed, you should see a new folder titled "CompilationOfManyBreaches"
which is 106 GB in size.

496 Chapter 41

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Assume you possess a folder called COMB within your external SSD which contains the data downloaded during
this exercise. This folder should contain the three files and folder labeled "data". Within Terminal, navigate to
that "COMB" folder. My Linux command for this was cd "/media/$USER/DATA/COMB". macOS users
would use cd "/Volumes/DATA/COMB". In Linux, you could also find the external drive within the Files
application, right-click, and choose "Open in Terminal". You should now be within your new data collection
folder inside Terminal. We can conduct searches to start evaluating the benefit of this data. Since COMB
includes a fast search option, we will start with it. However, we should make sure that our script is executable
with the following command (on both macOS and Linux).
chmod +x query.sh
Execute the following command in Terminal from within the COMB folder.
bash ./query.sh michaelbazzell@gmail.com
This should result in no hits within a few seconds. Now try the following (notice the period in the email address).
bash ./query.sh michael.bazzell@gmail.com
The result should appear as follows.
michael.bazzell@gmail.com:password
This identifies a password "password". The first query failed because we did not include the "." within the search
parameter. This tool can be fairly unforgiving and requires exact data. The following search provides any email
address which begins with "michael.bazzell" with results which follow.
bash ./query.sh michael.bazzell
michael.bazzell@gmail.com:password
michael.bazzell@us.army.mil:redacted10
michael.bazzelle1970@yahoo.com:redacted201
This search tool is extremely fast. If you know the email address of your target, or at least the first portion of
the address, searching through the native COMB query option is best. However, this presents limitations. You
cannot use this tool to search a specific domain or password. For that we will once again rely on Ripgrep. The
following queries will all assume that you have already opened Terminal and have navigated to the folder where
your data is stored. The next search would attempt to identify a specific email address within all the files. Note
that results were modified to protect the privacy of the individual. As a reminder, this command applies our
parameters and identifies the target data to be searched. The result follows the command.
rg -aFiN mikewilson@microsoft.com
mikewilson@microsoft.com:bigbucks55
We now know that at some point a password of bigbucks55 was used in conjunction with an online account
associated with our target email address. Would this password still work with any online accounts? Possibly, but
we will never know. Attempting to log in to an account with this information is a crime. Instead, think about
other ways that we could use this data offline. We know our target's work email account, but we may want his
personal account. Since many people recycle the same password across multiple accounts, let's conduct a search
for the password.

Data Breaches 497

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

rg -aFiN bigbucks55
The results include accounts associated with our target, and some that are not. The more unique your target's
password, the better quality of associated content you will receive. The following data was presented during my
search. Notice the ways that data was displayed based on the search, and how any portion of the results were
included. Since we specified our search parameters, we received results regardless of case.
bigbucks551@yahoo.com:towboat@1
bigbucks55@hotmail.co.uk:towboat@1
bigbucks55@hotmail.com:towboat@1
prizeunit@yahoo.com:bigbucks55
mike.wilson5@gmail.com:BigBucks55
mikewilson@microsoft.com:bigbucks55
This tells me that the last two results are very likely my target, since the names are similar and the passwords are
almost identical. I can now assume that my target's personal email account is mike.wilson5@gmail.com. The
first three accounts could be my target, but are probably not. This is likely just a coincidence. However, we can
assume that the owner of one of those accounts is the owner of all three since the passwords are identical. The
fourth response is a toss-up, but worth further investigation. We can also use this to query all credentials from
a specific domain.
rg -aFiN @altonpolice.com
One of the results is quite embarrassing, as follows. I promise I have not used that password since the late 90's.
bazzell@altonpolice.com:mb01mb01mb
The tactic of searching leaked passwords and recovering associated accounts is by far the most successful
database leaks strategy that I have applied to my investigations. In 2017, I was assisting a federal agency with a
child pornography investigation where a suspect email address had been identified. This address was confirmed
as being connected to the original person that had manufactured illegal videos of children being molested, but
an alias name was used during creation. A search of this address through a breach compilation revealed a unique
password associated with the account. Searching this password revealed only one additional email account,
which was the personal Gmail account of the suspect (in his real name). The suspect used the same password
for both accounts. The primary investigator made an arrest the next day after confirming the connection.
While some will say that we should never download leaked databases that contain personal login credentials, I
disagree. There is great potential value in these data dumps that could solve cases on a grand scale, and make a
huge impact on the prosecution of serious criminals.
I cannot overstate that this instruction is the very tip of the iceberg. There are tens of thousands of compromised
databases online, and more being published every day. If you find "COMB" to be valuable, you may consider
researching others. If you invest some time into seeking the sources of this data, you will quickly become
overwhelmed at the mass amounts of content to properly obtain, clean, and store. I can only discuss the basics
here. It is your job to proceed if you choose.
As a start, you may consider focusing on public credential leaks on Pastebin (pastebin.com). When you search
an email address on Pastebin via Google, the results often include paste dumps. Clicking on these links will take
you to the original paste document, which likely has many additional compromised credentials. A query of
test@test.com on this site will likely present hundreds of data sets ready for download. Any time I see on HIBP
that a new public leak has surfaced, I search for that specific data with a custom Google search. If I saw that
Myspace has been exposed, I would use the following.
"myspace" ext:rar OR ext:zip OR ext:7z OR ext:txt OR ext:sql

498 Chapter 41

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

There are many online database resources that will sell you the data. Please avoid these. First, you will likely get
ripped off a few times before you find an "honest" seller. Second, you are giving money to criminals, and I don't
like encouraging that behavior. Many researchers that I know possess over 100,000 databases which contain
over four terabytes of total information, all found on public sites. A single query of this data can take a few
minutes, even on a fast machine.
RaidForums Databases
In the previous chapter, I explained a method to open a torrent file which possessed voter registration data from
several states. You may still have this torrent loaded into Transmission. If not, revisit that instruction to get it
launched. Once opened, you should see 459 GB of databases which originally appeared on RaidForums. You
should see data breaches from many familiar companies within this torrent, but I do not want to get sued by
conducting demonstrations on them. Instead, I will focus on a few databases which were stolen from criminal
marketplaces. I hope you see the irony. Criminals will also steal from other criminals.
I downloaded the databases associated with CrackingForum.com, CrackingItaly.com, and DemonForums.net.
All three provide an online community which caters to criminal hackers. Let's jump into each.
The CrackingForum.com folder possesses a single text file which includes the email address and plain-text
password of all 469,550 users of the site. This is the easiest data to consume, and the file is ready to be archived
to your SSD. There is no cleaning to be done. If your email address target appears here, you know that suspect
was a member of this hacking site, and you also see their password.
The CrackingItaly.com folder possesses a single text file which includes the member ID, full name, email address,
hashed password, and IP address of all 18,132 users of the site. Again, no cleaning necessary here. This is a fairly
minimal database. If your suspect email address appears here, you might learn their full name and an IP address
which could identify their home internet provider (and approximate location). I will explain hashed passwords
in a moment.
The DemonForums.net folder possesses a single SQL file which is not as straight-forward as the others. It is
small enough that we can open it within a traditional text editor. The default option within Linux is fine with
me. Apple macOS users might prefer the free version of BBEdit. When I open a SQL file, which is usually an
exported backup of a database, I want to find the "Users" section. It is often toward the end of the file. In this
scenario, searching "mybb_users" takes you straight to it. I then removed all of the data before this section and
after, leaving only the 11,614 lines of user content. I then used my text editor's find and replace feature to remove
all of the single quotes, and saved the file. This produced a 6.7 MB file which is quite small. I could have used
the Cut command to extract only the desired columns of data, but that is overkill for such a small file. I can now
query through usernames and email addresses of all 11,614 users of the service.
Only you can decide if you should proceed with downloading the remaining 450 GB of databases which were
originally offered on RaidForums. If you do, many surprises await. Use the overall lessons throughout this guide
to clean the data when needed and query the results. Many readers report that this torrent will only download
99% of the data. If that happens, archive as much of the content which is visible and move on.
Telegram Search
In the previous chapter, we relied on Telegram to find voter information. We will also rely heavily on Telegram
to find stealer logs in the next chapter. Always check Telegram for breach data, as downloading from there is
easier than various websites. Subscribing to channels such as "We Leak Database", "LEAKS AGGREGATOR",
"DataLeak", "Open Leak", and "Leakbase Official" should present many breaches over the years. It also allows
you to query the contents of these rooms with the general search field in Telegram. Anytime I hear about a new

Data Breaches 499

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

breach, searching the company's name within Telegram usually reveals some evidence. Let's conduct a few
random demonstrations.
While writing this chapter, I saw a post on BreachForums.is discussing an offer of "USA / Payday Loans
Database / 1 Million / 2020". As previously stated, I prefer to never earn, buy, or spend any "credits" on these
types of sites. Instead, I searched the term "Payday" within Telegram. The following image displays the first
result. Since I was subscribed to the "DataLeak" room, I received a search result which allowed me to download
the file immediately, without spending any money or time to earn credits. In April of 2024, it appears this room
was either voluntarily or forcefully shut down. This is very common on Telegram. When it happens, move on
to the next lead.

The next post on the BreachForums site was offering to sell a file called "+250 Million USA Huge Leak". The
description of this data follows. Notice the total records size of 250,807,711.

I conducted a search of "250 million" on Telegram, and received the following result since I was a member of
the "Open Data" channel. The text file contained a torrent link, which I opened within my browser, which
launched Transmission, and began downloading the data. Notice that the total record count matches the

500 Chapter 41

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

previous image of someone trying to sell the data. This is another room which many readers have reported as
missing, but some readers have found success searching "250807711.7z" "torrent" within Google. Please
remember that these examples are to serve as overall search methods, and not to provide data which will be
archived forever. The next time you learn about data of interest, begin the hunt on Telegram.

The next post on this page presented a file which contained the Fotolog breach data, as seen in the following
image. A search of "Fotolog" on Telegram produced the result seen in the second image, offering this file for
free.

Data Breaches 501

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

We could do this all day. The lessons are to join as many breach data channels as you can find, and search
Telegram whenever you see something interesting being sold. You may find enough channels to keep you busy
for weeks at the following URL.
https://github.com/fastfire/deepdarkCTI/blob/main/telegram.md
SQL Files
Some old-fashioned Google queries might find more data breaches and leaks than one can manage. Let's conduct
a few examples with SQL files. SQL, often pronounced "sequel", is an acronym for Structured Query Language.
It is a computer language used in programming and designed for managing data held in a relational database
management system. In other words, most SQL files are databases of some sort. Many of the most popular
database breaches were originally released as SQL files. WordPress backups, web forum exports, and other
online maintenance files are also stored in this format. Searching for public SQL files can reveal surprising
results. Let's search Google for SQL files with the following operators.
ext:sql: This returns thousands of results. While some are files with the extension of ".sql", most of the
results are web pages ending with ".sql", and are not helpful. Let's modify the search as follows.
ext:sql "create table": This returns 26,300 results which include the exact terms "create table".
This is a standard statement within SQL files which specifies the names of tables within the database. This filters
most of the website names from our search and displays only valid SQL files. Next, let's add to our search with
the following modification.
ext:sql "create table" "@gmail.com": This returns 5,160 results. Each is an SQL database
with at least one entry of "@gmail.com" inside. This indicates that active email addresses are within the files,
which is indicative of a true breach or leak. The following search should reveal data worth analyzing.
ext:sql "create table" "@gmail.com" "'password'": This returns 3,060 results. Each is
an SQL database with at least one entry of "gmail.com" inside and a table titled "password". Note the single
quotes around password within double quotes. This tells Google to search specifically for 'password' and not
the word alone. 3,060 results are overwhelming, and include a lot of test files stored on Github. Since many
people use Gmail addresses as the administrator of test databases, we should add another email domain as
follows.
ext:sql
"create
site:github.com

table"

"gmail.com"

"'password'"

"@yahoo.com"

502 Chapter 41

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

-

This reveals 67 results. Each are SQL files which contain at least one Gmail address, one Yahoo address, and a
table titled password. Furthermore, all results from Github are removed. Most of these results will load as text
files within your browser. However, some will be quite large and may crash your browser while loading. The
following is a modified excerpt from an actual result, which I found by searching "@gmail.com" within the
browser text.
(62,'RichardWilson','admin','richard@redactedemail.com','4d5e02c3f25128
6d8375040ea2b54e22','Administrator',0,1,25,'2008-05-28 07:07:08','200904-02 13:08:07')
This is a very typical structure within SQL files. The following explains each piece.
62, (User ID)
'RichardWilson', (Name provided)
'admin', (Username)
'richard@redactedemail.com', (Email address)
'4d5e02c3f251286d8375040ea2b54e22', (Hashed password)
'Administrator', (Usertype)
0,1,25, (Variable internal codes)
'2008-05-28 07:07:08', (Registration date)
'2009-04-02 13:08:07', (Last visit date)
You could save the entire page as a .txt file (right-click > Save page as…) for your personal data archive. An
alternative Google query for text files is as follows.
ext:txt "create table" "gmail.com" "'password'" "yahoo.com" -site:github.com
As I updated this section, I conducted a query of ".sql" in Telegram. Since I was subscribed to the "LEAKES
AGGREGATOR" and "Leakbase Official" channels, I received hundreds of search results including recently
breached SQL files. Most of these databases each possessed thousands of names, addresses, and often hashed
passwords. You could spend weeks going through all of the data waiting to be plucked.
There may be a trove of sensitive information within these files, so use caution and always be responsible.
Exercise good defense when browsing any of these sites or downloading any data. Trackers, viruses, and overall
malicious software are always present in this environment. Using a macOS or Linux machine and a reputable
VPN will provide serious protection from these threats. I search and store leaked and breached databases as a
part of every investigation which I conduct.
I can say without hesitation that these strategies are more beneficial than any other online investigation technique
of which I know. Some investigators within my circles possess several terabytes of this data from tens of
thousands of breaches and leaks. Querying your own offline archive during your next investigation, and
identifying unique data associated with your target, can be extremely rewarding. Again, I ask you to be
responsible. Never use any credentials to access an account and never allow any data obtained to be further
distributed. Use this public data, stolen by criminals, to investigate other criminals.
Hashes
Most websites store passwords in "hashed" form. This guards against the possibility that someone who gains
unauthorized access to the database can retrieve the plain-text passwords of every user in the system. Hashing
performs a one-way transformation on a password, turning the password into another string, called the hashed
password. "One-way" means that it was practically impossible to go the other way and turn the hashed password
back into the original password. This was true many years ago, but not so much today. There are several

Data Breaches 503

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

mathematically complex hashing algorithms that fulfill these needs. Some are very insecure and others are nearly
impossible to crack. Let's look at a few examples.
Many older databases which have been breached possessed simple MD5 password hashes. The password of
"password1234" is as follows as an MD5 hash. The Sha-1 hash of the same password, "password1234", is also
as follows. Notice this is substantially longer, and a bit more secure. However, it will be quite easy for us to crack
these passwords in just a moment. Below this example is the same password in Sha-256 and Sha-512 format. As
you can see, these become increasingly complicated.
MD5: BDC87B9C894DA5168059E00EBFFB9077
SHA1: E6B6AFBD6D76BB5D2041542D7D2E3FAC5BB05593
SHA256: B9C950640E1B3740E98ACB93E669C65766F6670DD1609BA91FF41052BA48C6F3
SHA512: 8C7C9D16278AC60A19776F204F3109B1C2FC782FF8B671F42426A85CF72B
1021887DD9E4FEBE420DCD215BA499FF12E230DAF67AFFFDE8BF84BEFE867A8822C4
In regard to the various "older" breached databases which you are likely to find on the internet, you will most
commonly see MD5 and SHA1 hashed passwords. Some of them possess a "salt". This is a small amount of
data added to the hashing which makes cracking the password more difficult. If a breach does not possess the
salt, the passwords are nearly impossible to crack. If the salt is present, it takes considerable additional resources
in order to display the text password. The methods of "cracking" passwords exceed the scope of this book.
Fortunately, we do not need the knowledge and computer horsepower to convert these hashes into valuable
passwords. We simply need a third-party resource.
Hashes (hashes.org) attempted to reveal the plain-text of your submitted password hash. This was usually done
in an effort to assist security professionals to evaluate the security provided by the relevant hash submitted. For
us, it provided a new lead to follow. The database contained billions of cracked hashes available via web search
and API. If I queried " BDC87B9C894DA5168059E00EBFFB9077" via the search page on the site, I was
immediately presented with "password1234" as the password. Unfortunately, the service disappeared in late
2020. However, online archives exist. I consider the following technique to be advanced, and only suitable for
those who have a need to reveal hashed passwords as part of their daily operations. The entire archive of hashes
and passwords which previously existed on hashes.org is available as a torrent file. The following websites
contain a "magnet" torrent link within them. Copying and pasting this link within your browser should launch
your default torrent software and begin the 90 GB compressed download. Make sure you have room.
https://pastebin.com/pS5AQNV0
https://old.reddit.com/r/DataHoarder/comments/ohlcye/hashesorg_archives_of_all_cracked_hash_lists_up
Once complete, you should have a folder titled "HashesOrg Archive" with folders of "Hashlists" and "Leaks"
inside it. These two folders contain thousands of compressed zip files. While you could issue commands via
Terminal to decompress all files, I find it easier to simply select all files within a folder; right-click on them; and
select to open with your desired decompression tool. Once you see the ".txt" versions of each file present, you
might want to delete the original ".zip" files to free some space. Let's take a look inside the "Leaks" folder and
open the file titled "20_casio-com_found_hash_algorithm_plain.txt". A partial excerpt follows.
MD5 00747af6279313863a0319070bdbfb80:168130
MD5 007be02e9bd7eb4402a15f377ad22e9e:zhangker46
The data tells us that this specific breach stored passwords in MD5 format. In this excerpt, we know that the
MD5 hash of "00747af6279313863a0319070bdbfb80" reveals a password of "168130". We also know that a

504 Chapter 41

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

password of "zhangker46" was used within the Casio website at the time of the breach. Both of these pieces of
data will be valuable to us. Let's conduct an investigation.
Your target has an email address of "badguy42@gmail.com". A query of this email address within the COMB
data reveals a password of "verybad1234". However, this does not tell you which breach is associated with this
address. Within Terminal, after navigating to the "HashesOrg Archive" folder, the following command is issued.
rg -aFiN verybad1234
The result appears similar to the following.
Leaks/713_forums-nodoubt-com_found_hash_algorithm_plain.txt.zip
MYSQL5 887b0eb63dbc543991567864efc0b05aad5a8ab2:verybad1234
We now have circumstantial evidence that a user on a web forum for the band No Doubt was using a password
of "verybad1234" and the MYSQL5 hash of that password is "887b0eb63dbc543991567864efc0b05aad5a8ab2".
Does this prove that "badguy42@gmail.com" was using this forum? No, but it is a solid lead. It could also be
someone else using the same password. Since Hashes.org does not share the username or email address, we
must continue the investigation with the OSINT methods previously explained. Is that email address associated
with any conversations about the band? That would give me more confidence with the result. We should look
at the typical way that one would use the Hashes.org data set. Assume that you have identified the following
data within a breach, leak, or online website.
badguy42@gmail.com:14FDF540E39F0F154C8D0B3BD82ACE100B779DFA
Searching "14FDF540E39F0F154C8D0B3BD82ACE100B779DFA" through the hash identification website
TunnelsUp (tunnelsup.com/hash-analyzer) reveals the following.
14FDF540E39F0F154C8D0B3BD82ACE100B779DFA - Hash Type: SHA1
We know this is a SHA1 hash which represents a password, and can execute the following.
rg -aFiN 14FDF540E39F0F154C8D0B3BD82ACE100B779DFA
The results appear below.
Leaks/706_forums-utorrent-com_found_hash_algorithm_plain.txt.zip
SHA1 14FDF540E39F0F154C8D0B3BD82ACE100B779DFA:stillverybad1234
Leaks/1182_prowrestlingfans-com_found_hash_algorithm_plain.txt.zip
SHA1 14FDF540E39F0F154C8D0B3BD82ACE100B779DFA:stillverybad1234
We now know that "badguy42@gmail.com" likely used a password of "stillverybad1234" at some point in time.
We also know that someone using the password of "stillverybad1234" used that password on a uTorrent forum
and a wrestling website, both of which suffered a breach. Are these all the same person? We cannot definitely
conclude that. However, these are great leads. My next search would be the following.
rg -aFiN stillverybad1234
This may identify more data to be analyzed. However, this is all circumstantial. If a password is unique and
complex, I have more confidence in the relationship to my suspect. If the password is "password1234" and
appears on hundreds of sites, this has no value.

Data Breaches 505

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

The HashMob (hashmob.net) community now offers a paid search service and free downloads of lists similar
to those previously found at Hashes.org. Registration is not required to download "Found" lists from the
"Official lists" menu. These files are very similar to the Hashes.org data, but updated often. I downloaded all
2,326 official (non-combo) hash lists with the following command.
wget --content-disposition -i
https://inteltechniques.com/data/hashlists.txt
WARNING: The result was 90 GB of data. A typical file was titled "330.3200.found", which identified the ID
number of the breach (330) and the type of hash (3200-bcrypt). Each file contained numerous entries similar to
the following.
00092f0f900824707b3508abc78aa6bb89f1e61bca81b0bcb01bb2efc6a1057:yanks2008
Everything to the left of the colon is the hash, and everything right of it is the password. Searching "330" (the
ID of the breach) on the official HashMob website at https://hashmob.net/api/v2/hashlist/official reveals
this is the hash list from a breach at Zildjian.ru.
Just like the tutorials within the Hashes.org section, this data allows us to search for either a hash or a password
to identify if either is present within known breaches. It also allows us to query a hash in order to identify its
plain-text password. After witnessing Hashes.org disappear, I prefer to possess my own archive of this free data.
However, I also maintain a paid account with HashMob which allows real-time queries of hashes within their
website, or via their API, which is much easier and immediately identifies passwords. If you need to query hashes
often without downloading all the data, a paid account may be justified, and the results are updated daily. Next,
let's take a closer look at some popular types of hashes.
MD5
Some older data breaches possess passwords hashed with MD5, an extremely insecure method. These hashes
can be cracked very quickly. Below are two entries retrieved from various files.
174@gmail.com:482C811DA5D5B4BC6D497FFA98491E38
185@gmail.com:22F4182AAE2784FB3D1A432D44F07F46
Everything before the colon is the username or email address, and everything after is the MD5 hash. Searching
these hashes in your Hashes.org data produces the following results. We now know that the first password is
"password123" and the second is "reader12".
482c811da5d5b4bc6d497ffa98491e38:password123
22f4182aae2784fb3d1a432d44f07f46:reader12
MD5 + Salt (Vbulletin)
Some hashes will contain a "salt". This is usually a small piece of data after the hash, and both pieces are required
to translate into plain-text. One of the most popular examples of this are the hundreds of Vbulletin online
forums which have been infiltrated by various hacking groups. In the following examples, the salt is the final
three characters after the last colon.
Aanas,menball@aol.com:9d9e3c372d054c0769bd93181240be36:tye
Traor,tranr@optusnet.com.au:9274583d060b3efb464115e65a8c1ead:vv#
Searching these hashes and salts through your Hashes.org data provides the following.

506 Chapter 41

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

9d9e3c372d054c0769bd93181240be36:tye:eliza!%
9274583d060b3efb464115e65a8c1ead:vv#:runner
In the first example, you see the target password is "eliza!%". This proves that semi-complex passwords
containing special characters are often dehashed and ready for conversion. This is where offline hashes stick out
from the crowd. There are many online reverse-hashing tools, but most of them focus only on one format, such
as MD5, and use minimal dictionaries to crack the hashes. Let's try one more demonstration.
SHA1
This format is slightly more secure than MD5, but still extremely easy to crack. The passwords obtained from
the LinkedIn breach were all hashed in SHA1. Below are two examples.
174@gmail.com:403E35A2B0243D40400AF6BB358B5C546CDDD981
185@gmail.com:B1C4BBC4D7546529895CFABF8C1139CA7E486E18
The results from our offline hash collection follow. These two passwords are identical, but with different case.
The first is all lowercase while the second contains uppercase. Notice that these create a completely different
hash because of this. Keep this in mind when investigating passwords of your target.
403E35A2B0243D40400AF6BB358B5C546CDDD981:letmein!
B1C4BBC4D7546529895CFABF8C1139CA7E486E18:LetMeIn!
The golden days of data breaches from 2017 through 2019 are over. Sure, those databases are still floating
around and very valuable, but recent breaches do not typically possess MD5 or SHA1 password hashes. We
often see much more secure hashing algorithms such as BCRYPT or SHA512. Again, cracking these passwords
with dedicated rigs exceeds the scope of this book. Searching "older" hashes can be time consuming, but the
results can be extremely beneficial. It is quite a commitment to download hundreds of gigabytes of data for this
purpose. Take time to think about your own needs.
Online Hash Search Resources
The following websites will convert MD5 and SHA1 hashes into passwords in some scenarios. The password
must be within their limited system and should not be very complex. These are very limited, but may offer
immediate data.
https://osint.sh/md5/
https://md5decrypt.net/en/Sha1/
https://www.md5online.org/md5-decrypt.html
https://www.dcode.fr/sha1-hash
https://md5decrypt.net/en/
https://md5hashing.net/hash/sha1
If you do not want to build, store, and maintain your own hash data set, I recommend Name That Hash and
Search That Hash (github.com/HashPals/) over the online options. You can install it within your macOS or
Linux machine (as long as you installed Pip, as previously explained) with the following steps.
sudo pip install -U search-that-hash
sudo pip install -U name-that-hash
Within Terminal, you can now execute the following to search a hash within multiple online converters.
sth --text "5f4dcc3b5aa765d61d8327deb882cf99"

Data Breaches 507

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

The result appears as follows.
5f4dcc3b5aa765d61d8327deb882cf99
Text : password Type : MD5
You can also search for only the type of hash with a command of nth
"5f4dcc3b5aa765d61d8327deb882cf99". The result appears as follows.

--text

Most Likely MD5, HC: 0 JtR: raw-md5 Summary: Used for Linux Shadow files.
We now know that the hash value is a MD5 representation of the password "password". This process is included
within the script titled "Breaches/Leaks Tool" included in the OSINT VM. I launch this application daily. When
it cannot identify the password, I rely on my Hashes.org data set. If all of this is simply too complicated, we can
always rely on more online services, as explained soon.
Hopefully, you now have a basic understanding of breaches, passwords, hashes, database files, and how all of it
can work together to be a part of your online investigations. You might have a copy of the COMB data set
which includes over a billion email addresses and associated passwords, but that was created for convenience.
You may have encountered some hashes online and can reveal passwords hidden beneath, but those will be
based on specific target queries. While the data discussed so far is easily assessable, new breaches might not be
so easy to find and digest. Let's start over with two breach examples from data recently stolen.
As stated previously, I am not allowed to provide direct links to any breach data. However, I am allowed to
discuss ways in which some people use OSINT to find this data. Let's take another look at Torrent search
engines. If you were to search "Guron" on many Torrent sites, including The Pirate Bay, you would likely be
presented a Torrent file which contains 241 GB of data titled "MyCloud". Expanding the data should reveal
1,315 files, each of which are a breached database obtained between 2016 and 2021. This is far from everything
breached during that time, but it may serve as another introduction into this type of content. Warning: the
compressed content is 241 GB, so expect the decompressed to reach a terabyte. I plucked two small random
examples from this data set in order to explain the data within.
DogForum.sk: The file titled "Dump_public_dogforum.sk_2021.01.13.rar" is a 2.3 MB compressed file which
decompresses to a 12.5 MB SQL database dump. This site's database was allegedly stolen on January 13, 2021.
Opening the SQL file within a text editor reveals a table titled "phpbb3_users". The following displays only the
ten most interesting fields for my investigations within this table.
CREATE TABLE `phpbb3_users` (
`user_id` mediumint(8) unsigned NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
`user_ip` varchar(40) COLLATE utf8_bin NOT NULL DEFAULT '',
`user_regdate` int(11) unsigned NOT NULL DEFAULT '0',
`username` varchar(255) COLLATE utf8_bin NOT NULL DEFAULT '',
`user_password` varchar(40) COLLATE utf8_bin NOT NULL DEFAULT '',
`user_passchg` int(11) unsigned NOT NULL DEFAULT '0',
`user_email` varchar(100) COLLATE utf8_bin NOT NULL DEFAULT '',
`user_birthday` varchar(10) COLLATE utf8_bin NOT NULL DEFAULT '',
`user_lastvisit` int(11) unsigned NOT NULL DEFAULT '0',
`user_timezone` decimal(5,2) NOT NULL DEFAULT '0.00',
A redacted example of one user entry is below (there are over 17,000 users).
(8419,'178.40.120.170',1275503507,'Ode','$H$9ftKyo59RKktw7Idj2TGaVweMH2ITG.',1350132160,'xxxxblac
kjack@gmail.com',' 0- 0- 0',1371625109,+3,)
We can now assume the following about this user based on this data.

508 Chapter 41

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

8419: The user number for this user on this forum.
178.40.120.170: The IP address of the user during registration.
1275503507: The UNIX time the user registered (June 2, 2010 18:31:47 GMT).
Ode: The username for this user.
$H$9ftKyo59RKktw7Idj2TGaVweMH2ITG.: The hashed password.
1350132160: The UNIX time the user last changed the password (October 13, 2012 12:42:40 GMT).
xxxxblackjack@gmail.com: The email address of the user.
0- 0- 0: The date of birth of the user (none was provided).
1371625109: The UNIX time of the user's last visit (June 19, 2013 06:58:29 GMT).
+3: The user's time zone (+3 GMT - Middle East).
Please take a moment to digest this example. This entry is only one of 17,000 within this single stolen breach.
The Torrent mentioned possesses over 1,000 breaches, and there are tens of thousands of known breaches out
there. There is the potential to collect this type of information from billions of accounts. I hope you see the
possibilities for your own investigations. Every day, we digest dozens of breaches into our own system, which I
will discuss later, and we see this type of result with almost every query we conduct. Sometimes, we receive this
type of data from within several breaches associated with our single target email address. It is quite powerful.
Let's conduct another example.
EscortReviews.com: The file "Dump_public_escortreviews.com_2021.01.27.rar" is a 51.7 MB compressed file
which decompresses to a 223.3 MB SQL database dump. This site's database was allegedly stolen on January 27,
2021, and was publicly reported a month later. Opening the SQL file within a text editor reveals a table titled
"user". The following displays only the most interesting fields for my investigations within this table.
CREATE TABLE `user` (
`userid` int(10) unsigned NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT,
`username` varchar(100) NOT NULL DEFAULT '',
`password` char(32) NOT NULL DEFAULT '',
`passworddate` date NOT NULL DEFAULT '0000-00-00',
`email` char(100) NOT NULL DEFAULT '',
`homepage` char(100) NOT NULL DEFAULT '',
`joindate` int(10) unsigned NOT NULL DEFAULT '0',
`lastvisit` int(10) unsigned NOT NULL DEFAULT '0',
`birthday` char(10) NOT NULL DEFAULT '',
`ipaddress` char(15) NOT NULL DEFAULT '',
A fictitious example of one user entry is below (there are over 470,000 users in this database).
(201,bobforfun,65184286F793B5E70ACA525E63DAE54F,2011-06-12,bob_love@ymail.com,
bobforfun.com,1238309520,1307841316,06-02-1983,76.187.13.130,2)
We can now assume the following about this user based on this data.
201: The user number for this user on this forum.
Bobforfun: The username for this user on this forum.
65184286F793B5E70ACA525E63DAE54F: The hashed password for this account.
2011-06-12: The date the user last changed the password.
bob_love@ymail.com: The email address associated with this account.
bobforfun.com: The personal website associated with this account.
1238309520: The Unix time the user joined (March 29, 2009 at 06:52:00 GMT).
1307841316: The Unix time the user last accessed (June 12, 2011 at 01:15:16 GMT).
06-02-1983: The provided date of birth for this user.

Data Breaches 509

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

76.187.13.130: The IP address of the user during registration.
This site was used heavily by escorts, pimps, and johns in order to promote prostitution. Anyone who conducts
human trafficking investigations might benefit from this data on 470,000 registered members. The hash for this
fictitious example is MD5. If you were to place that hash into our Search-That-Hash tool previously discussed,
you would receive the following result.
65184286F793B5E70ACA525E63DAE54F
Most Likely
MD5, HC: 0 JtR: raw-md5 Summary: Used for Linux Shadow files.
Text : escorts
You would now know that this user was using a weak password of "escorts" for this site in 2011. These example
files are fairly small, but there is still a lot of content inside them which is unnecessary. You could clean these
files using the previous techniques, but that may be overkill for your needs. Since I collect terabytes of this data,
I try to minimize every file as much as possible. Reconsider the "DogForum.sk" file from earlier. The following
commands would extract only the columns we desire and remove the unnecessary tabs.
cut -d, -f1,6,7,8,10,11,13,15,16,29 dogforum.sk.sql > DogForum.txt
sed -i ''s/(ctrl-v-tab)//gI" DogForum-Cleaned.txt
This action shrank the 12.5 MB file to 2.4 MB and compressed each line to fit nicely within Terminal. That may
not seem like much, but it can make quite a difference when dealing with thousands of files.
Archive.org Breach Data
Archive.org possesses a surprising number of data breach dumps. As one example, conduct a search on their
site for "nulled.io" and click the "nulled.io_database_dump" page. It should present a download option for the
entire 10 GB database from the Nulled hacking forum, as uploaded by "ntgrg". If you were to click on this
profile, you would likely find other similar uploads. You could spend weeks on Archive.org identifying breach
data.
Cit0day Collection
Next, let's take a look at an enormous data set and discuss the challenges of ingesting such content. This section
will combine several techniques and commands which I have discussed throughout the previous chapters. In
2020, a criminal marketplace offering breached databases called Cit0day.in had allegedly been shut down by
various government agencies. The same day the site displayed a seizure notification, the 23,618 hacked databases
(containing 226 million credentials) from the site were provided for free download via a file sharing site. The
government takedown of Cit0day was never proven, and most researchers speculate the seizure notice on the
website was fake. However, the leaked data was real. Today, these files are still abundant on the internet for
anyone to obtain.
If you were to search "cit0day", with a zero (0) instead of an "o", within the main Telegram search field, you
would likely identify a channel called "cit0day collection in tg". Visiting this room should display thousands of
these compressed breach data files within the channel. This room allows download of each of these individual
hacked databases, or you can download the entire collection within three compressed files titled "Full Clouds
Cit0day_2" near the end of the list. These files consisted of 9 GB of compressed data, which expanded to a
single 9.1 GB compressed 7z file, which decompressed a folder titled "Cit0day_RF" containing 23,564 folders.
From there, each folder possessed multiple files associated with a specific breached victim company. The data
was 30 GB in size and consisted of 72,780 files. What a mess. Let's work through it together.

510 Chapter 41

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Some folders are easy. If you were to look at the contents of the folder titled "agekuda.net {8.882} [NOHASH]
(Shopping)", you would see that only one file exists, titled "agekuda.net {8.882} [NOHASH].txt". This file
possesses all 8,882 users of this site, and the contents appear similar to the following.
mge.com@ezweb.ne.jp:sundial
qbq@ezweb.ne.jp:apo11
All of the credentials within the file are plain-text passwords and there are no hashed passwords. This file is
ready to be added to your collection. However, let's take a look at the folder titled "agenziaporto.it {6.405}
[HASH+NOHASH] (Shopping)". It possesses the following five files.
NotFound.txt
Rejected.txt
Result.txt
Result(HEX).txt
www.agenziaporto.it {6.405} [HASH].txt
The "NotFound.txt" file contains all of the usernames and hashed passwords for this breach which were not
dehashed into plain-text passwords. Everything within this file is redundant to the last "[HASH]" file, and this
file is not needed. The "Rejected.txt" file is also redundant. The "Result.txt" file contains all of the hashed
passwords from the final "[HASH]" file which were turned into plain-text passwords. This file has value, but
the "Result(HEX).txt" file is not necessary for our needs. The final file titled "www.agenziaporto.it {6.405}
[HASH].txt" contains the most important content. It contains the 6,404 usernames and hashed passwords from
this breach.
If desired, you could simply copy these 23,618 folders into a directory called "Databases" within your SSD and
query the data whenever needed. There is no shame in that, and you could move on to more data. However, I
cannot stomach this. The amount of unnecessary data and redundant entries would bother me. It may not seem
like much now, but when you have 200,000 breached databases which take several minutes to query, you may
wish you had cleaned the data before archiving it. The first step I took was to open Terminal and navigate to
the folder which stored all of this data. For me, the command was as follows.
cd ~/Downloads/Telegram\ Desktop/Cit0day_RF/Data/
Once there, I removed all files which included "Rejected.txt", "NotFound.txt", "Result(HEX).txt", "*not
found*.txt", or "final" in the name. This eliminated much of the redundant data.
find . -iname 'Rejected.txt' -delete
find . -iname 'NotFound.txt' -delete
find . -iname 'Result(HEX).txt' -delete
find . -iname '*not found*.txt' -delete
find . -iname '*final*.txt' -delete
Below is the breakdown of the commands.
find
.
-iname
'*final*.txt'
-delete

This tells Terminal to find something.
This tells Terminal to search everything below the current folder.
This tells Terminal to search for content without case sensitivity.
This tells Terminal to find any text file with "final" in the name.
This tells Terminal to delete whatever matches our command.

Next, I wanted to combine all of the "decrypted", "result", and "no hash" files into one large file. These all
contain redundant usernames which are already in the main file for each breach, but they also include plain-text

Data Breaches 511

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

passwords which could be valuable. The following commands combined all of the data and then deleted the
unnecessary files. Notice that I removed the "i" from the "no hash" commands because I do not want to delete
uppercase entries containing "NO HASH".
find . -iname '*result*' -exec cat {} \; > Pass1.txt
find . -iname '*decrypt*' -exec cat {} \; > Pass2.txt
find . -name '*no hash*' -exec cat {} \; > Pass3.txt
find . -iname '*result*' -delete
find . -iname '*decrypt*' -delete
find . -name '*no hash*' -delete
cat Pass1.txt Pass2.txt Pass3.txt > Cit0DayPass.txt
rm Pass1.txt Pass2.txt Pass3.txt
You would now have a file called Cit0dayPass.txt which contains several gigabytes of usernames and plain-text
passwords from this collection. If desired, you could use the Sort command previously explained to remove
duplicates from this file, as there are many. Since these usernames are already within the files we will deal with
next, you do not need to know of which breach these entries originated. I will query this file in a moment.
Finally, each folder should now be left with only one file which should be similar to one of the following naming
structures.
3bbwifi.com {1.687} [HASH] [NOHASH].txt
agendadelasmujeres.com.ar {25.541} [HASH].txt
We could just save these to our Databases folder, but I want them cleaner. The following command renames
every file to remove the unnecessary information within parentheses and brackets. We will need the Rename
application, which can be installed with the commands.
macOS: brew install rename
Linux: sudo apt install rename
Once you know you have Rename installed, consider the following long command.
find . -type f -execdir rename
's/\{[^\}]+\}//g;s/<[^<]+>//g;s/\[[^\]]+\]//g;s/\([^\)]+\)//g' {} \;
This basically finds all files in all subdirectories and renames them to remove any parentheses and brackets, and
all data between them. I use this command often when I download thousands of files with long unnecessary
names. The previous files should now appear as follows.
3bbwifi.com .txt
agendadelasmujeres.com.ar .txt
This is much nicer, and I can now move all of these files into a single folder with the following commands. In
this scenario, I am moving them to a folder called Databases within my SSD. If you named your SSD the same
as mine, this should work for you too.
mkdir /Volumes/DATA/Databases/
find . -type f -name '*.txt' -execdir mv {} /Volumes/DATA/Databases/
\;
The result should be all 22,762 text files within the Databases folder on your SSD, with a total size of 20.37 GB
(down from 30 GB). This also moved the Cit0daypass.txt file which we previously created. You may notice that

512 Chapter 41

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

many of the files possess a trailing space in the file name. If this bothers you, navigate to your new Databases
folder and execute the following.
rename "s/ //g" *
Finally, let's conduct a query of a fictitious target.
rg -aFiN test9876@gmail.com
The results would appear as follows.
friuligol.it.txt
test9876@gmail.com:ef5381e56a457e62bf22976b5b4f4f8f
Cit0DayPass.txt
test9876@gmail.com:mypassword
This displays the presence of our target email address in the original breach (friuligol.it) with a hashed password,
and the dehashed plain-text password (mypassword) from the file we previously created from the "results" and
"decrypted" files. You would now possess this data in a format which is smaller, easier to digest, and faster to
query. You can delete the entire "Cit0day_RF" folder once you know you have the necessary data on your SSD.
If desired, you can conduct the following to see the total number of lines within all files combined.
find . -name '*.txt' | xargs wc -l
The result appears as follows.
50727432 total
We now know that the original report of 226 million credentials was likely based on all of that redundant data.
A total of 50 million victims is more accurate. Journalists will often exaggerate the truth in order to get more
clicks. Trust your own analysis. This is still not bad for a single data breach collection, which can be downloaded
and cleaned in an hour. The following image displays a very small portion of this collection.

assume my previous example of the password "escorts" is fairly common. I can confirm this through the Have
I Been Pwned password site at haveibeenpwned.com/Passwords. The following figures display the result
identifying 847 breaches containing that password (top). However, what if your target's password was "escorts!"?
Surpassingly, there is only one reported breach which had this password, as seen in the second image.

Data Breaches 513

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Online Breach Search Resources
The following provides direct URL submission options for several breach data search websites. This will be vital
for our Data Tool mentioned at the end of this chapter.
Email Address (test@test.com)
https://dehashed.com/search?query=test@test.com
https://intelx.io/?s=test@test.com
https://psbdmp.ws/api/search/test@test.com
https://check.cybernews.com/chk/?lang=en_US&e=test@test.com
https://portal.spycloud.com/endpoint/enriched-stats/test@test.com
https://cavalier.hudsonrock.com/api/json/v2/preview/search-by-login/osint-tools?email=test@test.com
https://api.proxynova.com/comb?highlight=1&query=test@test.com
Username (test)
https://dehashed.com/search?query=test
https://psbdmp.ws/api/search/test
https://api.proxynova.com/comb?highlight=1&query=test
Domain (inteltechniques.com)
https://dehashed.com/search?query=inteltechniques.com
https://psbdmp.ws/api/search/inteltechniques.com
https://intelx.io/?s=inteltechniques.com
https://www.hudsonrock.com/search?domain=inteltechniques.com
Telephone (6185551212)
https://dehashed.com/search?query=6185551212
https://psbdmp.ws/api/search/6185551212
IP Address (1.1.1.1)
https://dehashed.com/search?query=1.1.1.1
https://psbdmp.ws/api/search/1.1.1.1
https://intelx.io/?s=1.1.1.1
Name (Michael Bazzell)
https://dehashed.com/search?query=michael Bazzell
https://psbdmp.ws/api/search/Michael%20Bazzell

514 Chapter 41

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Password (password1234)
https://dehashed.com/search?query=password1234
https://psbdmp.ws/api/search/password1234
https://www.google.com/search?q=password1234
https://api.proxynova.com/comb?highlight=1&query=password1234
Hash (BDC87B9C894DA5168059E00EBFFB9077)
https://hash.ziggi.org/api/dehash.get?hash=BDC87B9C894DA5168059E00EBFFB9077&include_external_
db
https://decrypt.tools/client-server/decrypt?type=md5&string=BDC87B9C894DA5168059E00EBFFB9077
https://md5.gromweb.com/?md5=BDC87B9C894DA5168059E00EBFFB9077
https://www.nitrxgen.net/md5db/BDC87B9C894DA5168059E00EBFFB9077
https://dehashed.com/search?query=BDC87B9C894DA5168059E00EBFFB9077
https://www.google.com/search?q=BDC87B9C894DA5168059E00EBFFB9077
Miscellaneous Sites
The following websites do not allow submission via URL, but a manual search may be beneficial. Please
remember that all of these sites come and go quickly. By the time you read this, some of these services may have
shut down. It is equally possible that new resources are waiting for your discovery.
HIBP: https://haveibeenpwned.com
LeakPeek: https://leakpeek.com
Beach Directory: https://breachdirectory.org
ProxyNova: https://proxynova.com/tools/comb/
H8Mail (github.com/khast3x/h8mail)
H8Mail attempts to combine many of the breach services we have explored into one utility. It should never take
the place of a full manual review, but the embedded automation can be beneficial to an investigation. Conduct
the following within Terminal.
sudo pip install -U h8mail
cd ~/Downloads
h8mail -g
sed -i 's/\;leak\-lookup\_pub/leak\-lookup\_pub/gI' h8mail_config.ini
Launching the following from the Downloads directory will produce minimal, if any, results.
h8mail -t bill@microsoft.com
Providing API keys from services such as Snusbase, Leak-Lookup, HaveIBeenPwned, Emailrep, Dehashed, and
Hunterio will provide MANY more results, but these services can be quite expensive. If you rely on breach data
every day; can afford premium services; and do not want to collect your own breach data; there may be value
for you within this option. After you have obtained API keys from your desired services, open the Files
application, enter the Downloads folder, and double-click the file named "h8mail_config.ini". You should see
text similar to the following partial example. Add your API keys within the appropriate lines, similar to the entry
for "leak-lookup pub", and remove any semicolons within lines you want to be used. If a semicolon is at the
beginning of a line, that option is ignored. At the minimum, make sure the semicolon is removed from the "leaklookup pub" line and execute another query. You should see new results. If you conducted the previous "sed"
command, this should already be configured for you.

Data Breaches 515

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

;hibp =
leak-lookup_pub = 1bf94ff907f68d511de9a610a6ff9263
;leak-lookup_priv =
;emailrep =
After this new configuration file modification, I executed a search for test@email.com. The result was a file
which contained 172 results. The following partial view confirms that this address exists within breaches from
TicketFly, TrueFire, and Tumblr. Eliminating this modification returned no results.
test@email.com,LEAKLOOKUP_PUB,ticketfly.com
test@email.com,LEAKLOOKUP_PUB,truefire.com
test@email.com,LEAKLOOKUP_PUB,tumblr.com
Sample Investigation
We have covered a lot so far within this chapter. Let's pause and conduct an investigation using this data. Assume
that you possess the databases mentioned previously, especially "COMB". Your investigation identifies a suspect
with an email address of johndoe1287@gmail.com. This appears to be a burner email account, as you find no
evidence of it anywhere online. It was used to harass your client and likely created only for devious activity. Our
first step is to query the address through all the databases you have acquired. Assume these are all stored on
your external SSD, which is plugged into your host computer. Let's take each step slowly.
Open Terminal, type cd, then space, and drag and drop the external drive from your Files (Finder) application
into Terminal. This makes sure you are in the correct path. My command appears similar to the following.
cd '/media/osint/DATA/'
I can now conduct a query within Terminal against all of my collected data. The following searches our target
email address. Each query could take several minutes if you possess a lot of data and a slow drive.
rg -aFiN johndoe1287@gmail.com
This results in one entry as follows.
johndoe1287@gmail.com:H8teful0ne45
We now know that he used the password of H8teful0ne45 on a site. We should next conduct a search of that
password to see if it is used anywhere else. The following query is appropriate.
rg -aFiN H8teful0ne45
This returned the following results.
johndoe1287@gmail.com:H8teful0ne45
johndoe@gmail.com:H8teful0ne45
johndoe1287@hotmail.com:H8teful0ne45
These addresses are likely controlled by our target since the passwords are the same and the addresses are similar.
We now have new search options. However, this search only queries for this exact text password term. If you
possess a database which has not been dehashed, your target password could be present within an MD5, SHA1,
or other hash. Therefore, let's convert this password into the most commonly used hashes with the following
websites, displaying the output below each.

516 Chapter 41

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

https://passwordsgenerator.net/md5-hash-generator/
9EF0EC63E2E52320CB20E345DCBA8112
https://passwordsgenerator.net/sha1-hash-generator/
D15FB15C1BC88F4B7932FD29918D1E9E9BBE7CA5
https://passwordsgenerator.net/sha256-hash-generator/
37A790A268B9FE62B424BABFC3BCAB0646BFB24B93EC1619AAE7289E0D7086DB
We can now submit each of these throughout all of our data with the following three commands.
rg -aFiN 9EF0EC63E2E52320CB20E345DCBA8112
rg -aFiN D15FB15C1BC88F4B7932FD29918D1E9E9BBE7CA5
rg -aFiN
37A790A268B9FE62B424BABFC3BCAB0646BFB24B93EC1619AAE7289E0D7086DB
The first query returned the following result.
Leaks/1183_houstonastros-com_found_hash_algorithm_plain.txt.zip
SHA1 D15FB15C1BC88F4B7932FD29918D1E9E9BBE7CA5:H8teful0ne45
This tells us that a user with a password of "H8teful0ne45" was present on a breach about the Houston Astros.
Is this the same person? It could be. It could also be a coincidence. The more unique a password is, the more
confidence I have that it is the same individual. This definitely warrants further investigation. I might next try
to locate the original breach data, which would likely include any email addresses associated with that password
hash. All of these steps are designed to lead us to the next step. All of these results give me more confidence
that these accounts are owned by the same person. The variant of the "hateful" password and presence of
"johndoe" within the original email address and the new password convinces me we are on the right track. I
would now target this new email address and replicate the searches mentioned within previous chapters. We
should also check the online breach resources previously explained.
As previously stated, your biggest frustration may be the speed of each query. There is a lot to digest in this
chapter. I want to state again that breach data has been the absolute biggest aid in my online investigations. I
rely on it way more than Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram combined. In a future chapter, I will offer additional
storage and query techniques which should assist with immediate access to your data.
IntelTechniques Breaches & Leaks Tool
This search tool combines most of the online search options mentioned throughout the chapter. The breach
data resources are split into categories based on the target data (email, username, etc.). The last feature allows
entry of found passwords and immediately generates an MD5, SHA1, and SHA256 hash for further research.
Please vistit https://inteltechniques.com/tools/Breaches.html.

Data Breaches 517

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER FOURTY-TWO
STEALER LOGS

I am absolutely fascinated by stealer log data. While I have always prioritized breach data as a vital part of my
investigations, stealer log data presents a whole new world. This chapter offers two unique ways of acquiring
stealer logs. The first is the manual process which collects more data, but requires a lot of effort. The second
obtains only the most beneficial details with minimum effort, but misses some data you might find valuable.
First, let's revisit the basics. This is my favorite chapter.
Stealer logs are created once a malicious virus has been installed to a computer (typically Windows). The victim
may be tricked into installing a program after visiting a malicious website, or the virus could be included within
an unauthorized application, such as pirated software. The virus sniffs through the computer to identify, extract,
and collect any valuable data. These "logs" are then transferred from the host machine and distributed within
shady online networks.
The most common stealer logs we would find in previous years were labeled as Raccoon Stealer, Redline Stealer,
and Vidar Stealer. Today, every stealer log group rebrands the data they steal from other groups in order to
present it as their own. There is no honor amongst thieves. The groups which offer data stolen via these
programs are limitless. A new group pops up every week. Criminal marketplaces trade this data as a commodity.
They use the stolen data to unlawfully access online accounts, steal cryptocurrency, make unauthorized
purchases, and wreak havoc on innocent people's digital lives. Our systems ingest over one million logs every
day which are being shared online.
Let's take a look at some real data. In the following example, I extracted a random log which was generated by
the Redline Stealer and uploaded to a criminal marketplace. I redacted much of the content. First, let's
understand the file structure. The following is a tree of a single log file for one victim.
└── US[xx4909xC4Ex3C4x008x57AxD60BBCAF6] [2022-06-19T08_49_35]
├── -----000.txt
├── 00000000000.jpg
├── Autofills
│ ├── Google_[Chrome]_Default.txt
├── Cookies
│ ├── Google_[Chrome]_Default Network.txt
│ └──Microsoft_[Edge]_Default Network.txt
├── DomainDetects.txt
├── ImportantAutofills.txt
├── InstalledBrowsers.txt
├── InstalledSoftware.txt
├── Passwords.txt
├── Screenshot.jpg
└── UserInformation.txt
Now, let's walk through each folder and file.
└── US[xx4909xC4Ex3C4x008x57AxD60BBCAF6] [2022-06-19T08_49_35]
This top folder presents a two-letter abbreviation of the country of the victim (United States) followed by a
unique Hardware Identifier (HWID) and the date and time of capture. The HWID is a security measure used
by Microsoft upon the activation of Windows. This unique HWID is generated when the operating system is
first installed. This will be vital in a moment. The date and time allow us to know the likely accuracy of the data.

518 Chapter 43

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

├── -----000.txt
This is an information file about the thief. It often includes generic contact information, pricing for stolen data,
and online communities associated with the product.
├── 00000000000.jpg
This is the logo of the Redline product.
├── Autofills
│
├── Google_[Chrome]_Default.txt
This is where things get interesting. Your browser has likely asked you if you would like to store information
which was entered into an online form. This could include your name, address, email, or other unique detail
which gets entered into websites often. If you allow your browser to store this data, stealer logs easily collect it
into their systems. The following is partial (redacted) data extracted from an actual victim. The original logs
clearly displayed all data.
Name: email
Value: loxxx@gmail.com
===============
Name: username
Value: skxxxx22
===============
Name: lastname
Value: Loxxx
===============
Name: first-name-field
Value: Alixxx
===============
Name: address
Value: 20xx xxxx Lane
===============
Name: city
Value: Moxxx
===============
Name: phone
Value: 209-xxx-xxx
===============
Name: dob
Value: 10/xx/20xx
===============
Name: VIN
Value: kmhtcxxxxxxxxx
===============
Name: keyword
Value: 20xx Subaru xxxx
===============
Name: card-name
Value: Alixxx Loxxx
===============
Name: expiration-date
Value: 0x/2x

Stealer Logs 519

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

I now have the name, DOB, home address, email, cell, vehicle, and partial credit card details of the victim.
├── Cookies
│ ├── Google_[Chrome]_Default Network.txt
│ └──Microsoft_[Edge]_Default Network.txt
Your browser stores temporary internet files about your credentialed sessions. I may not have your password to
your email account, but possessing the cookies from your browser could allow me to steal your credentialed
session and replicate access to your account. The following details could be beneficial to a criminal (obviously
redacted and abbreviated).
.paypal.com TRUE / FALSE 196941xxx cookie_check yes
.paypal.com TRUE / FALSE 168533xxx cookie_prefs P%3D1%2CF%3D1%2Ctype%3Dimplicit
.paypal.com TRUE / FALSE 196941xxx d_id 9ebfcxxxe8545ae9a39xxx2d228xxx116537xxx
.paypal.com TRUE / FALSE 1969xxxG8 KN2xxx0aJZzhbL_R4HkiO_kb5_yMTkUPrF-Ml6xxx
.paypal.com TRUE / FALSE 1685334379 X-PP-ADxxxYsNaAuNxxxHBuQ9dI
.paypal.com TRUE / FALSE 1716870381 _ga GA1.2.137xxx.165379xxx
.paypal.com TRUE / FALSE 1716912230 login_email lopxxxgmail.com
.paypal.com TRUE / FALSE 1969417578 rmuc KhGxxxmVv_x1Oo9gQ7axxxUk
├── DomainDetects.txt
This file offers immediate access to the priority domains which exist in the overall record. This allows criminals
to quickly identify logs of interest.
PDD: [Amazon] amazon.com (2), [Games] steamcommunity.com (2)
CDD: [PayPal] paypal.com (40), [Amazon] amazon.com (14), [Games] battle.net (11), [Games] epicgames.com
(1), [Games] steamcommunity.com (8)
├── ImportantAutofills.txt
This file parses data from the stored form fields which will be most beneficial to a criminal. The last two lines
of my example suspect appear as follows. I also see full credit card details presented here often.
dob: 06/xx/xx
ssn: 248xx2xxx
├── InstalledBrowsers.txt
This file identifies all installed browsers and versions.
1) Name: Google Chrome, Path: C:\Program Files (x86)\Google\Chrome\Application\chrome.exe, Version:
102.0.5005.115
2) Name: Internet Explorer, Path: C:\Program Files\Internet Explorer\iexplore.exe, Version: 11.00.22000.1
(WinBuild.160101.0800)
3) Name: Microsoft Edge, Path: C:\Program Files (x86)\Microsoft\Edge\Application\msedge.exe, Version:
102.0.1245.44
├── InstalledSoftware.txt
This file presents all applications installed within the machine. While this may not be extremely valuable to a
criminal, it is gold to an investigator. If my target possesses a stealer program, I get to monitor a lot of details

520 Chapter 43

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

about the person's computer usage. In the following example, I would know which VPN my target uses,
hardware details, and preferred games. That could lead to quite a social engineering attack.
1) Adobe Acrobat Reader DC [22.001.20117]
2) Adobe Creative Cloud [5.5.0.617]
3) Adobe Genuine Service [7.7.0.35]
4) Adobe Photoshop 2021 [22.1.1.138]
5) Adobe Refresh Manager [1.8.0]
6) Epic Games Launcher [1.1.279.0]
7) ExpressVPN [7.7.12.4]
8) ExpressVPN [7.7.12.4]
9) Google Chrome [102.0.5005.115]
10) HP Audio Switch [1.0.179.0]
11) HP Connection Optimizer [2.0.17.0]
12) HP PC Hardware Diagnostics UEFI [7.6.2.0]
13) Intel(R) Chipset Device Software [10.1.18295.8201]
14) Launcher Prerequisites (x64) [1.0.0.0]
15) LOOT version 0.16.0 [0.16.0]
16) McAfee LiveSafe [16.0 R27]
38) Minecraft Launcher [1.0.0.0]
39) NVIDIA Texture Tools Exporter for Adobe Photoshop [2020.1.3]
40) Razer Synapse [3.7.0531.052416]
41) Red Dead Redemption 2 [1.0.1436.31]
42) Rockstar Games Launcher [1.0.59.842]
43) Rockstar Games Social Club [2.1.3.7]
44) Steam [2.10.91.91]
45) UE4 Prerequisites (x64) [1.0.14.0]
├── Passwords.txt
This file presents all of the passwords stored within all browsers. This is why it is so important to only use
reputable password managers, and never the native browser password storage option. Below is one of 56
examples for this victim, redacted. The original file displays all passwords in plain-text.
URL: https://www.amazon.com/ap/signin
Username: xxxxxxx
Password: xxxxxxx
├── Screenshot.jpg
This is one of the most interesting pieces. It is a screen capture of the victim's machine at the time of infection.
The following figure is an actual example (slightly redacted) which identifies the person's video interests, TikTok
favorites, toolbar shortcuts, Google avatar (redacted), and an overall state of the computer at the time. This is
quite invasive and can be a great lead in the investigation.

Stealer Logs 521

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

└── Us
The last f
date. An

tion, and

Build ID: REDLINEVIP
IP: 192.xx.xx.xx
FileLocation: C:\Windows\Microsoft.NET\Framework\v4.0.30319\InstallUtil.exe
UserName: xxx
Country: US
Zip Code: xxx
Location: xxx, Texas
HWID: 72xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxCAF6
Current Language: English (United States)
ScreenSize: {Width=1920, Height=1080}
TimeZone: (UTC-07:00) Mountain Time (US & Canada)
Operation System: Windows 10 Home x64
UAC: AllowAll
Process Elevation: False
Log date: 19.06.2022 8:49:35
Name: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-10750H CPU @ 2.60GHz, 6 Cores
Name: NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2060, 4293918720 bytes
Name: Total of RAM, 12126.75 MB or 12715814912 bytes
You may be wondering why I get so excited about these logs when they expose sensitive details about innocent
victims. I have two main reasons. First, it helps us defend our clients. We have had over a dozen clients who
unknowingly installed a stealer virus. Our systems caught the infection within a few days and allowed us to
contact the client to make notification. We have helped numerous organizations which had unknown infections
within their network. Some of our staff calls this our "Pre-Crime Unit".
Next, it could be a priceless investigation tool. I have had numerous suspects within my own investigations who
were victims of stealer logs. When this happens, I can see all of their email addresses, usernames, passwords,
and computer information. This has revealed the true owner of many alias names and other deceitful tactics
used by the suspect. If my target is the victim of stealer logs, my entire investigation is about to be wrapped up
quickly. If I have the HWID, I can search through our troves of logger data to identify even more vital info
about the suspect.
Because of this, we aggressively collect stealer log data every day. Some days we ingest over a terabyte of this
data. The following Google queries might present interesting information, but most results lead to shady criminal
marketplaces which require an account to see download links. Use extreme caution here, and I will present better
options in a moment.
522 Chapter 43

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

"stealer logs" "download"
"stealer logs" "Redline"
It is now time to dive into some very shady criminal communities. Ensure that your organization's policies allow
this behavior; never publish or disseminate anything you find; understand any local, state, or federal laws which
could disallow these actions; and always focus on the good usage of this data. Never attempt to log in to anyone's
account and make sure your computer is well protected from online threats. The following is presented as an
educational demonstration, and I take no liability for your own actions taken.
Full Stealer Logs via Telegram
Telegram is a cross-platform and cloud-based instant messaging service which provides group chat, optional
end-to-end encrypted chats, VOIP calling, file sharing, and several other features. We installed it within a
previous chapter and you may have already obtained some data from it. It has been scrutinized as a tool used by
drug dealers, burglars, terrorists, child abusers, and many fringe groups. The software and services were
developed, and are currently maintained, by a Russian company. I would never install this software on any
personal or OSINT investigations machine. I only execute it on my dedicated leaks, breaches, logs, and
ransomware desktop. Of any technique in this book, the following tutorial is the most likely to infect a machine
with a virus. You have been warned.
However, I believe Telegram is quite possibly the best resource for Stealer Logs. Within seconds, you have
access to terabytes of data without the need for links to third-party download providers which enforce slow
download speeds for free accounts. We can download most of the data directly from Telegram servers at the
full bandwidth of our internet connection. Let's start with a demonstration.
There are dozens of Telegram channels which offer free stealer logs in order to promote their paid services. I
never recommend paying for any type of stolen data, but I will eagerly download and analyze any content they
are sharing via their promotional channels. CRYPTON 2.0 is one of these services. If you were to search
"CRYPTON 2.0" in Google, you will likely only see a few BreachForums posts offering logs, which have since
been removed. However, if you were to navigate directly to the "CRYPTON 2.0" Telegram channel, you might
find an overwhelming amount of free stealer logs. Next, we need to understand Telegram URLs. Telegram links
might appear as the following fictious example, which is not me.
https://t.me/inteltechniques
If you navigate to a URL like this, your browser will likely prompt you to either choose an application or cancel
the request to open an external program. If you have Telegram installed, you can select it and allow your browser
to forward any channel links directly to Telegram Desktop. If you do not have Telegram installed, many channels
will allow you to see a preview of the content. The URL for this browser-based preview would appear as follows.
https://t.me/s/inteltechniques
In these two examples, I had my name (inteltechniques) in the URL. You would replace inteltechniques with
whatever channel you are seeking (channels start with "@"). However, searching a room name within the
Telegram application is always the easiest route. Remember, I cannot provide any direct hyperlinks to any stolen
data, but you should be able to adapt my following demonstrations in order to access a room such as
"CRYPTON 2.0". If you were to find this channel through a URL, you would see a page within your browser
similar to the following image to the left. Searching within Telegram should appear as the following image to
the right.

Stealer Logs 523

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Telegram and give you the opportunity to join. Not
collection, but also offering compressed samples f
appear. In this image, clicking the downward arro
Extracting the compressed file should result in a ne
folders. Each of these folders will possess a folder

their logs
his would
e of logs.
s) of new
ght.

The "A
s" files contain the information as previously explained.
The "F
red within the default "Documents" and "Desktop"
directo
rosoft Word documents and PDFs. In this one sample
file, we now have the passwords, documents, and other sensitive details of 1,101 victims. While this is scary and
awful, it is also powerful as an investigative tool.
There are always dozens of active stealer logs channels, but you might prefer to only visit a room which attempts
to combine free logs into one place. A channel called "Moon Cloud | Free Logs", which has a username of
"Moon_Log" could be appropriate for you. At the time of this writing, it offered downloads of logs from
DaisyCloud, LulzsecCloudLogs, Tiny Cloud, and dozens of others. There is easily over a terabyte of compressed
logs in this channel alone, which presents the logs of hundreds of thousands of victims.
You could easily fill a 4 TB SSD with the logs you collect in one day. Some people save everything, but that can
be a challenge. You could download as much as you can fit and then query the data with Ripgrep. However,
what about the new 50 GB of compressed data which will be posted tomorrow? What about the next day?

524 Chapter 43

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Collecting and storing this data can be a full-time job. This is where I offer two paths to consider. You can
continue to download the full logs and clean them, or rely on other people to do your dirty work. Let's
understand both options, and start with the manual approach. Afterward, I present a much easier solution which
collects less data.
Full Stealer Log Cleansing
Stealer logs are large. I estimate we now have over 40 TB of stealer log data. That is not only a lot of data to
store, it can take a long time for Ripgrep to query. At my company, we place everything within a custom database,
as explained later, but that is not feasible for most people. While writing this section, I downloaded over 25
compressed files which contained over 30 GB of data including over 37,000 victim logs. That was just as an
afternoon demonstration. Imagine how quickly this would pile up if you do it every day. Because of this, I offer
an option for those without the need for all of the data included within a typical log.
Most people find the email addresses, usernames, and passwords to be the most valuable part of this data. While
the screen captures, documents, and cookies are beneficial, they take up the most space. If desired, you could
just keep all of the password files and delete the rest. Some fellow data enthusiasts just cringed at that, but I
want to be realistic. Searching through millions of files in order to locate the email addresses and passwords of
a suspect may be overkill for some. Instead of saving the individual password files, let's merge them all into one
file. Imagine you have thousands or millions of stealer log files decompressed within your Downloads folder.
The following Terminal command would navigate to each "passwords.txt" file; extract all of the text data; and
compile it into one file titled Passwords.txt. Make sure you are in the right folder within Terminal, which is
usually your "Telegram Desktop" folder.
find . '*pass*.txt' -exec cat {} \; > ~/Downloads/Passwords.txt
We have a problem. Some stealer software titles the passwords file "Passwords.txt" with an uppercase "P".
Therefore, the following command is better. It ignores the case of the file and would extract data from both
"passwords.txt" and "Passwords.txt". We are using '*pass*' to pick up all files including "pass" anywhere in the
name.
find . -iname '*pass*.txt' -exec cat {} \; > ~/Downloads/Passwords.txt
If desired, you could replicate this for " ImportantAutofills" files with the following.
find . -iname 'importantautofills.txt' -exec cat {} \; >
~/Downloads/ImportantAutofills.txt
I executed both commands against my test data, which produced a 200 MB Passwords.txt file and a 20 MB
ImportantAutofills.txt file. These could be queried quite easily. If I had a terabyte of logs, my passwords file
might be only 8 GB. While we keep all of the data we acquire, we also create an ever-growing Passwords.txt file
which can be quickly queried for times we may not have immediate access to our entire database. If you were to
execute the following command, the date would be appended to your new file, such as Passwords.2023-1128.txt.
timestamp=$(date +%Y-%m-%d) && find . -iname '*pass*.txt' -exec cat {}
\; > ~/Downloads/Passwords.$timestamp.txt
The results within this large text file are split over several lines. This will require a variation of our Ripgrep
command. As an example, the following text might be present within the file.
URL: https://www.amazon.com/ap/signin
Username: test123@gmail.com
Password: pass456

Stealer Logs 525

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

If we conduct a traditional Ripgrep search for "test123@gmail.com", the result would be as follows.
Username: test123@gmail.com
This is because Ripgrep only displays the line which possesses the data, and not the lines immediately before or
after. The data within stealer logs typically splits the results over multiple lines. Therefore, if you want to query
this type of data, I recommend the following Ripgrep command.
rg -aFiN -A2 -B2 test123@gmail.com
This conducts our typical Ripgrep query, but adds "-A" and "-B" followed by "2". This tells Ripgrep to display
the two lines before and after each hit, which would appear as follows with our test data.
==================
URL: https://www.amazon.com/ap/signin
Username: test123@gmail.com
Password: pass456
==================
I suspect some readers are overwhelmed at the amount of data available for investigative use. I get it. I am
overwhelmed every day. However, I believe that is part of the fun. If you need to keep screen captures of victim
machines and any documents absorbed by the viruses, you will need to download, extract, and store entire stealer
logs. Eventually, you will need a server with tens of terabytes of storage. That is what I do, but it is not necessary
for most readers. This is where stealer log summaries enter the scene, and may be a more appropriate solution
for you.
Stealer Log Summaries via Telegram
Now that there are so many stealer log channels on Telegram, we are seeing new rooms which only offer
compressed text-only versions of stealer logs. These channels offer text file downloads of all URLs, usernames,
and passwords recently posted within the full stealer logs which I just explained. There are benefits and
disadvantages for each, so consider the following.
•
•
•

Full stealer logs contain screen captures, cookies, and other documents which are not present within
the stealer log summaries. This can identify priceless information about your target.
Full stealer logs assign a folder to a specific victim. You can use this to associate multiple email addresses
to a single user. Summaries combine all credentials into one big data dump.
Stealer log summaries have already been cleaned for you. You simply need to download the text files,
combine them, and sort for unique entries. You will only download the important data without the rest
of the garbage. Instead of downloading a 1 GB compressed logs file, you can download a 10 MB
summary of the credentials.

A typical entry within full stealer logs is as follows:
URL: https://www.amazon.com/ap/signin
Username: test123@gmail.com
Password: pass456
The same entry would appear as follows in a summary file.
https://www.amazon.com/ap/signin:test123@gmail.com: pass456
I will now assume you do not want to collect several terabytes of compressed files and parse through all of them
simply to identify the credentials within stealer logs. Instead, we will download stealer log summaries. Much like

526 Chapter 43

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

the previously mentioned channel of combined log sources called "Moon Cloud | Free Logs", we will focus on
another channel called "Moon Cloud | Combo/txtbase" to download summaries.
There are two types of files in this room. The first are stealer log summaries, which tend to be at least 40 MB
text files. The other are combo files from these summaries which tend to be less than 20 MB in size, often only
a few kilobytes. The following image displays an example. The top file is only 151 KB and includes email
addresses and passwords which were acquired from stealer logs. The second file contains 623 MB of URLs,
email addresses, and passwords from stealer logs. For this section, we will focus on the latter.

Let's start with the file seen in the previous image. After download, I can immediately access the data without
decompression. The file is small enough I can open it within a text editor. The following is a redacted view of
the first line.
kevinsaenxxxxient:kevinsaenxxxxientexx:https://www.netflix.com/ar/Login
This indicates that a person with that email address has been infected with a stealer virus; they stored their
credentials directly to their web browser; they have a Netflix account; and the username and password
combination is used to access that account. If you worked for Netflix, you could use this information to disable
the account and prompt the user for a password reset. If you were a criminal, you would illegally use this to
access free movies. Let's do another example.
Occasionally, a group will publish a huge collection of stealer log data as compressed files. The channel "Link
Cloud" with a Telegram username of "@linkpass" is notorious for this. While writing this chapter, they posted
6.7 GB of compressed files which decompressed to 71.1 GB of text files containing stealer log summaries. Note
the password required to decompress the data in the following image. All files should be decompressed before
proceeding.

Stealer Logs 527

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

When combined with the posts from the other room, I possessed 76.5 GB of text data. This is quite a feat, and
many might think the work is done. While you could offload all of these files onto a SSD for queries, you have
two problems. First, many files will have the same file name but unique content. Therefore, saving all files
downloaded over a year in one folder will be an issue. The bigger concern is duplicates. Since these groups steal
log data from each other, that 76.5 GB of data most certainly contains redundant information. There is no
justification to store duplicate entries.
Therefore, I will share my daily and weekly ritual with you. This method will download all available summaries
every day; combine the daily haul into one file without any duplicates; then merge the data into your primary
collection weekly, avoiding redundant data. While I hope you follow along and replicate my steps, I offer a script
soon that will do all of the work on your behalf.
Daily Tasks
On today's date, I downloaded a total of 80 GB of decompressed text files containing stealer logs. That is higher
than normal, but not completely out of the ordinary. I then executed the following commands within a single
Terminal window, with an explanation of each. A replica of these will be used in our script.
The following creates a time stamp which we can use to name our file later. This is important so that we do not
overwrite our collected data every day.
timestamp=$(date +%Y-%m-%d-%H-%M)

528 Chapter 43

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

The following changes the active Terminal directory to the folder used by Telegram by default for downloads.
Your folder may vary.
cd ~/Downloads/Telegram\ Desktop
The following command combines all text files into one file called Logs.csv.
cat *.txt > Logs.csv
The following commands delete all the original text files, then renames our working combined file to Logs.txt.
rm *.txt && mv Logs.csv Logs.txt
Next, we need to eliminate the duplicates with the following command.
LC_ALL=C sort -u -b -i -f -S 80% --parallel=8 Logs.txt > Logs$timestamp.txt
The result was only 57 GB of data within my new text file (down from 80 GB originally). Finally, the following
commands remove our original Logs.txt file and moves our new file to our Downloads directory. This is to
ensure that the next time we run this series of commands, we do not delete the file we just created.
rm Logs.txt && mv Logs-$timestamp.txt ~/Downloads/
Your daily task is complete and you would replicate these steps tomorrow with any new stealer log summaries
posted to your joined Telegram channels.
Weekly Tasks
If you download the stealer log summaries every day or two and conduct these steps, you will soon have a
substantial collection of stealer log data. I often find myself with a folder of files such as the following.
Logs-2023-11-25-09-39.txt
Logs-2023-11-26-09-48.txt
Logs-2023-11-27-09-19.txt
Logs-2023-11-28-08-41.txt
Logs-2023-11-29-09-00.txt
I can see from these file names that I tend to complete this process during the 9:00 hour. I try to collate these
files every week or two in order to query them from my SSD. The following two commands merge all sorted
logs files within the Downloads folder into a single file which should be free of any duplicates.
cd ~/Downloads && timestamp=$(date +%Y-%m-%d-%H-%M)
LC_ALL=C sort -u -b -i -f -m Logs* > Merged-$timestamp.txt
This creates our timestamp and takes any SORTED files in the current directory which begin with "Logs" and
MERGES (-m) them into a single file. Finally, we can delete the original Logs files which are no longer needed
with the following command.
rm Logs*

Stealer Logs 529

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

You can now move this merged file into your SSD. My SSD is labeled DATA and I have a folder at the root of
the drive titled "Logs". The following command moves my new file to that folder if using macOS. The second
command would move it if using Linux.
mv Merged* /Volumes/DATA/Logs
mv Merged* /media/$USER/DATA/Logs
You could collect these "Merged" files in your SSD and query them. There is no harm in that, as each file possess
a unique name due to the timestamp. However, you will find the duplicates start piling up again. Several stealer
logs will upload the same data every day from actively-infected computers. Therefore, I prefer to keep my
primary stealer log collection free of redundancies.
Assume you now have a file similar to Merged-2023-11-23-09-11.txt (November 23, 2023) in your SSD Logs
folder. It possesses all of the stealer log summaries which you collected over a week. It is now one week later,
and you have seven new sorted Logs text files in your Downloads folder after conducting the "Daily Tasks"
section previously mentioned. As also previously stated, you could merge them all and copy the new file to your
SSD, but then we have redundancy issues. The following four macOS commands merges all of the sorted log
files in your Downloads directory with your current primary merged file(s) in your SSD Logs folder to create a
new file which possesses all of the data without any redundancies. The original files are deleted and this new file
is copied to your SSD Logs folder.
cd ~/Downloads
LC_ALL=C sort -u -b -i -f -m Logs* /Volumes/DATA/Logs/* > Current.txt
rm Logs* /Volumes/DATA/Logs/*
mv Current.txt /Volumes/DATA/Logs/Current.txt
The following commands for Linux are slightly different.
cd ~/Downloads
LC_ALL=C sort -u -b -i -f -m Logs* /media/$USER/DATA/Logs/* >
Current.txt
rm Logs* /media/$USER/DATA/Logs/*
mv Current.txt /media/$USER/DATA/Logs/Current.txt
That was a lot. Let's summarize everything from the beginning. We collected a bunch of stealer log summaries
from Telegram into the default Telegram downloads folder. After the daily downloads completed, we sorted all
of the text files into a single file without any duplicates, and moved it to our Downloads folder. It appeared
similar to Logs-2023-12-01-09-52.txt. We repeated this every day. Whenever these sorted files started to pile up,
we merged them all into one file without any duplicates. We moved this file to our SSD for future queries. The
next week, we repeated the process and had several new sorted Logs files in our Downloads directory. We
executed a command to combine them with the file on our SSD to make a new primary logs collection file with
no duplicates. We moved that to the SSD and eliminated the unnecessary files. You could repeat this every week
(or month) as desired. Your "Current.txt" logs file will slowly grow without duplicates on your SSD.
Was it worth all the effort? Only you can decide. I currently possess a folder with 300 GB of unique stealer logs
which I query almost every day. There are billions of credentials in there. It is priceless to me. At the time of
this writing, the "Moon Cloud" and "Link Cloud" channels possessed many terabytes of stealer log summaries,
in text format, dating back to August 2023 (with logs dating back to 2015). After downloading them all and
removing duplicate entries, you should be able to replicate my entire 300 GB collection of most known stealer
log credentials in one day. In fact, you will likely possess the exact same data as the numerous new companies
selling stealer logs to organizations as a defense technique. Why pay for partial access when you can possess all
of the data yourself?

530 Chapter 43

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

In a moment, I will present a script which displays two sorting options. The first conducts your daily tasks for
you while the second completes the weekly tasks. This script will also query all logs data. If you plan to only
dabble in this type of data, these tutorials serve as an example to the threats and investigative benefits of stealer
logs. The only way you could truly benefit from them within your own investigations is to download everything
you find daily. That is quite a burden. I hired a full-time employee to do just that. He constantly acquires new
leaks, breaches, logs, and ransomware, and then imports into our custom database for use by my staff. That
comes with quite an expense, but we see results which justifies the activity.
Once you have built a massive collection of these logs, you can use Ripgrep to query them as previously
mentioned. In 2021, I was investigating an unknown person harassing one of my clients. He was using a
throwaway email address which seemed impossible to trace. It was not present within any breach data. However,
it appeared within my stealer logs, which included a device name similar to Desktop-u3ty6. Searching that device
identifier presented dozens of email addresses and passwords in use on that machine. This quickly revealed my
suspect, a 15-year-old kid. Further investigation confirmed his computer became infected after downloading a
pirated version of anti-virus software. The irony.
One week prior to writing this, I was investigating a financial account takeover attempt on behalf of a client.
Someone switched her bank account to a "burner" email address. This criminal apparently possessed a stealer
virus, because searching that email address immediately hit upon the entire logs for his computer. This included
his "FileGrabber" folder which contained a recently modified resume. I was able to provide a full dossier on the
suspect to my client, and the entire investigation took less than five minutes.
I suspect my attorney will scold me if I continue to provide more examples. Instead, I will leave you with a list
of known Telegram stealer log rooms for you to conduct your own research. These include Ayankouji, Base
Cloud, BradMax, Bugatti Cloud, CBank, Cloud Logs, Cloud Redhat, Cloudxurl, Crypton, DB_Cloud, Eternal
Logs, Expert Logs, Hub Head, HUBLOGS, Keeper Cloud, Link Cloud, Logs Cloud, Luffich Cloud, Luxury
Logs, Magican Cloud, Moon Cloud, NinjaByte, Observer Cloud, Octopus Cloud, OneLogs, Redlogs Cloud,
Ruban Cloud, Satanic Cloud, Snatch Logs, Syxap's Cloud, Tor Logs, Water Cloud, Wild Logs, xcloud, and XCloud. This is only a sample, and there are many others which emerge and disappear daily. Start with Google.
I offer one final recommendation for Telegram: take advantage of the search field. As I wrote this, I noticed an
announcement about a new breach at a cryptocurrency provider. Searching the name of the service within
Telegram immediately presented numerous free download options. Follow as many breach-related channels in
order to increase search results of interesting data.
You can also search sites such as BreachForums for logs, as a lot of members post direct download links which
do not require purchased or earned credits. The following query would identify posts on BreachForums which
may be helpful.
site:breachforums.is "Url-Log-Pass"
site:breachforums.is "mega.nz" "stealer log"
You may also have success with the following queries.
site:anonfiles.com "logs"
site:mediafire.com "logs"
Combo Files
If you were browsing the stealer logs offerings within the "Moon Cloud | Combo/txtbase" channel, you likely
noticed a lot of smaller files which did not contain stealer log summaries. These are "Combo" files, which are
typically the usernames and passwords extracted from the stealer log summaries. Most of the time, the content
within these files is also available within the stealer log summaries, but that is not always the case. I have

Stealer Logs 531

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

downloaded many combo files which contained data not present within any stealer logs. Consider the following
screen ca

In the fir
e the lower is 310 MB. This is the first sign that the larger file
contains
nly usernames and passwords. In the second image, these are
reversed.
hile the bottom possesses only 2,000 Hotmail usernames with
passwords. These channels will often extract cr
this case
Hotmail), and offer them to people who may want to target that service with illegal actions.
You may want to download all of these combo files for your own collection. I always recommend doing this
after you have acquired and sorted the logs for the day. Otherwise, the combo files will get mixed into your logs.
The process is the same. Download all of the desired combo files into an empty Telegram Downloads folder;
remove duplicates; and move the result out of your Telegram directory. The following modified commands
should work for macOS and Linux users. Note that the sort command is on two lines.
timestamp=$(date +%Y-%m-%d-%H-%M)
cd ~/Downloads/Telegram\ Desktop
cat *.txt > Combos.csv
rm *.txt && mv Combos.csv Combos.txt
LC_ALL=C sort -u -b -i -f -S 80% --parallel=8 Combos.txt > Combos$timestamp.txt
rm Combos.txt && mv Combos-$timestamp.txt ~/Downloads/
If you can only collect one type of data, I highly recommend logs over combos. Most combo files will display
thousands of lines in the format of EMAIL:PASSWORD.
Mega.nz Issues
As you continue your journey into data collection, you will likely find several links on the popular file sharing
website Mega (mega.nz). This service provides 50 GB of free storage, and is often used by criminals to store
and share leaks, breaches, and logs. Download speeds are typically fantastic, but we have a new problem. Free
users have a limited amount of bandwidth they are allotted within a 24-hour period. Even worse, those of us
using a VPN, as highly recommended, are sharing IP addresses with people abusing Maga's free tiers. This often
results in blocks from Mega encouraging us to purchase a paid plan. I cannot completely eliminate these hurdles,
but I can make them much more tolerable. For this, I recommend Megatools, which can be installed with the
following steps.
macOS: brew install megatools
Linux: Download and install from https://megatools.megous.com/builds/builds/
Windows: choco install megatools

532 Chapter 43

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Once installed, we can download a Mega link directly via terminal. A demonstration should explain the benefits
of this method over a traditional web browser download. I opened Telegram and searched "mega.nz". I was
presented a post which claimed to offer 63 GB of stealer logs hosted on Mega. I clicked the link and was
immediately presented the following warning from Mega.

I then opened Terminal; changed the directory to my Downloads folder; and entered megatools dl
followed by the same Mega file URL. The download began immediately and it continuously disclosed the
download speed and percent of completion. Whenever I encountered a bandwidth restriction, the Terminal
command kept my place and retried to resume every couple of minutes. When that happened, I simply switched
VPN servers and the download continued. This would not have helped with the browser download, as the
session cookies monitor your overall usage, regardless of your IP address.
I use this method for every large Mega download I encounter. Not only does it bypass some of the restrictions,
it is not prone to browser memory problems which can result in corrupted or incomplete downloads.
Criticism
I know what some readers are probably thinking. You may believe that sharing these types of details is
irresponsible and will lead to further abuse of the victims of these attacks. I respect your opinion and understand
your concern. I also believe that thinking is naive. The criminals who are going to abuse this data do not need a
tutorial from me. If anything, they would laugh at my basic understanding and explanation of their world. I am
sure they could teach me better ways of doing all of this. I do not believe anyone is going to buy this book and
begin further abusing this type of data.
Hardware stores sell hammers; websites sell lock picks; and local stores sell guns. All of these can (and are)
abused. That does not mean that they should be restricted from those who are responsible with the items. I
would rather take the chance that one person will misuse this information if it helps a thousand people use it
for good. The more analysts and researchers who understand and collect this data, the better we will all be. If
we had enough large companies monitoring and acting upon this data, we may see it go away because it is no
longer useful to the criminals. Ignoring these techniques allows the criminals to continue their games and win.
If I was the CEO of PayPal, I would dedicate employees to this task; have them identify any presence of PayPal
credentials; and disable them before they are abused. You could replace PayPal with any other financial
institution in those statements.
There are books about detailed computer hacking, malware creation, and various "black hat" lessons. They are
used by security researchers, penetration testers, and other professionals who are tasked with responding to bad
situations. My hope is that this book can help those who can use this data for good (defense and offense). I
would have loved to have all of this when I was investigating cyber-crime for the FBI, but they probably would
not have allowed me to use it. We can either pretend there is not a problem or we can take action to stop some
of this mess. We can either allow criminals to have all of the power with this data or we can use it against them.
I have witnessed countless examples of criminals accidentally infecting their own machines and exposing their
own data.

Stealer Logs 533

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER FOURTY-THREE
RANSOMWARE

If you thought I was pushing the boundaries of ethical data acquisition, the following might make you
uncomfortable. You have likely heard about ransomware infection. It is the illegal activity by criminals which
steals data from a company, encrypts all of their files, and demands a ransom to gain access to the unusable data
remaining on their own servers. When companies began creating better backups which eliminated the need to
pay the ransom, the criminals took a new route. If the victims do not pay, all of their data is uploaded to the
internet via Tor websites for anyone to download. This generates terabytes of private documents, email
messages, databases, and every other imaginable digital file. Is this OSINT data? I don't think so. However, an
investigator working on behalf of a victim company should know where to find this information.
Most sites which announce and distribute ransomware will require the Tor Browser. However, we will also
retrieve recent data posted within clear-source options such as Telegram. Let's start with a demonstration using
the Tor browser. The first step is to identify the current URLs for the various ransomware groups. I present the
following resource, which should be all you need to identify your targets.
https://github.com/fastfire/deepdarkCTI/blob/main/ransomware_gang.md
This collection does not require access to the Tor network, but many of the sites included will. This site attempts
to provide a current status of various criminal groups; direct links to otherwise hidden sites offering data; and
identify sites which have gone offline. The following figure displays a current partial view of this service.

You should have already installed Tor Browser by following the steps presented in a previous chapter. If you
did not, navigate to https://www.torproject.org/download/ and install the Tor Browser for your operating
system. You should then be able to copy any links from the previous Github page and paste them into Tor
Browser to see the content. Any website ending in ".onion" will require the Tor Browser.
I copied the Everest link to navigate to the official Everest ransomware distribution page. I then saw dozens of
victims listed within their page. I will not identify any victims throughout this chapter, and will focus only on
the data and type of organization. I clicked on the first victim, which was a non-profit health care organization
which was hit with ransomware in October 2022. The page offered three links hosted at gofile.io, each
534 Chapter 43

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

approximately 30 GB compressed. The following figure displays one of the download options. Notice we can
see the number of successful downloads. This could be vital if you are investigating this breach on behalf of the
company. This confirms people are actively downloading the stolen data from this group.

If you were to download these files, you would have 120 GB of data which was stolen during the breach. Most
of the data is of no use to an online investigator. We intentionally destroy anything which contains intellectual
property or internal housekeeping affairs. The breach provided over 37,000 medical documents including patient
records. This breach also included many copies of driver's licenses (front and back), insurance cards, and other
forms of identification. This data is quite invasive and you may feel uncomfortable accessing any of it. I
completely understand. We digest it into our system in order to make immediate notifications to any of our
clients which are present within the breach. We only use this data for defensive practices, and mark all medical
data to be ignored when staff conducts OSINT queries into the data.
Recently, we took in a large ransomware data set which included scans of the front and back of thousands of
customers' driver's licenses. Our systems analyze all images, documents, and PDFs, and extract any text content
via Optical Character Recognition (OCR). This allows us to query or monitor our clients' details, which can
notify us when their identification cards or financial data is present online. This process has weaknesses,
especially when scanned images are of poor quality. The text must be properly identified in order to receive any
alerts about client data.
We also started scanning all documents for any type of barcode, including QR codes and license barcodes. This
has paid off greatly, and this recent breach turned out to be quite beneficial. Our automated barcode scanning
element immediately identified the text details of all customers, which allows us to query by name, address,
DOB, DL, etc. The following figure (left) displays a redacted back of a scanned DL from this recent breach.

The figure (right) displays the (redacted) automated text conversion of that barcode, which allows us to ingest
text data into our overall breach database for easy access. The first lesson here is that barcode analysis of entire
data sets can reveal much more data about the victims within the breach. In this example, our systems ingested
the images; performed OCR on all text; scanned the barcodes; populated all text data within our database; and
alerted us that a client's driver's license was within the breach, all without any manual effort from us.
The second lesson is to never allow companies to scan your identification. It will never be stored securely and
will be leaked during the next attack. The barcode on the back of a passport card only includes the passport

Ransomware 535

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

number, and may be much safer whenever required to hand over ID. My driver's license possesses a vinyl sticker
on the back which contains a new barcode. Scanning it reveals a stern text message about consumer rights. I
have yet to allow anyone to scan it though.
The Everest site has terabytes of data published for anyone to see. Add that to the other dozens of groups and
you have more data than you likely want to store. We typically eliminate large files such as PDFs and Office
documents once our system has ingested the text from the data. Let's conduct another example on the clear web
and look at some pure text data which would be much easier to analyze.
In October of 2022, I reviewed a Telegram channel called "baseleak". This channel was offering a 1 GB
download of recently stolen medical data in text format. The first figure displays the original post. However,
there was no instant download option. Please note I have redacted these posts in order to protect the identity
of the victim organization. This group adds a layer of complexity in order to retrieve and analyze the information.
I had to copy the text on the last line, as visible in the second figure. I then had to click "@MotokoBot" to load
the view seen in the third figure), where I had to paste this text. The password to access the file was present in
the comments of the post, as seen in the fourth figure. This finally unlocked the link, which is visible in the fifth
figure, which connected me to the download site Mega, as seen in the final figure. The entire process took only
a couple of minutes.

536 Chapter 43

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

The 70 MB compressed file extracted to an almost 1 GB CSV file titled "data.csv". It contained the following
92 fields of data.
Master Patient ID, Name, Sex, Date of Birth, DOB Approximate, Age, AgeInDays, AgeText, PrematureDays,
GestationalAge, BSA, Ideal Body Weight, Height, Weight, HeightMod, WeightMod, SSN, BMI, Brand
Preference, Safety Caps, Race, Language, Religion, Pregnant, Breast Feeding, Smoker, Address 1, Address 2,
City, State, ZIP, Last Room, Last Hospital#, Last Admit Date, Last Discharge Date, Last Visit #, AllergyList,
DiagnosisList, PhoneNumber, AssigningAuthority, Visit #, Medical Record #, Hospital #, Room #,
CurrentOrPreviousRoom, Room, Prev Room #, Admit Date, Discharge Date, PlannedDischargeDate, PCU,
Facility Code, Service Type, Service Type Description, CommentsTextID, Physician Code, Physician,
Unverified Orders, CrCl, AdminRecord, Diet Code, Diet Description, Clinical Service, PassStart, PassStop,
Encounter Number, AccountNumber, AllowLateCharges, AccountNumberAssignAuth,
MedicalRecordNumAssignAuth, HospitalNumberAssignAuth, InternalCommentsTextID,
InternalCommentsText, CommentsText, org_int_id, loc_lvl_3_id, loc_lvl_4_id, loc_lvl_5_id, pcu_int_id,
pat_grp_int_id, psn_int_id, Patient Type Group, SerumCreatinine, PatientCategory, VisitActive, out_prt_lc,
pat_cat_cd, vst_sta_cd, visit_status_code, PatientInBed, Complaint, FinancialClass
That is a lot of invasive and sensitive content. We avoid possessing explicit medical data, such as medical
conditions or patient data. However, we do collect and store names, DOBs, SSNs, addresses, and phone
numbers in order to make proper notifications to our clients. Therefore, I executed the following command to
extract only the fields important to me (and my clients), as previously explained.
cut -d, -f1,2,3,4,6,17,27,31 data.csv > data-cleaned.txt
This minimized my CSV to a 228 MB txt file. I noticed there were many duplicate entries, so I executed the
following, also as previously explained.
LC_ALL=C sort -u -b -i -f

data-cleaned.txt > Data-Final.txt

I then noticed a lot of extra spaces within the lines, so I executed the following to replace every two spaces with
only a single space.
sed -i 's/

/ /gI' Data-Final.txt

This resulted in a 31 MB text file with 375,000 unique entries. A redacted example of the text follows.
Master Patient ID, Name, Sex, Date of Birth, Age, SSN, Address 1, ZIP
00xx3, PRESTON, JAxx, F, 1982-xx-xx, 459xxxxxx,47xx Rxxxxx RD, ROxx, TX, 77xxx
This file contains extremely sensitive stolen information about 375,000 people. If any of our clients are within
this data, we will receive an alert and can make notification. I hope you now see why it is so important to protect
any breach data which you acquire. While it is publicly available content, you must ensure that you do not leak
it further. This is why we never store any breach data within the cloud. It is all stored on a physical server in our
office, and access is tightly controlled. We also monitor all activity for abuse.
Telegram Ransomware Search
Monitoring every ransomware group within their dedicated Tor websites is exhausting. Fortunately, we have an
easier option. I highly recommend joining a Telegram channel called RansomWatcher. This channel monitors
all of the active ransomware groups and posts a notification when a victim has been infected. The following
image represents only a fraction of the victims posted the day I wrote this section. This channel does not possess
or offer any sensitive data.

Ransomware 537

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

I can now search the name of
attack. If anything is present,
I can then navigate to the gr
alternative to this type of mon

ear in any known ransomware
on the previous GitHub page.
hed from the attack. Another

If your employer tasks you with the investigation of content stolen from your organization, I want you to know
what to do. I want you to locate, obtain, and analyze the exact same data which criminals are abusing. We can
no longer keep our heads in the sand and hope no one notices the leakage of sensitive data. We must think like
the criminals and attack from their mindset.
If you are an online investigator who can responsibly benefit from this type of data, I want you to know what
to do with the content you find. I also want you to protect the data and make sure you cause no further harm.
Every day, this type of data assists me with positive identification of the true identity of stalkers, harassers,
scammers, and other unsavory people. We can either allow this data to be solely used by criminals to make our
lives more difficult, or we can use it as a tool to expose those criminals which would otherwise remain hidden.

538 Chapter 43

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER FOURTY-FOUR

QUERIES, SCRIPTS, DATABASES, & BACKUPS
This brings us to the elephant in the room. How does someone new to breach data collection organize and
query all of it? The obvious optimal solution is to create a database and then identify any fields which should be
indexed when importing each breach. Elasticsearch would work well for this. However, maintaining an internal
database would be a full-time job and database maintenance far exceeds the scope of this book. I believe large
databases are overkill for most individual data collectors. Where does that leave us? I have simpler options.
While I was writing this section, I put my feet in the shoes of a reader new to this type of data collection. I
pretended I did not have access to our investigations server and grabbed a couple of terabytes of data similar to
that which has been previously discussed here. Conducting the Ripgrep queries discussed throughout the guide
worked fine, but they were dreadfully slow across 2 TB of data. I needed to isolate the scope of each query to
eliminate unnecessary search time.
I decided to create a script which would manually query the data in the most efficient way possible, absent a
structured database. First, I categorized all files in order to limit the data for each query. I then placed everything
on my SanDisk 4 TB Extreme Portable SSD (amzn.to/3GO0cP2). The drive was labeled "DATA" and
possessed the following folders at the root of the drive. After each folder name, I include a brief description of
the content within parentheses.
COMB
(The COMB user:pass database previously explained)
Combos
(Additional user:pass files)
Databases
(Breached databases containing SQL, txt, csv, and other formats)
Hashes (The Hashes.org and HashMob data sets)
International (International data which may not apply to every daily investigation)
Logs
(Stealer logs acquired using the previously-explained techniques)
People
(Various people search database leaks and breaches)
Ransomware (Any ransomware content including txt, pdf, csv, and other data)
Voter
(All voter data acquired during the previous tutorials)
Whois
(All Whois data acquired during the previous tutorials)
You can either manually create these folders on your own drive, or copy and paste the following commands to
replicate the structure on your own drive labeled "DATA" on your macOS machine. It is vital that your drive
possesses this internal name for all of this to work.
mkdir /Volumes/DATA/COMB/
mkdir /Volumes/DATA/Combos/
mkdir /Volumes/DATA/Databases/
mkdir /Volumes/DATA/Hashes/
mkdir /Volumes/DATA/International/
mkdir /Volumes/DATA/Logs/
mkdir /Volumes/DATA/People/
mkdir /Volumes/DATA/Ransomware/
mkdir /Volumes/DATA/Voter/
mkdir /Volumes/DATA/Whois/
Linux users would conduct the following.
mkdir /media/$USER/DATA/COMB/
mkdir /media/$USER/DATA/Combos/

Queries, Scripts, Databases, & Backups 539

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

mkdir /media/$USER/DATA/Databases/
mkdir /media/$USER/DATA/Hashes/
mkdir /media/$USER/DATA/International/
mkdir /media/$USER/DATA/Logs/
mkdir /media/$USER/DATA/People/
mkdir /media/$USER/DATA/Ransomware/
mkdir /media/$USER/DATA/Voter/
mkdir /media/$USER/DATA/Whois/
You now have some structure for your data. You can place the files you obtain in the folder most appropriate
for that type of data. Once my data was split into these folders, I created a script to query all of it. The entire
text from the macOS script is presented here soon. However, let's download and prepare it with the following
commands.
macOS Users:
cd /Applications
curl -O
chmod +x DataTool
Linux Users:
cd /home/
sudo curl -O https://inteltechniques.com/data/DataTool.sh
sudo curl -O https://inteltechniques.com/data/DataTool.desktop
sudo chmod +x DataTool.sh
sudo mv DataTool.desktop /usr/share/applications/
This will present an executable script within the Applications folder (macOS) or the Show Applications menu
(Linux) called "DataTool". Clicking the file launches the script and presents the following menu. Make sure you
have installed all necessary software from the previous chapters. The following images display the menu, an
information notice, and query window.

540 C

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

The following six pages presents the entire macOS script, which is almost identical to the Linux option
previously downloaded.
opt1="COMB Email Search"
opt2="COMB Term Search"
opt3="Combos Search"
opt4="Databases Search-Filename"
opt5="Databases Search-Content"
opt6="Databases Search-Filename & Content"
opt7="Hashes Search-Filename"
opt8="Hashes Search-Content"
opt9="Hashes Search-Filename & Content"
opt10="International Search"
opt11="Logs Search"
opt12="Logs Daily Sort"
opt13="Logs Weekly Merge"
opt14="People Search-Filename"
opt15="People Search-Content"
opt16="People Search-Filename & Content"
opt17="Ransomware Search"
opt18="Voter Search-Filename"
opt19="Voter Search-Content"
opt20="Voter Search-Filename & Content"
opt21="Whois Search"
opt22="All Filename Search"
opt23="All Content Search"
opt24="All Filename & Content Search"
menu=$(zenity --list --title "Data Tool" --radiolist --column "" --column "" TRUE "$opt1" FALSE "$opt2"
FALSE "$opt3" FALSE "$opt4" FALSE "$opt5" FALSE "$opt6" FALSE "$opt7" FALSE "$opt8" FALSE
"$opt9" FALSE "$opt10" FALSE "$opt11" FALSE "$opt12" FALSE "$opt13" FALSE "$opt14" FALSE
"$opt15" FALSE "$opt16" FALSE "$opt17" FALSE "$opt18" FALSE "$opt19" FALSE "$opt20" FALSE
"$opt21" FALSE "$opt22" FALSE "$opt23" FALSE "$opt24" --height=700 --width=300)
case $menu in
$opt1 )
zenity --info --text="This option queries the COMB database for full or partial email addresses. Click "OK" to
begin" --title="COMB Email Search"
data=$(zenity --entry --title "COMB Email Search" --text "Enter Target Email")
cd /Volumes/DATA/COMB
bash ./query.sh $data
echo
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
$opt2 )
zenity --info --text="This option queries the COMB database for any term. Click "OK" to begin" -title="COMB Term Search"
data=$(zenity --entry --title "COMB Term Search" --text "Enter Target Data")
cd /Volumes/DATA/COMB

Queries, Scripts, Databases, & Backups 541

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

rg -aFiN $data
echo
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
$opt3 )
zenity --info --text="This option queries combo files for any term. Click "OK" to begin" --title="COMB
Term Search"
data=$(zenity --entry --title "Combos Search" --text "Enter Target Data")
cd /Volumes/DATA/Combos
rg -aFiN $data
echo
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
$opt4 )
zenity --info --text="This option queries all file names in the Databases folder. It is used to identify the exact
file name to be searched next. Click "OK" to begin" --title="Databases Search-Filename"
data=$(zenity --entry --title "Databases Search-Filename" --text "Enter Partial Filename")
cd /Volumes/DATA/Databases
find . | grep -i $data
echo
echo "Select and copy any file path and press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
$opt5 )
zenity --info --text="This option queries all Databases for any term. Click "OK" to begin" --title="Databases
Search-Content"
data=$(zenity --entry --title "Databases Search-Content" --text "Enter Target Data")
cd /Volumes/DATA/Databases
rg -aFiN $data
echo
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
$opt6 )
zenity --info --text="This option queries only a specific Database file for any term. Click "OK" to begin" -title="Databases Search-Filename & Content"
data1=$(zenity --entry --title "Databases Search-Filename & Content" --text "Enter File Path")
data2=$(zenity --entry --title "Databases Search-Filename & Content" --text "Enter Target Data")
cd /Volumes/DATA/Databases
rg -aFiN $data2 $data1
echo
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
read data

542 Chapter 44

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
$opt7 )
zenity --info --text="This option queries all file names in the Hashes folder. It is used to identify the exact file
name to be searched next. Click "OK" to begin" --title="Hashes Search-Filename"
data=$(zenity --entry --title "Hashes Search-Filename" --text "Enter Partial Filename")
cd /Volumes/DATA/Hashes
find . | grep -i $data
echo
echo "Select and copy any file path and press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
$opt8 )
zenity --info --text="This option queries all Hashes for any term. Click "OK" to begin" --title="Hashes
Search-Content"
data=$(zenity --entry --title "Hashes Search-Content" --text "Enter Target Data")
cd /Volumes/DATA/Hashes
rg -aFiN $data
echo
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
$opt9 )
zenity --info --text="This option queries only a specific Hashes file for any term. Click "OK" to begin" -title="Hashes Search-Filename & Content"
data1=$(zenity --entry --title "Hashes Search-Filename & Content" --text "Enter File Path")
data2=$(zenity --entry --title "Hashes Search-Filename & Content" --text "Enter Target Data")
cd /Volumes/DATA/Hashes
rg -aFiN $data2 $data1
echo
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
$opt10 )
zenity --info --text="This option queries International files for any term. Click "OK" to begin" -title="International Term Search"
data=$(zenity --entry --title "International Search" --text "Enter Target Data")
cd /Volumes/DATA/International
rg -aFiN $data
echo
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
$opt11 )

Queries, Scripts, Databases, & Backups 543

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

zenity --info --text="This option queries Logs files for any term. Click "OK" to begin" --title="Logs Search"
data=$(zenity --entry --title "Logs Search" --text "Enter Target Data")
cd /Volumes/DATA/Logs
rg -aFiN $data
echo
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
$opt12 )
zenity --info --text="This option combines all log files within the Telegram download folder and sorts for
unique entries. Click "OK" to begin" --title="Logs Daily Sort"
timestamp=$(date +%Y-%m-%d-%H-%M)
cd ~/Downloads/Telegram\ Desktop
cat *.txt > Logs.csv
rm *.txt
mv Logs.csv Logs.txt
LC_ALL=C sort -u -b -i -f -S 80% --parallel=8 Logs.txt > Logs-Sorted-$timestamp.txt
rm Logs.txt
mv Logs-Sorted-$timestamp.txt ~/Downloads/
echo
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
$opt13 )
zenity --info --text="This option merges all sorted Logs files within the Downloads folder with the primary
collection on the SSD. Click "OK" to begin" --title="Logs Weekly Merge"
cd ~/Downloads
LC_ALL=C sort -u -b -i -f -m Logs* /Volumes/DATA/Logs/* > Current.txt
rm Logs* /Volumes/DATA/Logs/*
mv Current.txt /Volumes/DATA/Logs/Current.txt
echo
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
$opt14 )
zenity --info --text="This option queries all file names in the People folder. It is used to identify the exact file
name to be searched next. Click "OK" to begin" --title="People Search-Filename"
data=$(zenity --entry --title "People Search-Filename" --text "Enter Partial Filename")
cd /Volumes/DATA/People
find . | grep -i $data
echo
echo "Select and copy any file path and press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
$opt15 )

544 Chapter 44

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

zenity --info --text="This option queries all People data for any term. Click "OK" to begin" --title="People
Search-Content"
data=$(zenity --entry --title "People Search-Content" --text "Enter Target Data")
cd /Volumes/DATA/People
rg -aFiN $data
echo
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
$opt16 )
zenity --info --text="This option queries only a specific People file for any term. Click "OK" to begin" -title="People Search-Filename & Content"
data1=$(zenity --entry --title "People Search-Filename & Content" --text "Enter File Path")
data2=$(zenity --entry --title "People Search-Filename & Content" --text "Enter Target Data")
cd /Volumes/DATA/People
rg -aFiN $data2 $data1
echo
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
$opt17 )
zenity --info --text="This option queries all Ransomware data for any term. Click "OK" to begin" -title="Ransomware Search"
data=$(zenity --entry --title "Ransomware Search" --text "Enter Target Data")
cd /Volumes/DATA/Ransomware
rg -aFiN $data
echo
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
$opt18 )
zenity --info --text="This option queries all file names in the Voter folder. It is used to identify the exact file
name to be searched next. Click "OK" to begin" --title="Voter Search-Filename"
data=$(zenity --entry --title "Voter Search-Filename" --text "Enter Target Data")
cd /Volumes/DATA/Voter
find . | grep -i $data
echo
echo "Select and copy any file path and press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
$opt19 )
zenity --info --text="This option queries all Voter data for any term. Click "OK" to begin" --title="Voter
Search-Content"
data=$(zenity --entry --title "Voter Search-Content" --text "Enter Target Data")
cd /Volumes/DATA/Voter

Queries, Scripts, Databases, & Backups 545

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

rg -aFiN $data
echo
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
$opt20 )
zenity --info --text="This option queries only a specific Voter file for any term. Click "OK" to begin" -title="Voter Search-Filename & Content"
data1=$(zenity --entry --title "Voter Search-Filename & Content" --text "Enter File Path")
data2=$(zenity --entry --title "Voter Search-Filename & Content" --text "Enter Target Data")
cd /Volumes/DATA/Voter
rg -aFiN $data2 $data1
echo
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
$opt21 )
zenity --info --text="This option queries all Whois data for any term. Click "OK" to begin" --title="Whois
Search"
data=$(zenity --entry --title "Whois Search" --text "Enter Target Data")
cd /Volumes/DATA/Whois
rg -aFiN $data
echo
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
$opt22 )
zenity --info --text="This option queries all file names. It is used to identify the exact file name to be searched
next. Click "OK" to begin" --title="All Filename Search"
data=$(zenity --entry --title "All Filename Search" --text "Enter Partial Filename")
cd /Volumes/Data/
find . | grep -i $data
echo
echo "Select and copy any file path and press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
$opt23 )
zenity --info --text="This option queries all data for any term. Click "OK" to begin" --title="All Content
Search"
data=$(zenity --entry --title "All Content Search" --text "Enter Target Data")
cd /Volumes/Data/
rg -aFiN $data
echo
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
read data

546 Chapter 44

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
$opt24 )
zenity --info --text="This option queries only a specific file for any term. Click "OK" to begin" --title="All
Filename & Content Search"
data1=$(zenity --entry --title "All Filename & Content Search" --text "Enter File Path")
data2=$(zenity --entry --title "All Filename & Content Search" --text "Enter Target Data")
cd /Volumes/Data/
rg -aFiN $data2 $data1
echo
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
read data
exec /Applications/DataTool
;;
esac
Let's break down the sections. The following identifies the text file as a bash script.
#!/bin/bash
The following begins our menu entries as they will appear on launch.
opt1="COMB Email Search"
The following builds the menu content and size, and selects the first option as default.
menu=$(zenity --list --title "Data Tool" --radiolist --column "" --column "" TRUE "$opt1" FALSE "$opt2"
FALSE "$opt3" ... FALSE "$opt24" --height=700 --width=300)
The following begins our set of function options.
case $menu in
The following presents the first menu option.
$opt1 )
The following presents an informational dialogue to the user.
zenity --info --text="This option queries the COMB database for full or partial email addresses. Click "OK" to
begin" --title="COMB Email Search"
The following presents a menu to collect a piece of data to query.
data=$(zenity --entry --title "COMB Email Search" --text "Enter Target Email")
The following changes our target directory to the desired folder on the SSD.
cd /Volumes/DATA/COMB
The following executes a command and enters the collected target query data.

Queries, Scripts, Databases, & Backups 547

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

bash ./query.sh $data
The following presents instructions to return to the menu when finished.
echo "Press Enter to return to menu"
The following returns to the main menu in macOS.
exec /Applications/macos
The following represents the end of a function and then the end of the script.
;; esac
Next, let's walk through each query option within this menu.
COMB Email Search: This option prompts the user for an email address and then queries the COMB data set
using the included database. Make sure the three files and "Data" folder are directly in the COMB folder at the
root of the SSD. Results should appear almost immediately. While this will also accept username queries,
password searching will fail.
COMB Term Search: This option prompts the user for any term and queries the same COMB data, but uses
Ripgrep. The results will take more time, but you can query any portion of the data, including passwords or
partial content.
Combos Search: This option prompts the user for any term and queries all data within the Combos folder with
Ripgrep. The speed of results will depend on the amount of data within this folder.
Databases Search-Filename: This option prompts the user for any term and searches all filenames (not
content) within the Databases folder. This identifies files of interest which can be specified in order to decrease
query time. You would copy the entire path of any result of interest. If I searched "LinkedIn" and received a full
path of "/Volumes/DATA/Databases/LinkedIn2022.txt", I would copy that entire path and paste it into the
upcoming menu option to isolate my search results only to that file.
Databases Search-Content: This option prompts the user for any term and queries all data within the
Databases folder with Ripgrep. The speed of results will depend on the amount of data within this folder. If you
have thousands of files in this folder, you may want to focus on the next option.
Databases Search-Filename & Content: This option prompts the user for both the file path (identified in a
previous search) and any term for a specific query. In this scenario, you would paste the
"/Volumes/DATA/Databases/LinkedIn2022.txt" result from a previous query; submit it; then provide any
term which should be queried within that file. This drastically reduced search time when otherwise searching a
folder with thousands of large files.
Hashes Search-Filename: This option prompts the user for any term and searches all filenames (not content)
within the Hashes folder. This identifies files of interest which can be specified in order to decrease query time.
You would copy the entire path of any result of interest. If I searched "LinkedIn" and received a full path of
"/Volumes/DATA/Hashes/LinkedIn2022.txt", I would copy that entire path and paste it into the upcoming
menu option to isolate my search results only to that file.
Hashes Search-Content: This option prompts the user for any term and queries all data within the Hashes
folder with Ripgrep. The speed of results will depend on the amount of data within this folder. If you have
thousands of files in this folder, you may want to focus on the next option.

548 Chapter 44

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Hashes Search-Filename & Content: This option prompts the user for both the file path (identified in a
previous search) and any term for a specific query. In this scenario, you would paste the
"/Volumes/DATA/Hashes/LinkedIn2022.txt" result from a previous query; submit it; then provide any term
which should be queried within that file. This drastically reduced search time when otherwise searching a folder
with thousands of large files.
International Search: This option prompts the user for any term and queries all data within the International
folder with Ripgrep. The speed of results will depend on the amount of data within this folder.
Logs Search: This option prompts the user for any term and queries all data within the Logs folder with
Ripgrep. The speed of results will depend on the amount of data within this folder.
Logs Daily Sort: This option conducts all of the steps within the "Daily Tasks" section of the Stealer Logs
chapter. You only need to make sure that all of your decompressed log files are in the default Telegram Desktop
folder within Downloads.
Logs Weekly Merge: This option conducts all of the steps within the "Weekly Tasks" section of the Stealer
Logs chapter. Your final result should be a new "Current.txt" file within the Logs folder of your SSD, free of
any duplicate entries.
People Search-Filename: This option prompts the user for any term and searches all filenames (not content)
within the People folder. This identifies files of interest which can be specified in order to decrease query time.
You would copy the entire path of any result of interest. If I searched "Experian" and received a full path of
"/Volumes/DATA/People/Experian2015.txt", I would copy that entire path and paste it into the upcoming
menu option to isolate my search results only to that file.
People Search-Content: This option prompts the user for any term and queries all data within the People
folder with Ripgrep. The speed of results will depend on the amount of data within this folder. If you have
thousands of files in this folder, you may want to focus on the next option.
People Search-Filename & Content: This option prompts the user for both the file path (identified in a
previous search) and any term for a specific query. In this scenario, you would paste the
"/Volumes/DATA/People/Experian2015.txt" result from a previous query; submit it; then provide any term
which should be queried within that file. This drastically reduced search time when otherwise searching a folder
with thousands of large files.
Ransomware Search: This option prompts the user for any term and queries all data within the Ransomware
folder with Ripgrep. The speed of results will depend on the amount of data within this folder.
Voter Search-Filename: This option prompts the user for any term and searches all filenames (not content)
within the Voter folder. This identifies files of interest which can be specified in order to decrease query time.
You would copy the entire path of any result of interest. If I searched "Florida" and received a full path of
"/Volumes/DATA/Voter/Florida2022.txt", I would copy that entire path and paste it into the upcoming menu
option to isolate my search results only to that file.
Voter Search-Content: This option prompts the user for any term and queries all data within the Voter folder
with Ripgrep. The speed of results will depend on the amount of data within this folder. If you have thousands
of files in this folder, you may want to focus on the next option.
Voter Search-Filename & Content: This option prompts the user for both the file path (identified in a
previous search) and any term for a specific query. In this scenario, you would paste the
"/Volumes/DATA/Voter/Florida2022.txt" result from a previous query; submit it; then provide any term

Queries, Scripts, Databases, & Backups 549

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

which should be queried within that file. This drastically reduced search time when otherwise searching a folder
with thousands of large files.
Whois Search: This option prompts the user for any term and queries all data within the Whois folder with
Ripgrep. The speed of results will depend on the amount of data within this folder.
All Filename Search: This option prompts the user for any term and searches all filenames (not content) within
the entire SSD. This identifies files of interest which can be specified in order to decrease query time. You would
copy the entire path of any result of interest. If I searched "Facebook" and received a full path of
"/Volumes/DATA/People/Facebook2022.txt", I would copy that entire path and paste it into the upcoming
menu option to isolate my search results only to that file.
All Content Search: This option prompts the user for any term and queries all data within the entire SSD with
Ripgrep. The speed of results will depend on the amount of data within this folder. If you have thousands of
files in this folder, you may want to focus on the next option.
All Filename & Content Search: This option prompts the user for both the file path (identified in a previous
search) and any term for a specific query. In this scenario, you would paste the
"/Volumes/DATA/People/Facebook2022.txt" result from a previous query; submit it; then provide any term
which should be queried within that file. This drastically reduced search time when otherwise searching a folder
with thousands of large files.
Having all of these options reduces your query time, and gives you greater control over the data included. Instead
of waiting for Ripgrep to search through 3 TB of data, you can focus on either one folder or one specific file.
Once you master this technique, your search results should return quickly.
Notifications
Every time you select an option within this menu, you will be greeted with an informational notice identifying
the steps which are about to take place. I believe these are important until they become a nuisance. If you are
sick of these notices, you can simply remove every line which begins with "zenity --info" from your script. If
that seems too tedious, you can complete the entire process with the following commands for each macOS and
Linux, respectively.
sed -i "s/zenity \-\-info/\#\#zenity \-\-info/gI"
/Applications/DataTool
sudo sed -i "s/zenity \-\-info/\#\#zenity \-\-info/gI"
/home/DataTool.sh
Internal Storage
If you plan to host all of your breach data within your internal drive for the fastest queries possible, you only
need to change the paths within the script. As an example, each path on the script typically begins by changing
the directory to the SSD as follows.
cd /Volumes/DATA/
If you wanted to host your breach data within a directory labeled "Breaches" within your Documents folder,
you would change every instance of this to the following. Make sure to maintain any subfolders such as COMB
or Voter exactly as they appear in the script. You only want to change the part of the path from the SSD to
internal. This is completely optional, and only appropriate for those with huge internal drives.

550 Chapter 44

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

cd ~/Documents/Breaches/
Zenity
While writing this chapter, I was often annoyed with the way macOS implements Zenity into its system. Zenity
is the software which presents selectable menus for our script. The Linux version is much smoother and more
functional. I intentionally used the default macOS version of Zenity in order to keep everything similar.
However, I currently use a different version of Zenity on my macOS device. If you are a macOS user, and are
also annoyed at the fluidity of the menu for this script, you can change to an alternative version with the
following commands.
brew uninstall zenity && brew install ncruces/tap/zenity
If you dislike the alternative version worse than the official option, you can reverse this change with the
following commands.
brew uninstall zenity && brew install zenity
Qgrep
Until this point, we have been using Ripgrep to query our files. This is much faster than traditional Grep queries,
but it can still take a long time to sort through a large amount of data. The speed of your drive will determine if
this takes minutes or hours. Creating a proper database from scratch can quickly exceed the scope of this book,
but we do have one easy option if we want to create simple databases which can be queried in a fraction of the
time it would take Ripgrep. This is not a magic bullet, as it has some caveats, but it can be a game-changer for
querying folders with thousands of files in seconds. You have already installed Qgrep in an earlier chapter, so
you should be ready to go. We must first navigate to the folder where we installed the program. The following
should apply to macOS and Linux users who followed my guide.
cd ~/Documents/Qgrep
We can now launch Qgrep and create a new entry called "Voter", which will create a database with all content
in the Voter folder on our SSD, with the following commands for macOS and Linux.
./qgrep init Voter /Volumes/DATA/Voter/
./qgrep init Voter /media/$USER/DATA/Voter/
This created a configuration file within a hidden folder titled ".qgrep" in our Home folder. However, this file
contains no voter data. It only has the settings for our new database. You should be prompted to update this
database, as it does not have any data in it yet. The following command should complete the process.
./qgrep update Voter
You should receive a result similar to the following in a couple of minutes.
[100%] 42 files, 34228 Mb in, 10926 Mb out
+42 files; 68454/68454 chunks updated in 165.80 sec
This tells us that we now have a database of all Voter information which is ready to query with the following
command.
./qgrep search Voter i bazzell

Queries, Scripts, Databases, & Backups 551

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Let's break this down.
./qgrep This is the command to run the application.
search
This tells the program we want to search data.
Voter
This identifies the database we want to search.
i
This informs Qgrep to run without case sensitivity.
bazzell
This is the term we want to query.
This process completed in a few seconds, and produced all lines within any files inside the Voter folder on our
SSD which matched the search term. The same query with Ripgrep would have taken much longer. You may
be wondering why we are not building these simple databases for all of our data. Well, there are issues.
•
•
•

Every database you create requires additional storage of approximately 1/3 of the total data indexed on
your host drive. This can add up quickly, and may introduce undesired redundancies. If you have 3 TB
of data, you would need 1 TB of internal storage for the indexed database.
The update process can only tolerate files which are less than the size of your available RAM. If every
file you are indexing is less than 32 GB on a machine with 32 GB of RAM, you might be OK. The
moment your stealer logs file (or any other large data set) crosses that line, Qgrep will crash.
Every time you add any files to a folder indexed by Qgrep, you must update the program in order to
receive search results for all data. This can become a nuisance if you add data often, however, it is quite
fast.

By default, Qgrep stores the databases it creates on your internal drive in a hidden directory called ".qgrep" in
your home folder. If you are able to view hidden files, you can navigate to this folder to see the contents. If you
cannot see it, you must conduct the following to enable hidden file view.
macOS: Press the "Command" + "Shift" + "." (period) keys at the same time.
Linux: Open Files and enable "Show Hidden Files" in the upper-right menu.
You should now see the contents of the .qgrep folder. Mine appeared as follows.
Voter.cfg
Voter.qgd
Voter.qgf
My Voter folder on my SSD had 36 GB of data, and the Voter.qsd file was 12 GB. This matches with our 1/3
rule. If you decide to use Qgrep for most of your data, I would consider moving the databases to your SSD and
execute the queries from there. Let's conduct a thorough demonstration of all options to determine the best
query speed for you.
My initial query of the Qgrep Voter database from my internal drive took 8 seconds. A second query was only
2 seconds. This is because Qgrep had stored much of my data within RAM. That is very fast for querying 36
GB of original data. Every query I conducted within this Terminal session consistently took 2 seconds to
complete. A Ripgrep search of this same data took 39 seconds. That is a substantial difference.
Next, let's move our Qgrep database to our external SSD. I created a new folder at the root of the SSD titled
.qgrep. I moved the three Voter files from my internal drive to this external SSD. I made sure the files no longer
existed internally with the following commands.
cd ~/Documents/Qgrep
./qgrep search Voter i bazzell
This resulted in an error since the files are no longer present in the place where Qgrep thinks they should be.
Instead, I must specify the location of this Voter database with the following command.

552 Chapter 44

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

./qgrep search /Volumes/DATA/.qgrep/Voter.cfg i bazzell
This specified the path to our configuration file which is now stored on our SSD. This query took 19 seconds,
over twice as long as the initial query when the database was on our internal drive, but still half the time as
Ripgrep. Additional queries were slightly faster, but did not make a huge difference.
Whenever I update any files within my Voter folder, I must execute the following to also update the Qgrep
database since I moved the files.
cd ~/Documents/Qgrep
./qgrep update /Volumes/DATA/.qgrep/Voter.cfg
Overall, you must decide what is most important to you. Consider the following.
•
•
•

If speed is your ultimate priority; you need to query specific data often; and you have the extra internal
disk space, then default Qgrep is a great solution for you.
If speed is a priority; you need to query specific data often; you do not have the extra internal disk space;
and you do have extra SSD space, then Qgrep with databases stored on your SSD is a great solution for
you.
If simplicity is your priority and you can tolerate longer query times, then strict text files is better for
you.

I do a mix of both. Over 90% of my queries utilize the standard script previously presented. That works fine
for most needs. However, I have built a few Qgrep databases. One is for a folder of text files identifying the
owners of cellular telephone numbers obtained from a huge data leak from a caller ID database provider. This
folder has over 300 GB of text files, none of which are over 32 GB in size. Any time I identify new leaks or
breaches which contain phone owner info, I put them in this folder on my SSD. I have created a Qgrep database
using the previous commands, and update the database whenever needed. When I conduct a Qgrep query on
this data, Qgrep is using a compressed version of that data which exists on my internal drive (now with 100 GB
of extra data). The results take only a few seconds to arrive and my SSD does not need to be connected to my
machine. I conduct the following any time I need to search a number from my internal drive database.
cd ~/Documents/Qgrep
./qgrep search Phone i 6185551212
SQLite
After the initial publication of this guide, several readers requested a tutorial for creation and maintenance of a
traditional database. I have always resisted this because I am not a database expert, and I even hired someone
to handle our extensive in-house database needs. However, I respect that a proper database can be the most
appropriate tool when handling large amounts of data. I want to preface this section by stating that we will only
dive into the basics of database creation using only one of many options, but you might see the value with a
brief tutorial. I believe the best database software for a beginner is SQLite. You may already have this software
of your machine, but let's make sure with the following commands.
macOS: brew install sqlite
Linux: sudo apt update && sudo apt install sqlite3 -y
SQLite is also available for Windows, and the following commands should work the same way as within macOS
and Linux. Since my demonstration involves stealer log data, I will refrain from any specific Windows commands
due to the high risk of virus infection. The following commands navigate to the Documents folder and creates
our first SQLite database called "Logs.db" within that folder.

Queries, Scripts, Databases, & Backups 553

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

cd ~/Documents && sqlite3 Logs.db "PRAGMA journal_mode = OFF;PRAGMA
cache_size = -64000;PRAGMA synchronous = 0;"
You should now see "sqlite>" within your Terminal, which confirms we are working within our new
database. Let's create a table called "Logs" and a single column called "log" with the following command. This
command instructs SQLite to make sure no duplicates ever appear within this database. Make sure you see
"sqlite>" on your Terminal line, as these commands will do nothing if pasted directly into a standard
Terminal session. The following should be copied and pasted in its entirety.
CREATE TABLE Logs(log TEXT PRIMARY KEY,UNIQUE(log)) WITHOUT ROWID;;
We now have an empty database. I like to enter the following two commands which are likely already set by
default, but they make sure that data headers are off (for stealer logs) and that the mode is set to list any entries
one line at a time.
.headers off
.mode list
The next command creates a data separator as a character which we should never encounter within our data.
This is because we only want to import one line of stealer log content into our only column, and not have things
sporadically split into additional columns which may be ignored by our database. Since this demonstration will
involve stealer logs which are typically separated by a colon (:), we do not want SQLite trying to split the lines
by colon, which would be common with a CSV file. This could create a huge mess when the database encounters
lines which begin with "https:" or include a colon, comma, pipe, or other character within a password. The
following command is a way to cheat and tell SQLite to avoid a separating character when importing data.
.separator "\a"
We are now ready to import data. Assume you have a stealer log text file titled "logs.txt" within a folder called
"Logs" on your SSD. The following SQLite command imports this file into our Logs table. Since this table only
has one column and we have no valid separator set, this should just import each line directly into the column.
.import /Volumes/DATA/Logs/logs.txt Logs
Depending on the size of the file, this process can take seconds or several minutes. You might see several lines
which display "INSERT failed: UNIQUE constraint failed: Logs.log". This is a great
error to see. It informs you that SQLite detected an entry which you already possessed and ignored the duplicate.
This unique designation does two things. It prevents duplicates, but it also creates an index of your data. This
provides faster search queries, but with some caveats which are discussed in a moment. We can now see our
progress with the following.
.databases - This displays your database location details.
.table - This displays the table details.
.indexes - This displays the name of any indexes.
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM Logs; - This displays the total rows of a database.
During this writing, I imported 25 GB of stealer log text files into my new database, which took about ten
minutes. Since the data was imported and then indexed for unique entries, the database was 30 GB in size. That
is larger than the data itself, but that is the nature of indexed data. If you are following my tutorial, this database
is stored within the Documents folder of your internal drive, so be aware of internal storage requirements. This
database file can be created or moved anywhere desired, and you would only need to navigate to that directory

554 Chapter 44

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

to open it. Finally, we can query our data. The following SQLite command queries the "log" column within the
"Logs" table for any entry which includes "inteltechniques" within the line.
SELECT log FROM Logs WHERE log LIKE '%inteltechniques%';
My query of the 25 GB of original data (30 GB database) took over fifteen minutes to complete from the internal
drive, and the results appeared within the Terminal in real time. That seems very slow for an indexed query. This
is because the previous command did not actually take advantage of the index at all because we used a wildcard
(%) at the beginning and end of the query. We can use the following command to see what will happen behind
the scenes for our first query without searching any data.
EXPLAIN QUERY PLAN SELECT log FROM Logs WHERE log LIKE
'%inteltechniques%';
The result should be similar to "--SCAN Logs". This tells us that SQLite will go through each line, one at a
time, and display any results. Let's try again with the following command which tells us the search plan for a
query for any line BEGINNING with "https://inteltechniques".
EXPLAIN
QUERY
PLAN
SELECT
'https://inteltechniques*';

log

FROM

Logs

WHERE

log

GLOB

The result should be similar to the following.
--SEARCH Logs USING COVERING INDEX sqlite_autoindex_Logs_1 (log>? AND
log<?)
This confirms that our fast index will be used instead of scanning all of the data one line at a time. This is because
we are specifying the first part of the line and not using a wildcard. Now, let's execute the actual query with the
following. Note that "*" is a wildcard to replace "%" from our previous query.
SELECT log FROM Logs WHERE log GLOB 'https://inteltechniques*';
This query was much faster and completed within one second. It displayed every line in my stealer logs which
BEGINS with "https://inteltechniques". If you know exactly how your target data begins, such as a URL, this
index can be the fastest option. If you are searching data which may appear randomly within a line, as will be
most common for our queries, the index will not assist with the speed of your search. However, it still assists
with making sure duplicate data is never imported into your database.
You may be wondering why we do not separate each field of the URL into multiple columns for better indexing.
Unfortunately, all of the stealer logs we acquire will have various formats. Some will appear similar to
URL:LOGIN:PASS while others will be LOGIN:PASS:URL. Some will use semicolons, pipes, or other
separators. Many will be formatted as USER@PASS:URL. There is no standard. Therefore, creating a properly
separated and fully indexed database will take a lot of time, and will never be perfect. You could create multiple
columns with unique indexing and import all data with a separator, but I think you will be displeased with the
size of your database and the errors encountered due to poor formatting of the data. This would also delete
duplicate email addresses for various sites. This is why my demonstration only focuses on a single column of
data. You may be able to justify the extra effort, but the exact steps to configure your own perfectly-indexed
custom database exceed our scope. While testing this data, I downloaded new stealer log files from Telegram. I
conducted the "Daily Task" as previously explained, and then opened my database and imported the "new" data
with the following single command.
sqlite3 Logs.db "PRAGMA journal_mode = OFF;PRAGMA cache_size = 64000;PRAGMA synchronous = 0;" ".headers off" ".mode list" ".separator
\a" ".import ~/Downloads/Logs/logs.txt Logs

Queries, Scripts, Databases, & Backups 555

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

I immediately observed that most of this data was already present within my SQLite database. Since I configured
this column to only accept unique data, I never need to "sort" for unique entries. Every time I import data, only
the unique entries are added. In my experience, importing unique entries into SQLite is more accurate than
sorting for unique entries with the Sort command. Once your database becomes substantially larger than the
content, you may want to optimize the data with the VACUUM command. This will attempt to optimize and
shrink the size of the database. While working within your SQLite database in Terminal, execute the following
command.
VACUUM;
Note that you must have at least the size of your database available as free space. Results will vary. My 30 GB
test database only reduced to 29 GB, but it was fairly new. A 250 GB database that has seen hundreds of imports
might benefit more. You can always export a current copy of the text data with the following SQLite command
from the folder of your database. This can be valuable if you are using SQLite to import non-duplicate stealer
logs in order to keep the data to a minimum, but also want a non-database backup of the data. I can state from
experience that databases eventually become corrupt. Having a backup of the database is great, but having a
text-only backup of the raw data is even better. If you rely on SQLite databases, make sure you have updated
and archived data.
sqlite3 -header -csv Logs.db "select * from Logs;" > ~/Desktop/Logs.csv
For most readers, I think Qgrep and SQLite are overkill. If you have a specific data folder which you query
many times every day and you can no longer stomach the wait times, then you should test these strategies. For
those who conduct an occasional daily query, the previous search script is a much simpler solution. If you need
to query terms which could appear anywhere within your data, Qgrep is faster than Ripgrep, and Ripgrep is
faster than SQLite. If your query appears at the beginning of an entry, SQLite is fastest, followed by Qgrep then
Ripgrep. If your priority is to eliminate redundant data, SQLite is the best daily solution. Remember that Qgrep
will only ingest files which are smaller than the available RAM, but SQLite should be able to import any size. If
you want to create a Qgrep database out of a 100 GB Stealer Logs file, you will need to use the Split command
to create multiple smaller files. You could then search the entire data set in seconds, but could no longer merge
these smaller files with new data to eliminate duplicates with the Sort Merge feature.
If you collect stealer logs every day and you want an easier way to import them into your collection without
duplicate entries, a SQLite database is great. You may find that the space required to store an indexed database
is too much more than that required for the original data alone. Ripgrep may be better for your needs. Only you
can decide which route is best for your data. I prefer the simplicity and speed of Qgrep with the immediate
delivery of keyword queries, but respect the ability to remove duplicates while importing into SQLite. We have
only briefly discussed SQLite databases. Tweaking your configuration, indexing, compression, and queries can
open even more doors. If this is of interest to you, I highly recommend researching SQLite further.
Duplicate Files
If you collect enough breach data, you will likely find many duplicate files with different names. This could be
due to poor file naming or deliberate trickery in order to distribute inaccurate data. Regardless, I find it beneficial
to eliminate duplicate files frequently. The following commands install fdupes.
macOS: brew install fdupes
Linux: sudo apt-get install fdupes
The next command launches fdupes, scans recursive files within the Downloads directory, and prompts you to
select which duplicate file to keep.
fdupes -r -d ~/Downloads

556 Chapter 44

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

I placed two identical files with different names in the same directory, the following was the result. Entering "1"
would keep the first file, while "2" would preserve the second.
Set 1 of 1:
1 [ ] /Users/mbp/Downloads/1/Real Breach.txt
2 [ ] /Users/mbp/Downloads/1/Fake Breach.txt
( Preserve files [1 - 2, all, help] ):
Backups
You have worked hard to collect, clean, and organize your data. However, storage devices crash all of the time
without warning. I would be devastated if I lost my collection. Therefore, a good backup system should be in
place. You should have already installed FreeFileSync, and we can use it to easily copy our data.
Until now, we have been copying our data to an external SSD labeled DATA. You should now insert your
backup drive, and make sure it is labeled BACKUP. In the previous hardware chapter, I recommended a cheap
4 TB external USB drive with a small spinning disk inside. Since this is only used as a backup of our data, speed
is not a priority.
Follow the previous tutorials to encrypt this new external backup drive, then conduct your first backup within
FreeFileSync.
•
•
•
•
•
•

Close any pop-up windows and click "Browse" in the left "Drag & drop" area.
Select your root folder of your SSD in the left menu.
Click the "Open" button and click "Browse" in the right "Drag & drop" area.
Select your root folder of your backup drive in the right menu.
Click the right arrow icon next to the green cog wheel near "Synchronize".
Change the option to "Mirror".

The mirror option makes sure that the data on the SSD is always an exact replica of the content on your backup
drive. If your drives match the labeling of mine, yours should look similar to the image below. You could save
this configuration with the "Save as" icon, naming it "Data Backup".

Next, click "Compare" and allow the analysis. You may receive warnings that FreeFileSync is trying to access
folders, but this is acceptable for this purpose. You may also receive a warning about an area which is inaccessible
to the program. I click "Ignore All" when this happens. Once complete, you should see a summary of all files
which will be synchronized. Clicking the "Synchronize" button begins the backup process, which can take some
time on the first run.
The next time you need to back up your data, you would connect your drives; unlock the encryption by entering
the passwords; open FreeFileSync; and select the "Compare" button again. This time, you should only be
presented the files which have been modified since the last backup. Then, the synchronization process should
be much faster. I do this weekly.
You now have ONE backup. To some, that is plenty. To me, that is risky. What if my house explodes with both
drives inside? What if I accidently erase data from my DATA drive, and then synchronize that to my BACKUP

Queries, Scripts, Databases, & Backups 557

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

drive? Most computer professionals will tell you that you need three copies of any important data, and I agree.
This is why I keep one off-site backup in addition to the previous backup we just made. I have another external
USB drive which has a replica of all data stored at another trusted home. When I visit monthly, I take my laptop
and SSD in order to update the second backup drive off-site. It might not always be up-to-date, but the majority
of my data collection is present in the case of catastrophe.
Putting It All Together
I am simplifying the explanation of these steps, but you have everything you need to conduct your own research
into its capabilities. Possessing an efficient way to query your data will increase the likelihood that you will take
advantage of these techniques. During my testing, I could use the script to query the entire COMB data within
a few seconds; display file names from thousands of breaches immediately; or focus my queries within generic
data types or specific files in less than a minute, all from an external drive. Consider the following typical usage.
•
•

•

Internal Investigations: This one is obvious. This type of data can be crucial to investigations. It can
immediately uncover real and alias information. Every day, breach data reveals the true person behind
a burner account due to sloppy OPSEC.
Client Vetting: We take our clients' privacy very seriously. We would never use a third-party system to
properly verify the identity of a potential client. Instead, we use our own in-house system to make sure
we know who we are dealing with. At least twice, a potential client's record in our system revealed
suspicious activity related to criminal prosecution, identifying the reason they were asking about
anonymous relocation services (we never assist in those situations).
Client Exposure: We have many clients who keep us on a retainer. Part of that service is an initial
analysis of exposed information, and a constant monitoring for any new details. Every week, we reach
out to clients to let them know of a new breach, ransomware attack, or password log which may impact
them or their company. Just a few months ago, I was able to alert a close friend that his daughter's full
name, address, DOB, SSN, and banking details were being passed around a criminal marketplace
focused on identity theft. We received the internal alert within two days of the initial exposure.

Breach data is nothing new to investigators. I have explained how we ingest typical text-based breach data since
the 7th edition of OSINT Techiques. The new world of daily ransomware dumps and stealer logs changes
everything. We are collecting this data in masses never seen before. We often bring in over 2 terabytes of new
stolen content weekly, which we parse down to an average of 50 GB of useful data for the week. Our current
collection is over 40 TB. We focus mostly on text and private documents, and try to eliminate all public docs,
company materials, and anything else which does not have an immediate impact on an individual.
The following figure displays a heavily redacted screen capture of my company's internal investigation portal,
which was created specifically for our needs by a database expert. In this example, I searched only the email
address of my target. Since this address appears within multiple breaches, it connects me to her real name (from
the MGM and LinkedIn breaches). From there, the system cross-references that name to her driver's license.
This license was scanned by a mortgage company, which was later hit with a ransomware attack, which resulted
in all of their data being published on an onion site. Our system scanned the characters within the scanned image
but also the barcode, as explained in the previous text. Now that our system has enough true data about our
target, it can cross-reference everything within our collection of breach data, including ransomware dumps, Tor
content, and stealer logs. From there it determines her home address, which is cross-referenced with people
search data, historic Whois data, vehicle data, and numerous public APIs. The result is an immediate view of all
available public, private, and stolen data. Our team relies heavily on this portal, and each query takes
approximately 5-10 seconds. It cross-references any data we have until all options have been exhausted, as
encouraged throughout this book.

558 Chapter 44

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

I want t
we can a
of data
professi
details o
investigators and those who monitor this activity from a defense perspective.

dant, but
s consist
day by
t I share
l to both

We are only beginning the journey into data collection. I hope I have sparked your interest for this type of
investigation technique, and I challenge you to see what else you can find. If you are an early adopter of this
guide, you should have all of the basics to get started. As time passes, I hope to continuously update these pages
with new techniques, data sources, and other ideas. When this document should need updated, all modifications
are completely free. If you purchased this PDF through my website, you will be notified via email when revisions
can be downloaded. If you downloaded an unauthorized copy from a piracy website, please consider purchasing
a legitimate copy. Your $20 purchase supports the research which goes into creating and updating these guides.
Finally, if you find anything which needs updated or corrected, please email us at books@inteltechniques.com.
My staff cannot respond to emails directly, but they will monitor them for any changes which we need to apply
to the next version of this guide.

Queries, Scripts, Databases, & Backups 559

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

SECTION IV

OSINT METHODOLOGY
In the late 90's, I was tasked to investigate a computer-related crime involving inappropriate online contact from
a registered sex offender to children in his neighborhood. The internet was new to most people; AOL dial-up
connections were common; and there was very little monitoring or enforcement in place. I contacted the subject
at his home and conducted an interview. He admitted to inappropriate behavior and showed me the evidence
on his computer. I had no forensic imaging machine or acquisition methods. I didn't even have a digital camera.
I had my notepad and pen. Months later, I testified about the illegal activity this suspect conducted with local
children. I verbally explained what I observed on his computer without any digital evidence. It was a very
different time, and would never be acceptable today. Current prosecution would require forensic acquisition,
detailed logs, and pictorial proof of every step. This is a good thing, but presents a higher demand toward your
own documentation and overall OSINT methodology. Without digital evidence, the computer crime or online
incident you are investigating never happened. Without proper training and policies, your evidence may never
be considered. Without confidence in your work, you may not be taken seriously.
We can no longer ignore discussions about workflow, documentation, and other formalities of our
investigations. It is also time that we tackle the ethics surrounding online investigations. These are not easy
conversations, and many people will have their own opinions. I do not claim to have all of the answers. I only
have my own experiences and lessons learned from many mistakes.
I rely heavily on assistance from my friend and colleague Jason Edison throughout this entire section. Jason is a
25-year veteran of a major U.S. police department where he serves as the investigative lead for the agency's
Digital Crimes Unit. He has trained thousands of students in the public and private sectors on various topics
related to open source intelligence and cyber-crime investigations. In fact, he is an official IntelTechniques
OSINT instructor who travels the world presenting my methods. He also maintains the IntelTechniques online
video training courses at IntelTechniques.net. Most of the content in this section is directly from him. I maintain
the first-person usage of "I" throughout the section. It is a collective "I" from both of us.
Jason and I do not agree on everything presented here. This is why you see alternative tools and methods which
may contradict each other. This is a good thing. We need as many thoughts and opinions as possible in order to
present ideas applicable to many situations. As an example, I try not to use Microsoft or Google products unless
absolutely necessary. I have forced myself to use Linux whenever possible, and avoid closed-sourced tools which
"call home". Jason prefers Microsoft OneNote, which is extremely robust. His need for an ideal note-taking
solution outweighs my paranoia of metadata collection by Microsoft. He prefers Chrome while I insist on
Firefox. Neither of us are right or wrong. We simply have strong preferences. We only hope to present numerous
options which may help you choose the best methods for your own investigations. Only you can decide what is
most appropriate for your daily workload.
It is now time to take a breath and get back to basics. You may have been overwhelmed with the techniques
discussed throughout the previous sections. You may wonder how you will present your findings, create a report,
and defend your right to access public information from the internet. This section tackles these issues.
Throughout this section, we present numerous document templates and workflow diagrams. All of these are
available to you via digital download at the following URL.
https://inteltechniques.com/osintbook11
Enter a username of "osint11" and password of "bk3t7" (without quotes) if required.

560 Section IV

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER FOURTY-FIVE
METHODOLOGY & WORKFLOW

An often overlooked component of open source intelligence gathering is the importance of establishing an
efficient and repeatable workflow. You need to be thoughtful and deliberate in how you proceed on an
investigation rather than wading in haphazardly. As an instructor, one of the most common stumbling blocks
with which I see new practitioners struggle is putting the tools into action in a fashion that results in a
professional looking work product. This section provides a step by step walkthrough of the entire investigative
process, from receiving an OSINT assignment all the way to submitting a professional case report.
This chapter assumes you have already completed the steps laid out in the previous sections of this book. You
will need familiarity with each of those tools and techniques if you wish to take full advantage of the
recommended workflow. If you have an existing investigative process, there will likely be pieces shared here that
can be folded into your current procedures. The examples used here were chosen purely for demonstration
purposes and not due to any association with ongoing criminal investigations.
Receiving the OSINT Mission
The first step in most investigations is what we in law enforcement refer to as "intake". This is the process of
receiving a mission assignment from a supervisor or fielding a request for investigative support from another
internal unit or outside agency. For those in the private sector, this might be accepting a contract investigation
from a client or conducting a security assessment as part of your normal duties. The following are examples of
OSINT requests that we receive on a regular basis:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Threat Assessments (Individuals): Online threats to carry out an act that we wish to prevent. Who
is this person? Where are they? What is their capability and true intent?
Threat Assessments (Events): Monitor intelligence prior to and during a significant event that
impacts the organization or region of responsibility. Who is involved? What are their intentions? What
is the scale of impact on available resources?
Target Profiles (Individuals): Uncover the target's entire online presence, including email addresses,
home addresses, friends, hobbies, etc., often referred to as "due diligence" investigations.
Target Profiles (Organizations): Uncover an organization's online footprint and/or entire
technological infrastructure. This can be a business, criminal enterprise, or group of individuals
organized to pursue a shared goal.
Subscriber Identification/Account Attribution: Identify the person associated with a domain, IP
address, or account. Who runs a malicious website? Which child predator has traffic through this IP?
Vulnerability Assessments: This is a defensive assessment where we will map out the sensitive data
exposures and operational security weaknesses for an individual or organization.

The following recommendations can be applied to any of these common investigative scenarios. More than
anything else, the key to success is staying organized and having a repeatable process.
Triage
Triage is the practice of assessing a situation or mission to calculate an approach that is likely to result in the
best possible outcome. A common mistake that is made when working OSINT investigations is to rush to action
with no clear plan or direction. You should take time at the beginning of a mission to ensure you are following
a productive path to relevant answers. Depending on the urgency of the situation, this step could be 30 seconds
or 30 minutes. The important thing is to make a plan of attack and move forward with purpose rather than just
bush-whacking your way through the internet. Here are some of the key considerations during the triage phase.

Methodology & Workflow 561

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Be certain of the mission objectives. If you ask a professional analyst to describe the first step they take in any
assessment, they will tell you that it is to identify the question. This of course could be multiple questions, but
the important thing is that you articulate the investigative goals. This can be a verbal or written confirmation,
depending on your situation, but written is preferred should the other party later misremember the conversation.
The first benefit of articulating the questions is establishing a clear set of expectations with the person asking
you to do the work. This could be a supervisor, contract client, colleague, or victim of a crime. Do not overthink
it. An example could be: "To be clear, you want to know the real name and physical addresses associated with
the person in control of the email account of ramit@iwillteachyoutoberich.com, and we have two hours to
accomplish this. Is this correct?"
Include in your verification any specific identifiers (email addresses, names, phone numbers, IP addresses, etc.)
that were originally provided by the requestor. It gives them a chance to catch any typos or miscommunications.
They may have given you the email address of the victim rather than the suspect. Those types of mix-ups occur
frequently and can waste a lot of valuable investigative time and resources if not caught and corrected early on.
That quick clarification also defines the primary goals for our investigations, similar to the following.
•
•

Find the legal name of the real person associated with ramit@iwillteachyoutoberich.com.
Find any home and/or work addresses for ramit@iwillteachyoutoberich.com.

When it comes time to write your investigative report, these questions should be clearly addressed in the
summary of key findings. Taking the time to articulate and clarify mission goals up front lays the groundwork
for your final work product. You should also ask questions regarding the source of any initial leads or other
intelligence on your target. Why do we believe that email address belongs to our suspect? How was that lead
obtained and how certain are we that it is correct? Information is not intelligence until it has context. Consider
asking additional questions up front to establish any available context for the target. Do we know anything about
their location, profession, known associates, or culture? Once you get to the research phase of the investigation,
you will have a far easier time locating pages, accounts, and identifiers related to your target if you start learning
about his or her day to day life. Never assume that the person tasking you with this work has given you all
available information. Ask questions and be persistent.
Legal Service & Preservation Letters
If you work in support of law enforcement, you should consider if there is likely to be a legal request made to
any known social media platforms. For example, if a Gmail address was involved in a crime, you might want to
issue a preservation letter to Google requesting that they retain any data related to the specified address. The
preservation letter is issued in anticipation of a future subpoena or search warrant for account data, such as
subscriber information. If you are unsure of whom to contact at a particular provider in order to submit this
request, a good starting point is the ISP list at https://www.search.org/resources/isp-list/.
Deconfliction
Not all investigations involve infiltration into criminal organizations. However, when they do, you may want to
check with colleagues in other agencies to make sure you are not stepping on any ongoing investigations. This
could also save you time should you locate an investigator who has already laid groundwork into the online
communities in question. We always want to be respectful of another professional's work and collaborate
whenever operationally appropriate. In the past, I have concluded long-term investigations only to find out later
that other teams were running operations in that criminal community at the same time. While reviewing the
case, we found that we had wasted time working to gain reputation with users who, unbeknownst to us, were
other undercover investigators. This is not only a waste of time and focus, but can complicate the individual
cases where they overlap. Ask the person for whom you are doing the work if anyone else is working on the
case. You would be surprised how often two branches of the same agency are unknowingly pursuing a common
target.

562 Chapter 45

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Note-Taking
The triage stage is the appropriate time to begin your note-taking. I will discuss specific tools in the next chapter,
but at its core you will need a paper scratch pad and digital notebook, such as Microsoft OneNote. A paper
notepad allows for quickly noting key details without having to move out of your browser during searches. This
is even more crucial if you are on a laptop or otherwise have limited screen real estate with which to work. Your
digital note-taking application is for pasting content as you copy it from your browser. Keep in mind using
Microsoft products allows them to collect user information, so make sure that this is within the operational
security requirements of your organization. At the top of your legal pad, list out the details you are seeking and
any initial investigative steps. This does not need to be comprehensive or detailed. We are simply establishing
some first steps by clarifying our mission goals and known leads.
In your digital notebook, create a new section and title it logically based on the date of request, incident type, or
case number if there is one. For example, "OSINT Request Jan_10_2025" or "Robbery 25-486544". Any emails
or other written correspondence received leading into the case should be copied into your digital notebook.
Finally, before moving on, ask yourself if OSINT is the right tool for the job. I have made the mistake of
investing hours into online searches, only to realize later that a two-minute phone call would have likely given
me the same information. Do not make the mistake of overlooking traditional investigative resources. Would a
phone call to a postal inspector identify the occupants of a residence quicker than an online search? The
strongest investigators are ones who think outside the box while also using every tool in it.
Knoll Your Tools
Now that you have established a plan and a clear understanding of the mission goals, you need to prepare your
workspace for the investigation. "Knolling" is the process of organizing your resources so they are ready to go
and easily accessible once you start the actual work. Think of how a surgeon's instruments are sanitized and laid
out in an organized fashion. The time spent preparing up front will result in a more efficient overall operation
while also reducing the chances of unnecessary mishaps. If you followed the instructions and recommendations
in previous chapters, you should already have a custom Linux VM. It should be patched and preloaded with
your preferred OSINT applications. Additional recommended preparations prior to the search phase include
the following.
•
•
•
•
•
•

Verify your VPN connection and consider connecting to a VPN server in your targets region
Start you OSINT Virtual Machine and if necessary run any updates
Open and have ready your notepad, digital notebook, and/or investigation template
Load your investigative browser and log into any covert accounts, such as social media platforms
Open the OSINT tools dashboard https://inteltechniques.com/tools/ (consider pinning that tab)
Create an investigative directory and any desired sub-directories on your workstation or external drive

Your knolling is complete. You have a virtual machine preloaded with the most useful OSINT tools, and you
are on a secure and private connection. We are prepared to search quickly, collect pertinent content, store it
logically, and track our progress within our notes.
Closed-Source & Premium Data
You should now be ready with all your tools and note-taking resources. Begin the research phase of the
investigation by querying your target against any in-house, premium, or proprietary data sources. This includes
any of the following.
•
•

Commercial aggregators such as Accurint (LexisNexis), TLO, Clear, and others.
Premium products such as BeenVerified, Intelius, Spokeo, Pipl, and WhitepagesPro.

Methodology & Workflow 563

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•

Government and LE databases such as Department of Licensing, Criminal Records, Department of
Corrections, and Agency Records Management Systems (if available to you).

Whereas using purely open-source tools typically requires visiting dozens of sites in order to find just a few
leads, paid services often quickly provide a list of possible addresses, associates, and accounts. If you have
services like LexisNexis or Clear available, use them early for easy additional leads on your target. These services
obtain much of their data from credit histories and utilities. Therefore, they tend to be good sources for
residential address history, land-line phone numbers, employers, roommates, and family members. They tend to
work very poorly with email addresses, usernames, and social media accounts.
This is also when you should run any premium people-search services such as Pipl, Spokeo, or BeenVerified.
These types of services range from $15-$300 a month depending on the subscription tier, but tend to offer a
much richer, immediate return on queries than their free counterparts. However, they will push you to spend
more money for "premium" data about your target. Many investigators kickstart the early stages of their open
source investigations using one of these cheap premium aggregators, but keep in mind everything you get from
paid people
effort).

For those on
, department
of licensing
digging. An
advantage that government investigators have is that many of these systems will provide access to a photo of
the target, which can be used to verify or rule out possible social media accounts. These records also typically
include recent associates, phone numbers, and residential addresses. Even if the subject did not use their own
address during a previous contact with government agents, they likely used one where they can receive mail,
such as a relative's house. Most people are not trained to think on their feet and will use familiar data when
cornered with hard questions.
Any promising identifiers from your premium or government searches should be added to your case notes, and
generated reports should be dropped into your digital notebook as pdfs. Photos can be copied and pasted into
your digital notes or dropped into your designated directory within the shared folder on your desktop. This
reflects our workflow going forward. Any valuable page, image, or identifier is noted, and a corresponding pdf
or image capture is placed either in our digital notebook or investigative folder.
Open-Source Research & Collection
Once you have exhausted your in-house and paid data resources, it is time to dive into your OSINT tools and
resources. This tends to be the most involved stage of research due to the large number of sites that you will
check for your target's information. Tab management is critical in staying organized. If you have not already
done so, add the OneTab (one-tab.com) extension to Chrome and Firefox within your VM.
•

In your VM, open your custom OSINT tools and use the tool category that corresponds to your known
identifiers, such as the email and search engine tools.

564 Chapter 45

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•

Perform any additional queries on sites not included in your custom toolset. For example, a colleague
may have very recently recommended a new email search site. If that resource provides good results,
consider adding it to your custom toolset.

At this point, you should be in your VM looking at several open tabs in your browser. These tabs represent the
results from the Google and custom tools queries which you have executed. The rule going forward is to deal
with each tab completely, and intentionally keep or discard it before moving on to the next. A common misstep
is to start clicking on leads that look interesting prior to completely reviewing the page on which you are currently
visiting. Therefore, tab discipline should be in the forefront of your mind as you parse through your first batch
of search results. Consider the following.
•
•

•
•

Review the first tab of Google results, looking for anything that stands out as a likely valid lead on your
target. For any results that look promising, right-click the link and choose "Open link in new tab".
Continue to scroll through the first page of Google results and when you get to the image results, rightclick on it and choose "Open link in new tab". If Google does not include an "Images for…" section
in the first page of results, you may need to select "Images" from the tabs at the top of the page. The
image results are always worth reviewing as you can quickly scan the page for potential profile images
or other photos of your target.
Once you are satisfied that you have fully reviewed the first page of Google results and have opened
any promising leads in their own tabs, you can move on to the next tab.
As you start to do more OSINT work, small efficiencies compound to save a lot of time in the overall
investigation. Learning keyboard commands for frequently used browser actions will be very beneficial.
In this case, you can press "Ctrl" + "tab" (Windows) or "command" + "tab" (Mac) to move to the next
tab to the right. Holding down "Shift" with the previous key combinations will cycle through tabs in
the opposite direction, from right to left.

This system of exhausting leads on the current page before moving on to other tabs is crucial in ensuring that
you do not overlook potential intelligence or lose your way by moving too quickly from lead to lead. That is
called "rabbit holing" and it is one of the most common mistakes made by new investigators. You also need to
be disciplined about closing any tabs that are false positives or otherwise present no fruitful results. This will
help to control browser clutter and reduce the load on your workstation resources.
As you move through your tabbed results methodically, you may come upon a page of results which is a jackpot
of links to potential target data. This is a good problem to have, but a problem nonetheless. The same rules
apply, but with one additional recommendation, which is that any lead that warrants its own full set of queries
should be opened in a new window rather than a new tab. Consider the following example.
•
•
•
•

You have located a social media account containing several strong leads which require their own full
set of queries using Google and your custom OSINT tools.
The Twitter usernames need to be queried through the Twitter tools and the email addresses through
the email tools. Think of each of these as a new path that needs to be followed independently.
Any strong leads should be represented in your notes. Write down any account identifiers on your
notepad, and for each create a new page in your digital notebook. Figure 45.02 displays the
documentation in OneNote.
Much like a family tree forks into new branches which create even more branches, following online
leads often presents new leads. Browser tabs and windows can help you categorize and isolate all leads,
providing a sense of structure to your investigation.

This OneNote digital notebook is logically structured to organize intelligence leads as they are uncovered. The
notebook title on the top left reflects the case number and name of the target organization. I should mention
that this example was chosen arbitrarily, and the group depicted is not likely criminal in nature. I have tabbed
sections for the target individual and the organization. I also have a tab which contains fresh copies of my

Methodology & Workflow 565

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

OSINT templates should I need them. The visible section represents a "real-name" investigation into my primary
target. On the right, I have added pages that reflect each strong lead, which was created for each account
identifier. This ensures that every new investigative path I open has a place to paste relevant data, while also
making it easier to visualize my leads as a whole. The following explains some of the options present in Figure
45.02.
•
•
•

The Scratch Page is for quickly pasting links and reminders for items which I want to have quick access
or revisit later.
The Request Details page is where I paste the details of the investigative request along with any other
important details gleaned during triage.
The various Premium/Government Data resource pages contain pasted reports or snippets from
closed-source, in-house, and paid services.

Strong leads are given a new browser window and their own page in my digital notebook. The list of pages can
also be used as a checklist or "to-do" list. Once you have fully exhausted that lead, you can add a "+" symbol or
any other desired character to the title to indicate that it is complete.
Tab Management
When you reach the last open tab in your current search, look back and make certain that any open tabs are
pages that have useful data. Prior to moving on to a new window and path of inquiry, you should preserve your
list of tabs. This is where your tab manager can be beneficial. OneTab's primary purpose is its ability to quickly
collapse all tabs into an exportable list of URLs. These bookmarks can then be pasted into your notes or shared
with a colleague who can import them into their own OneNote instance. Once you are finished working with
any set of tabs, conduct the following.
•
•
•

Right-click anywhere in the window, select the blue OneTab icon, and click "Send all tabs to OneTab".
You will now be looking at the OneTab manager, which was explained in Chapter Three. The list of
bookmarks for the tabs you just collapsed will be at the top of the list.
Click in front of the number of tabs to add a title, such as "Google Target Name". Logical naming is
the cornerstone of staying organized and making your work searchable. Eventually this set of
bookmarks will get pushed farther down the page as you add newer tab sets. To find it again, press
"Ctrl" + "F" (Windows) or "command" + "F" (Mac) to conduct a keyword search for the custom title
you added.

The list of tabs is saved locally in your VM within your browser extension data, but you will want it in your notes
for easy access. Click on "Export/Import URLs" on the top right of the page. Figure 45.03 displays an example.
The export page is missing titles, but each set is separated by a space and the URLs are in the same order as the
lists on the OneTab management page. Consider the following steps.
•
•

Left-click and drag your mouse to highlight your set of URLs. Press "Ctrl" + "C" (Windows) or
"command" + "C" (Mac) to copy the list.
Move to your digital notebook, select the appropriate page, and press "Ctrl" + "V" (Windows) or
"command" + "V" (Mac) to paste the list into your notes.

Although OneTab is the tab manager I recommend for most people, if you require online sync or advanced
features, some other tab extensions are Toby, Tabs-Outliner, Workona, and Graphitabs. As discussed earlier in
this book, extensions always come with a security cost, so use them sparingly and only when the added
functionality is mission critical.

566 Chapter 45

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Context Menu Queries
Speed and efficiency are key if you are conducting OSINT at the professional level. Context search extensions,
such as ContextSearch (github.com/ssborbis/ContextSearch-web-ext), allow you to query a keyword or link
just by right-clicking on it. These extensions come with a predefined set of search options, such as Google
reverse image, and allow you to also add your own custom queries.
Queries are customized via the options menu by adding structured URLs to the existing list of popular search
engines. To add your own custom search strings, conduct the following.
•
•
•
•

Left-click on the "ContextSearch" extension in your toolbar and then click the gear icon to go to
settings.
Select the "Search Engines" tab and click the "Add" button.
Type in a name for your new search and click "OK".
In the template field, paste the URL query for the search you want to execute. These can be some of
the same queries that you have added to your custom OSINT toolset. At the end of the URL add
{SEARCHTERMS}.

Context-based search capabilities complement, but do not replace your custom toolset. They offer speed and
convenience, but lack the full level of control and customizability that you have with your own tools.

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

You should now have a reliable, repeatable process for working through your OSINT queries and capturing
results in your paper and digital notes. The final piece of the research phase is capture and collection. This is
made up of the steps involved in preserving content for evidentiary or reporting purposes. There are three
approaches to collection depending on the tools you have available.
Manual Capture
Manual capture includes any technique that is user-initiated and results in capturing a single file or multiple files
within a single page. These are often browser-based tools such as JavaScript or extensions. Here are the steps to
integrating manual capture into your workflow.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Create a case folder in your VM shared directory named logically for your case.
Open that case folder and create a new folder matching the corresponding category from your toolset.
If I am working on an email address, this will be titled "Email Addresses".
Open that directory and create a folder titled appropriately for the identifier you are querying. If an
email address is the target, the folder may be titled similar to "ramit@iwillteachyoutoberich.com".
Repeat this for any other strong leads, such as Twitter usernames, names, domains, etc.
Now you have a logically structured set of folders to store any saved digital content.
As you work through your set of tabs specifically for that lead, capture any pages that support your
findings and save those to this folder.
Any time you save an image or video related to that lead, also save it to this directory using any of the
tools referenced earlier in the book.
Any time you save a specific image or video, you should also save a screen capture of the page from
where you obtained it. This shows visually how that image or video was laid out on the page. The
capture of the entire page is saved to the same folder where you placed the image or video it references.

If you followed the prior steps for tab management, these subfolders should match up with any strong leads
that you have opened in their own windows. At the conclusion of your investigation, the digital evidence is
nicely organized by its corresponding identifier and tools.

568 Chapter 45

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Passive Capture
The best example of a passive capture tool is Hunchly. It records pages loaded in Chrome at the source code
level, as well as any images on those pages. It provides a wide safety net, but you should be more intentional in
taking advantage of its capture capabilities. The following steps assume you have Hunchly and Chrome installed
in your custom OSINT VM. If you are not a Hunchly user, you may skip this section and move on to scripted
capture.
•
•
•
•

Create a new Hunchly case named the same as your investigative notebook and your digital directory.
Click the Hunchly extension icon on the top right of your Chrome browser and make sure it is set to
capture and that it is set to the correct case name.
Proceed with your research in Chrome as described in the previous sections. Any time you find an
image that is key to your case, right-click it, select the Hunchly entry on the context menu, and choose
"Add Caption to Image". Provide a logical caption and click "Save".
Hunchly can later generate a forensically sound report containing all tagged images.

Scripted Capture
Scripted capture is made up of the manually activated programs that collect or "mine" digital content on our
behalf. A good example of this is using Instaloader to rip all of the photos from a specified Instagram account.
These types of tools were covered earlier in the book, and there are only a few things to keep in mind on how
they fit in our workflow, as explained below.
•
•
•
•

For scripts that prompt you for a save location, you should use the same system that was described for
manual capture: a series of logical nested folders.
Some scripts will store collected data in a default directory, such as Downloads or Documents. In these
cases, complete the collection and then manually move the files over to your case directory. When
reasonable, move rather than copy files to limit clutter and abandoned case data.
Add a line to your notes indicating which script was used, what it was directed to collect, and the date
and time. Unlike Hunchly, most of these tools do not annotate or generate a log of their actions.
If you are collecting digital evidence for use in court, you should consider also conducting a manual
capture of any crucial items. The problem with scripts is that you may not be able to explain how they
work in court. A manual save is easy to explain confidently to a jury when the time comes to testify.

Multimedia and Link Analysis
Whether you are working your case independently or have the support of a dedicated team, the research phase
will include some level of multimedia analysis. This is the process of examining the visual and metadata
characteristics of recovered images and video. Visual examination is exactly what it sounds like. View each image
or clip at the highest resolution possible and methodically examine media for any intelligence that was
unintentionally included in the frame. You are looking for things like business signage in the background of your
target's profile photo. Identify anything that narrows down who or where they might be, and include this in your
case notes. This process can be very time consuming, but it remains one of the best methods of locating an
elusive target who has otherwise covered their online tracks.
Link analysis is the process of using charts and diagrams to illustrate how information and entities are connected.
These can be people, locations, websites, phone numbers, or any other identifiers you see associated with online
accounts. Figure 45.05 displays a link analysis showing connections between specific people and domains. You
will see specific examples of link analysis tools in the following chapter. Not all cases require a link chart, but
you should consider its value when faced with complex organizations or anytime your case might benefit from
a visualization of how entities or accounts are connected.

Methodology & Workflow 569

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Figure 45.05: A link analysis example with Draw.io.
Once your research is complete, you will need to prepare your report. Several of the steps in this workflow were
in preparation for the reporting phase. If you have followed along diligently, your efforts will be rewarded by
painless report creation. Chapter Thirty-Five is dedicated to taking all of the intelligence that you have collected
and using it to build a professional case report.
Submission and Cleanup
It is not unusual to move from one investigation to another very quickly. Just as we took time to properly set
up our research, we also need to appropriately close out our work before moving on to the next task. The
following may be beneficial.
•

•

•

Transfer any handwritten notes to either your digital notes or final report. If you prefer, you can scan
the notes as a pdf using your scan enabled printer or scanning straight to OneNote. Any paper notes or
printouts are then either filed in a secure location and in compliance with your agency's policies or they
are shredded.
Do not leave case assets scattered about or they will get mixed in with future case work. Your
investigative directories should be archived in accordance with your agency's evidence submission and
retention policies. Some teams retain copies of these "working files" on network attached storage or
optical discs. If the subject should resurface, as criminals tend to do, having historical notes from
previous incidents can be a huge time saver.
If appropriate, export a copy of the VM that you used for the case. Then return to a clean snapshot or
clone as described in earlier sections of this book. Consider preparing fresh accounts for the next
investigation and find replacements for broken tools.

20 Minutes vs. 20 Days
Some major case investigations take place over a series of days or even months, while critical incidents may
require you to give a threat assessment in 20-30 minutes. Your workflow will remain the same for each situation,
but the time spent on each step will obviously be reduced. When you reduce the "time-to-solve" drastically,
there will be compromises made to the quality of work and operational-security. A common scenario where I
use a streamlined workflow is a threat assessment, such as a person threatening suicide in an online chatroom.
Consider the following threat assessment steps and workflow charts on the following pages.

570 Chapter 45

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•
•

•

•
•
•
•
•
•

Triage: Verbally clarify the known identifiers and expected intelligence, such as: "User D1ckTraC on
4chan is threatening to kill himself in a post. We want to know who he really is, where he lives, and
whether he is likely to carry out the threat".
Knoll Your Tools: Grab your legal pad and a pen. Ideally you will have a fresh instance of your OSINT
VM ready to use. If you do not have this prepared ahead of time, use "utility" social media accounts.
Utility social media accounts are those on hand for assessments where speed is essential and crosscontamination is a reasonable concession. Fresh accounts are always preferable.
Collaboration: If you are collaborating with a team on a platform such as OneNote, create a page for
each user to paste key findings so that you do not confuse one another. Keep in mind that OneNote in
a browser syncs almost instantly, whereas several users on OneNote desktop will have syncing issues.
Assign one person to keep track of everyone's progress and build out the big picture.
Premium/Government Resources: Run your target through any commercial aggregators and
government databases. These checks should run very quickly and return basic data with minimal effort.
OSINT: Begin with Google searches such as: site:4chan.org "username". Then query your target's
known identifiers through your custom OSINT tools.
Only open very promising links in new tabs and visually scan each page quickly for words or images
that jump out at you. The images results can be especially useful on time sensitive assessments because
your brain can process them exponentially faster than text.
For anything useful, make a note on your legal pad and leave the corresponding tab open.
Be prepared to give a briefing at the deadline, even if it is just a situational report similar to "we've
located and preserved the original posting, there's a history of similar suicidal threats from that user,
but we do not know who or where he/she is yet".
Take care of any additional collection, analysis, and reporting once the crisis has passed. At that point
you will fall back into the normal workflow and documentation steps.

Target Flowcharts
I have conducted numerous OSINT training programs over the past few years. Regardless of the audience, I
receive the question "Is there a standard process or workflow for each type of OSINT target?" at every event.
My short answer was always "no". I had always looked at each investigation as unique. The type of investigation
dictated the avenues and routes that would lead me to valuable intelligence. There was no cheat-sheet that could
be used for every scenario. While I still believe there is no complete template-based solution for this type of
work, I now admit that some standards can be developed. This section will display my attempt at creating
workflows that can quickly assist with direction and guidance when you possess a specific piece of information.
These documents are presented in six views based on the information being searched: Email, Username, Real
Name, Telephone Number, Domain Name, and Location.
Each example will try to show the standard path that I would take when provided the chosen type of data. The
goal with my investigations is to get to the next topic. For example, if I am given an email address, my goal is to
find any usernames and real names. When I have a username, my goal is to find any social networks and verify
an email address. When I have a real name, the goal is to find email addresses, usernames, and a telephone
number. When I have a telephone number, my goal is to verify the name and identify a physical address and
relatives. When I have a domain name, my goal is to locate a real name and physical address. The cycle continues
after each new piece of information is discovered.
Download all flowcharts at https://inteltechniques.com/data/osintbook11/flowcharts.zip. This file
includes full-size image exports of each flowchart and the original Draw.io file which can be modified. I no
longer visually present the files in this book in order to save space. I believe that all of these will always be a
work in progress. As everything else in OSINT changes, these will too. I used the free open-source application
Draw.io (draw.io) to create each of these. I installed the desktop application, but you could also use their free
browser-based solution to open and modify the documents to fit your own investigations.

Methodology & Workflow 571

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER FOURTY-SIX
DOCUMENTATION & REPORTING

Once you have completed your research, you will need to compile your intelligence into a professional report.
Using the correct tools and techniques for documentation throughout your investigation will make generating
your final report a relatively painless process.
Investigative Note-Taking
Like any form of research, note-taking is essential when conducting a professional OSINT investigation. As
mentioned in the previous chapter, I prefer to take my notes in both paper and digital formats. The paper
scratchpad is for quick identifiers, reminders, and at times a rough diagram. The digital notes are for pasting
copied text, images, video, or other files. My hand-written notes tend to be unstructured, whereas collecting
digital content often benefits from a pre-structured destination. The following are my recommendations for
solid digital notebook applications for OSINT work, along with some of their respective pros and cons.
Standard Notes (standardnotes.org)
Standard Notes is the best privacy focused note-taking application with AES-256 encryption and has a very clear
privacy policy. It has open-source versions for Mac, Windows, IOS, Android, Linux, and web browsers making
it a great fit for OSINT work. You can use Standard Notes completely offline, but if you choose to make an
account even the free tier supports sync and end-to-end encryption. The premium version adds advanced
features such as multi-factor authentication, automated backups to your own cloud service of choice, and some
aesthetic options, such as themes.
OneNote (onenote.com/download)
OneNote is the power option for digital note-taking at the price of a privacy compromise, but it is worth
mentioning because many of us work for organizations that use Microsoft Office as their enterprise office
platform. I recommend installing the standalone version of OneNote unless your agency requires use of the
cloud-based Office 365 ecosystem. Creating a fresh Microsoft account will prevent the installation from cross
contaminating your other MS Office projects. Microsoft will offer to provide you with a new Outlook.com
address, but a Proton Mail address would be the better choice for most people.
The desktop version of OneNote is supported on Mac, IOS, Android, and most major browsers, but each will
require authentication with the account you used for installation. Microsoft, like other major platforms, forces
you to sync to their ecosystem whenever possible. Similar to Standard Notes, OneNote stores data in a
hierarchical structure of pages, sections, and notebooks. From an organizational perspective, it functions exactly
like an old-school case binder of paper reports and printouts. I can create a new notebook titled
"CopperThieves" with tabbed sections for each suspect. Each section is then broken down into my desired
pages: Bio, Facebook, Twitter, Vehicles, Employment, etc. These pages can be populated from scratch, or I can
preload them with my case templates or a simple spreadsheet.
What makes OneNote possibly worth the privacy compromise is its ability to ingest just about any type of digital
file as an attachment. I can drag a pdf report from the Department of Licensing and drop it on the "Vehicles"
page of a target and OneNote will ask if I want it added as a printout or file. The printout option adds a human
readable image of the file, while the file option embeds the pdf file itself. Double-clicking on that pdf file after
import would open it in a browser window or pdf reader of choice.
You may organize your digital notebook to suit your investigation, although I typically use the section tabs to
separate out case targets and then each page of a section represents a major investigative lead (username, email

572 Chapter 46

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

address, employer, etc.). I can also export entire notebooks by clicking on "File" and then "Export". Notebooks
can be exported in a proprietary format, whereas sections and pages may also be exported as pdfs, docs, and
several other file formats. This is convenient should you want to export sections from your digital notes to
include in your report appendix. Although OneNote can be used in an online capacity via browser from any
operating-system, implementation on Mac and Linux is clunky at best. For MacOS users you may have better
luck with a OneNote clone called Outline (outline.app/mac). Linux users have the option of a project called
P3X (github.com/patrikx3/onenote) which will allow you to create edit OneNote files in your browser.
CherryTree (giuspen.com/cherrytree)
CherryTree is my note-taking application of choice for Linux. It ticks all the boxes we like such as being opensource and offline. What separates it from other Linux options is its ability to support both hierarchical notes
and some limited support for storing images, tables, and other filetypes. The following steps will install
CherryTree to your Linux Original VM.
•
•
•

Open a terminal window by clicking on the shortcut in your Dock.
Type the following into terminal: sudo apt install -y cherrytree
Press enter and you will see CherryTree and all dependencies installed.

Open CherryTree from the Applications menu and add to your favorites, if desired. CherryTree has vast
functionality, but the core feature of which we want to take advantage is the hierarchical node structure. Think
of Nodes as notebook sections and SubNodes as pages within those sections. On the left side of the CherryTree
window is the "node tree", which shows everything in your current notebook. To add a new section, click on
"Tree" in the top toolbar and then "Add Node". Give your node a logical name such as "Facebook" and select
"OK". To add a page or "SubNode" to that section, right-click on the node and select "Add SubNode". Name
it appropriately and click "OK". Most of the functions we care about can be completed via the "Tree" menu in
the toolbar or by using the right-click context menu.
CherryTree is not without its downsides. It is not nearly as user-friendly as OneNote when it comes to drag and
drop and its support for inserting non-text filetypes is inconsistent. However, it is a hierarchical digital notebook
within our Linux VM and one with much greater privacy than we could ever obtain using a Microsoft or other
closed-source office application. There is a windows installer available as well, although I recommend using the
Linux version in your VM whenever possible. A CherryTree template is included in the files download page.
Joplin (joplinapp.org)
Joplin is a free and open source note taking application which is supported on iOS, Android, Mac, Linux, and
Windows. Joplin is a great option for anyone wanting a simple digital notebook with an intuitive structure of
notebooks and pages. Markdown format is supported for notes as well as the ability to create notes in a "to-do"
format which adds a checkbox to the title in the navigation panel. Notebooks may be exported in markdown or
HTML formats, with pdf export as an additional option for individual note pages. Although fairly simple by
design, Joplin does support modern features such as search, tagging, plugins and small quality of life features
such as dark mode. Joplin supports optional notebook sharing and synchronization via various cloud services
such as OneDrive, S3, and their own premium Joplin Cloud service. The privacy-minded can take advantage of
their self-hosting support with NextCloud or a Joplin server. If you choose to utilize any of the syncing options,
make sure to enable end-to-end encryption and set a strong master passphrase at "Tools" > "Options" >
"Encryption". Joplin clients for each operating system are available for download at
https://joplinapp.org/help/install/.
Obsidian (obsidian.md)
Obsidian offers the simplicity of a basic text editor but also supports some limited graphical capabilities such as
mind maps and ingesting images. The graph functionality allows you to create a rudimentary link chart showing

Documentation & Reporting 573

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

connections and relationships between various notes. Obsidian also has a very active community and plugin
ecosystem. The free version is fully featured with a paid tier for those intending to use the application for
commercial purposes. Obsidian is available for all three major desktop platforms as well as mobile
(https://obsidian.md/download).
Cryptpad (cryptpad.fr)
Cryptpad is a privacy respecting online office suite with support for online collaboration. While it lacks the more
advanced features of something like the Microsoft Office ecosystem, it is very simple to use, and it does not
collect and sell your data. Your documents are encrypted by default on the Cryptpad servers. There are built in
comment and chat features for real-time collaboration on shared documents. As a guest you can create, store,
and share documents for up to 90 days. Setting up a free account requires only a username/password and will
net you an additional 1 GB of persistent online drive space for storing and sharing your documents. The team
at Cryptpad is not collecting your contact information, which is great for privacy, but they cannot reset
passwords, so store your credentials appropriately. There is also a premium tier which includes more storage
and faster support should you require either. As with any online service, we recommend maintaining a local
backup of any files stored on the Cryptpad servers.
Advanced Text Editors: You may want to consider adding Interactive Development Environments (IDEs) to
your arsenal of documentation tools. These are applications built for programmers and web developers for
writing and testing their code. While full IDEs can be very complex, there are a handful of "light" IDEs or
advanced text-editors which fit well into your workflow. The editors handle basic note-taking quite well. They
also provide additional capabilities such as built-in terminals and mark-down support, which is exactly what we
need when customizing your OSINT tools as previously explained. There are significant efficiency gains to be
had when using a tool that supports note-taking, running scripts, and editing code all within a single interface.
While many readers will continue to rely on office suites from major publishers to prepare your final reports,
these light IDEs are capable of handling much of your investigative workflow.
VSCode (code.visualstudio.com)
VSCode is very close to being a fully functional IDE and it has a huge following in the programming and web
development communities due to its extensive catalogue of available extensions. Extensions are plugins which
add additional features and customizations such as interface themes. While the source code is open, the
application itself is a proprietary free Microsoft product and its primary weakness is the standard telemetry and
data collection that accompanies most Microsoft products. Therefore, VSCode is a good option for someone
already working in a Microsoft enterprise environment. In addition to simple text capabilities, VSCode supports
mark-down. This makes it a good tool for both notes and also for working on your custom tool files. It has a
very responsive interface and does not bog down when dealing with large files. It has arguably the largest
collection of extensions of any editor in its class and it supports running code should you want to customize
some scripts. The standard install includes a terminal so you can run CMD, PowerShell, or bash from within the
application. VSCode is available for macOS, Windows, and Linux. Following installation, immediately review all
settings and disable telemetry. You can accomplish this by selecting "File" > "Preferences" > "Settings" or
"Code" > "Preferences" > "Settings". Using the search box, submit a query for "telemetry" and uncheck
"Telemetry: Enable Telemetry setting". Now search for "@tag:usesOnlineServices" and review the settings
which make calls to online services such as those querying for extension updates. Disabling these will reduce
your exposure to Microsoft but may limit some functionality such as automatic updates and notifications.
VSCodium (vscodium.com)
VSCodium is an open-source clone built from the VSCode source. It removes the Microsoft data collection in
exchange for a slightly more complicated configuration process. VSCodium offers most of VSCode's
capabilities. If you are not already using Office or other Microsoft products, this is the best choice for you.
Although the bulk of data sharing is disabled by default, it is recommended that you review all application

574 Chapter 46

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

settings and look for any which use "online services". There is no substitute for reviewing configuration settings
yourself. VSCodium presents a slightly less polished user experience. Some extensions require additional
installation steps and there is a much smaller community from which to draw support. VSCodium is available
on macOS, Windows, and Linux using the package managers which were previously explained.
Anatomy of an OSINT Report: Although some investigators choose to write their reports as they go, I prefer
to use handwritten and digital notes to complete the formal report at the conclusion of the investigation. I have
created a series of templates in Microsoft Word and Adobe Acrobat, each of which are available in the digital
files download, which provide a polished documentation framework for the most common mission scenarios.
Although they vary in format, each contains a common structure including face-sheet, narrative, analysis, and
appendix.
Face-Sheet: The face-sheet is typically one or two pages and is the most important piece of any report. It is
meant to quickly convey the most important intelligence. The mark of a good face-sheet is that a boss or client
can glance at it and instantly know the case name/number, who collected the intelligence, investigative
timeframe, primary subject identifiers, and a concise set of key findings. The key findings can be in bullet or
paragraph format, but should be no more than a half of one page. If you choose to include a table of contents
for the report, it is often placed under the case title and prior to key findings. Figure 46.01 (upper-left) displays
an example of a simple face-sheet while Figure 46.01 (upper-right) displays a full report version.
Narrative: The narrative follows the face-sheet and it tells the story. This is your opportunity to describe the
path you took to reach your key findings. I like to organize my narrative in either chronological order or match
the order of findings as listed on the face-sheet. I always prefer to tell a story in the order in which things
occurred. This can be vital if your report will later be used as part of your courtroom testimony. Write in the
first person and as concisely as possible, just as you would for any written statement for a police report or other
legal document. Write just enough to provide context and a clear understanding for each piece of discovered
intelligence. This section can be a couple of paragraphs to several pages, depending on the complexity of the
case. The narrative should address any discoveries that impact the investigative findings. It is important to
acknowledge any exculpatory evidence and ensure that it is represented in your reporting. This is especially true
for those working in the criminal justice and government sectors. Likewise, if your report takes the form of an
intelligence briefing, your audience may expect confidence levels associated with your conclusions. Use terms
such as "unsubstantiated", "likely", or "highly likely", rather than expressing the chances in percentages. Consider
adding a section describing the best-practices used during the online investigation. Key points to be made here
are compartmentalization from other casework; thoroughness of research; software and services used; and a
brief statement of training and qualifications. Think of this section as demonstrating why your work should be
trusted. Figure 46.01 (lower-right) displays a partial example of a report narrative.
Link Analysis & Timelines: Not all reports will contain an analysis section, but this is where I present graphical
components that support understanding of the preceding narrative. These include timelines of key events and
link charts mapping out relationships between individuals, groups, locations, and internet sites. In my
organization, this type of specialized work is often handled by civilian analysts who are proficient in software
such as Maltego or I2 Analyst's Notebook. I provide them with a copy of my face-sheet, narrative, and a hand
drawn map of the case entities and corresponding relationships. They use these to construct a more professional,
visually appealing, and understandable graphical representation of the criminal organization or series of events.
Not every investigation warrants this level of investment and not every investigator has these resources available,
but they are a nice touch on major cases. When I do not have analyst resources available, I leverage one of the
following free and user-friendly link visualization tools.
Draw.io (www.diagrams.net/integrations.html)
Gephi (gephi.org)
MindMup (mindmup.com)
NWU (knightlab.northwestern.edu/projects)

Documentation & Reporting 575

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Figure 46.01: Document templates available at https://inteltechniques.com/osintbook11.

576 Chapter 46

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

I formerly used the free, stripped-down version of Maltego called CaseFile for my link charts. I have since
moved on to better open-source options that are far less resource intensive and less of a privacy concern.
Remember, when working in our VM, we are borrowing resources from our host machines, so we need to use
lightweight applications whenever possible. I prefer Draw.io for most investigations. It is most commonly used
online as a browser-based diagram solution. When you browse to the site it will prompt you to create a new
diagram, but first click on "Change Storage". Select "Device" and check "Remember this setting" to establish
that we will be saving our work locally rather than with Google or Microsoft. Once you select either a blank
diagram or one of the many templates, you will be ready to start building a link chart representing your
investigative diagram. Before moving on, consider a more private option by installing the offline desktop
application, which is available for MacOS, Windows, and Linux (https://github.com/jgraph/drawiodesktop/releases).
Once the application is installed and running, choose to create a new diagram, and a window will open offering
you several templates. Some of the options in the network category work well for OSINT, or you can start with
a blank project. Draw.io is very intuitive, allowing you to select icons on the left and drag them into your chart.
Any linear icons (lines or arrows) are connectors and can be used to represent relationships between entities on
the diagram. Double-clicking on text will allow you to edit the labels. The toolbar at the top and the right-click
context menu offer many additional options for editing or adding components to the link chart. Save and export
options are in the "File" menu. Draw.io supports export in the most common filetypes such as pdf, docx, png,
and html. When you first install Draw.io the default settings will present charts which appear a bit outdated due
to the art style of the standard icons. Changing the following settings can fix this.
•
•
•
•

Click "Extras" at the top and select one of the additional themes. I use the lighter options, as seen in
Figure 46.02, for anything being printed, but I find that dark works well visually.
At the bottom of the "Shapes" panel on the left, click "+More Shapes...".
Browse through and check any sets that look useful and click "Apply". One I always include is "Web
Icons" under "Other". The "Web Icons" and "Web Logos" work very well for OSINT charts and the
icon styles tend to be more modern than the default selections included in the offered templates.
There is also a + button in your toolbar that will allow you to import your own images into the chart
or even draw shapes freehand.

Timelines and Event Maps
Draw.io is very flexible and you could use it to create timelines or event maps. However, I like to have multiple
options for any task. The following descriptions are of two other applications for dedicated timeline and
mapping tools.
Event Viewpoint (eventviewpoint.com)
Event Viewpoint is a free, closed-source, browser-based timeline and mapping application. It will allow you to
create events made up of a location, designated span of time/date, and event notes. You may add images and
view your case as a list, timeline, or geographical map. An example is seen in Figure 46.03. You will need to sign
up for a free account using a non-attributable email address. I never use these types of browser-based
applications to work with sensitive data.
Time Graphics (time.graphics)
Time Graphics is a premium browser-based timeline tool and you will need to make an account using a valid
email address. Only premium users can save privatized projects and remove watermarks. The interface is driven
by an intuitive right-click context menu and will allow you to add events, pictures, video, and notes. Figure 46.04
shows an example. You can export your project in several formats including pdf, docx, and json.

Documentation & Reporting 577

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Appendix
The appendix of a report is made up of all the supporting documentation and media captured during the
investigation. This will be screen capture files, still frames from YouTube evidence, spreadsheets of social media
contacts, and any other digital evidence that can be displayed in a document format. These are working copies
only, with the digital originals preserved on external media or other format approved by your agency's digital
evidence policy. Many of your tools are going to generate pdf files which you will then need to include in your
report appendix. If you have Adobe Acrobat Pro you can easily combine the working copies of your pdfs into
a single document for easier distribution. The free versions of Acrobat do not support combining or conversion
of multiple documents. I prefer a privacy respecting open-source option that does not require an account with
Adobe, such as the following.

578 Chapter 46

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

PDFsam Basic (pdfsam.org/pdf-merge)
PDFsam Basic is a free and open-source application for merging multiple pdf files. It is available for Linux, Mac,
and Windows, but the Linux version is the perfect fit for our investigative VM. Installation in Ubuntu Linux is
straightforward, as follows.
•
•
•
•

In your Linux VM navigate to pdfsam.org/download-pdfsam-basic/.
Click on "Deb package for Debian based Linux distributions" to download the app.
Right-click the file and choose "Open with Software Install".
Click the "Install" button.

This installation provides a new icon in the Applications menu. Opening the application presents a user-friendly
menu with many options. To consolidate PDF files, select "Merge" in the left menu, then "Add" to select the
desired files, and then "Run". A new combined pdf document will be created in the same directory as the source
documents. PDFsam Basic has many more features that will allow you to manipulate your pdf documents, such
as removing or rotating a single page within a long document. There are additional customizations available in
the settings menu, such as changing the default directory to that of your case file. The premium versions of
PDFsam are closed source, and primarily adds support for alternate filetypes.
Sourcing & Annotation
It is important that in our documentation we include annotation indicating the source of each piece of
intelligence. The following are some of the most common methods for adding sourcing to reports:
•
•
•
•

•

•

Footnotes – This is one of the most common methods of including sources in documentation. It has
the added benefits of looking professional and also being intuitive.
Tables – Tables make for easy organization and association between specific identifiers (accounts,
usernames, etc.). If your report includes ratings, such as seriousness of data exposure or confidence
levels, you may wish to color code cells and include a color key.
Embedded Links – Embedding the links in the listed identifier is an option but is often not ideal
because you lose that link if you print out a hard copy of the report.
Combination – Footnotes can be included in tabled entries or the links to the source may be listed in
the table directly depending on formatting preferences. Including embedded links in your tables along
with footnotes or full URLs is an option that some choose. Just ensure with embedded links that you
are not directing your client to any questionable sites that could expose them to threats or an adversary.
Appendices – Your report appendix may include full captures, lists of sources, or both. Keep in mind
that even if you include sources in your appendix, you may want to include them in the profiles portion
of your report as well for convenience. If your client has to hunt through the appendix any time, they
wish to see an exact source, they may find the report cumbersome to digest and make use of.
File Attachments/Supplemental Documentation – Larger captures of raw pages, images, or videos
may be provided in a zip file or other archive. This should be in addition to proper sourcing in the
report, not in place of. Many clients will not be interested in digging through the raw data and we want
the archive of captures to be a bonus, but at the same time we do not want them to have to dig though
the raw data to find the source URLs.

Quality and Diversity of Sources
In addition to how we memorialize and present our sources, we need to also bear in mind the value of the
sources themselves. We often say in our line of work that information does not become intelligence until it has
context. Sourcing our findings adds context while also providing an avenue for further validation/verification.
The sources may also lend to the level of confidence we have in our findings. Just how likely a certain assumption
or belief is to be true. Whenever possible we should include multiple diverse sources for each data point in our

Documentation & Reporting 579

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

report. For example, if we find our target's address on a people search engine such as truepeoplesearch.com,
that alone would be a fairly low confidence finding as people search engines are notorious for inaccuracies and
false positives. However, if we locate and properly source the address from a county tax parcel database, that
will increase the confidence level and overall value of that particular finding.
Hunchly (hunch.ly)
Hunchly was mentioned in prior chapters and is one of the only paid OSINT tools I use daily. If you are a
Hunchly user, the report builder can be used to create your appendix even if you are not planning to use Hunchly
to prepare the entire report. The first step is to set aside the evidentiary copy of your recovered data. This is
accomplished by clicking on "Export" and then "Export Case". This will organize the raw data into an archive
which can then be transferred to optical or other storage media. We may want a visual representation of this
data included in the appendix of our report, which can be accomplished by using the report builder option to
export pertinent captures to a consolidated PDF. The primary advantage of using Hunchly to generate your
appendix is that it will add the capture date, hash, and URLs to each preserved page and image. This is beneficial
when using the appendix as a hard-copy visual reference for the full evidentiary case export.
Document Sanitization
Although I prefer to submit paper reports with an attached optical disc of supporting digital evidence, you may
be constrained to the documentation procedures defined by your organization. If your agency uses any of the
full-feature proprietary products such as Word or Acrobat, there is going to be metadata included in the digital
version of your report that could unnecessarily expose your account details. While we would never want to
remove metadata from evidentiary documents, removing hidden author data from your investigative report prior
to submission is a recognized best practice.
To accomplish this in Microsoft Office products select "File" > "Info" > "Check for Issues" > "Inspect
Document". This will open the inspector window with a list of possible metadata. Check all boxes and click
"Inspect". This will execute a scan and any concerns will display a red exclamation point. Typically, these will be
in the "Properties" or "Header, Footers, and Watermarks" sections. I often want to keep footnotes and do not
remove this section. However, next to "Properties" click "Remove all". This will delete most of the metadata
such as the username of the author. This is by no means a complete cleanse, but is an easy way to remove low
hanging fruit. To perform a similar metadata removal in Adobe Acrobat, click on "Tools" and under "Protect
& Standardize", click "Protect". A new set of options will show up just below the top toolbar. Click "Removed
Hidden Information" and a window will open listing the types of removable metadata. You should uncheck
boxes next to any items that you do not want removed. When you click "Remove", anything with a check mark
will be deleted permanently from your document.
It should be noted that removing metadata can potentially break formatting or corrupt the entire file; therefore,
it is wise to create a backup copy prior to metadata removal. You can also use third-party scripts and tools to
clean documents, such as the Metadata Anonymization Toolkit (https://github.com/jubalh/MAT) for Linux. I
find that these tools are more prone to breaking documents created in Microsoft and Adobe products. Thus,
for those types of documents, I use the built-in removal tools described above. Keep in mind an old, but still
very effective, method for removing metadata from non-evidentiary documents is using a scanner. Just print
your report and scan the paper report back to a digital format using a scanner. The new document will have
metadata based on the scanner/copy machine rather than your own accounts or workstation. If this scanner is
an enterprise grade copier, it likely saves this data temporarily to a hard-drive and you would never want to use
this technique with sensitive documents.
Case Archiving & Cleanup
Upon completing a report, I collect my analog and digital case work and archive it for future use. The length of
retention of these notes, virtual machines, screen captures, and reports are dependent on the policies of my

580 Chapter 46

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

organization or the expectations of the client for contracted work. When appropriate I keep handwritten notes
for six months and digital documentation for at least three years. Should the case be later adjudicated, I have the
documentation available. It is also not uncommon to have a current target resurface in a future investigation; in
which case those digital notes will give you a head start on that new case. A final warning for users of OneNote
or other digital notebooks. The search capabilities built into OneNote are very useful when querying subjects
for any previous work your team has completed. However, hoarding data long-term can leave you with an awful
mess if you do not have a system for archiving old cases. I have an archive notebook for each year and within it
sections broken down by month. Any completed cases get moved to the archive, and at the end of each month
I review any remaining sections to assess their status. Then, at the end of each year, I go through all my
notebooks to tidy up any loose ends and consider purging any archived notebooks that have gone untouched
for longer than three years. Another approach is to export older notebooks and save them to optical discs or
other long-term storage. In your own agency, please ensure that you implement an organization system that
works for your workflow and one that is also compliant with retention/audit policies.
Large-Scale Continuous Investigations
Many of my investigations span weeks or months. Most are extremely sensitive and must possess complete
isolation from any other investigations. This goes beyond a clean virtual machine. They demand management
of dedicated Facebook, Twitter, email, and other accounts, which can become difficult when providers detect
my behavior as suspicious. In these scenarios, I assign a dedicated mobile device and cellular data account to
each investigation. This may sound ridiculous and expensive, but we can provide this extreme layer of protection
at minimal cost. My process is as follows, and only applies to investigations which cannot afford to be
compromised by case-contamination or suspended accounts.
First, I need an unlocked mobile device. This will never be used outside of the investigation or for any personal
use. I usually buy refurbished Android devices at local cell phone repair shops for $20 each. These are generic,
low-powered, and overall undesired units which have very little value. You may also find similar new phones in
grocery stores, pawn shops, or online through eBay or Amazon. I then purchase Mint Mobile SIM cards from
either Amazon or mintmobile.com. These are $2.00 each, but include a $5.00 credit for service and a one-week
free trial. Three months of service is $15 per month ($45 total), and T-Mobile is the data provider. I purchase
the phones and service with prepaid gift cards or Privacy.com virtual cards.
I insert the SIM into the device; download the Mint Mobile application over Wi-Fi; register an account under
an alias name; and start my trial. Since this is prepaid service, there are no verifications or credit checks. I choose
a local telephone number issued by Mint Mobile which can be used for the countless verification text hurdles I
am likely to face over the course of the investigation. When Facebook demands a real cellular number, I give
this out freely. When Gmail blocks my account as suspicious, I can unlock it with a verification text. I no longer
dread the suspension notices typically received when relying on VOIP numbers, VPN connections, and burner
email accounts. This cellular number is my ticket out of most negative situations.
I can also place applications on the device when an emulator is not appropriate. As an example, Snapchat and
Tinder usually block Genymotion and other virtual Android environments. With this device, I can install the
native apps, launch a GPS spoofer, and conduct my investigation without roadblocks. My device appears "real"
and I bypass scrutiny from the providers.
At the end of the investigation, I remove the SIM and place it and the phone in a sealable plastic bag with holes
punched for use in a binder. These can be found in any office supply store. The phone and SIM are part of the
investigation. The service will expire on its own and I have a clean digital trail. If necessary, I can provide the
device and account details as part of discovery in court. I have no concerns if an expert witness wants to clone
the machine for their own analysis. If the number should become exposed in a data breach, it is not a problem.
It will never be used again. If you plan to replicate this technique, I advise preparing now. You do not want to
be shopping for a device and waiting for delivery of a SIM card while you should be investigating your target.

Documentation & Reporting 581

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CHAPTER FOURTY-SEVEN
POLICY, ETHICS, & DEVELOPMENT

There is much controversy over the use of social media and personal data for investigative purposes. Therefore,
it is critical that your organization has a clear and concise technical investigations policy in place. This should be
a one or two-page document and it must include at a minimum a training standard, an approval process, and an
appropriate use policy. Avoid using language tied to specific technologies or platforms, as those will change
rapidly over time. In-house council may request language pertaining to Facebook or another specific third-party
platform. They may recommend building policy around specific tools or technologies. It is our responsibility to
demonstrate how the rapid changes in technology will make such a policy ineffective and almost immediately
irrelevant. Moreover, limitations imposed by overly specific regulations will likely confine us to difficult options.
Responsible investigative policy should focus on the appropriate use of techniques and technologies. Review
and borrow heavily from the mission statement and boilerplate language that your organization already applies
to traditional investigative procedures. Any existing policy relating to training, equipment, enforcement,
supervision, or chain of custody will have language that will fold easily into the framework of your online
investigations policy. I believe that for most agencies an online investigations policy should be no longer than
two pages. The framework for an appropriately non-specific policy typically includes the following sections:
Definitions, Appropriate Use, Approval Process, Training, Retention/Audit, Approved Forms, Revision
History, and Appendix. We have a sample boiler plate policy included with our digital templates referenced in
the previous chapter and downloadable at https://inteltechniques.com/osintbook11/.
For smaller teams or organizations lacking an official policy structure, an alternative format could be a set of
standard operating procedures (SOPs). The content will be essentially the same, but less formal in structure.
Take the previous policy example, delete the definitions and headings, and paste the remaining content into your
agency's memorandum template. Then, have it approved by a commander or manager higher in rank than the
front-line supervisor. The important thing is to have some type of documented standard for these types of
investigations. Eventually a controversial incident or high-profile case will expose your team to scrutiny and a
well-structured policy will go a long way to demonstrating transparency and professionalism.
If your organization requires language around "interaction", such as "friending", make this as non-specific as
possible. Some agencies also restrict the use of covert social media accounts, which will extremely limit the
effectiveness of your OSINT work. You have to educate management and legal advisors on the importance of
covert accounts in building actionable intelligence. Decades of case law supports the use of "undercover"
operations for traditional investigations and online investigations should be treated no differently.
I am not an attorney and the best path is always to solicit advice from legal counsel that is familiar with the local,
state, and federal laws affecting your jurisdiction. Common sense goes a long way and I always ask myself if
there is any way a target could argue a reasonable expectation of privacy. Additionally, being good stewards of
privacy is important when building trust with our communities. We never want to portray any hint of
recklessness during intelligence gathering. Practice good documentation during the process in order to build
favorable case law and maintain as many of our tools as possible.
Child Sexual Abuse Material (CSAM) Policy
In the course of our investigative work, there are times where we might locate content that is, by its very nature,
illegal. If we are investigating crimes such as child exploitation, this might be intentional and we likely have a
procedure in place. Those outside law enforcement may unintentionally stumble into digital contraband and find
themselves unprepared to deal with the ramifications. Although there is a range of digital contraband which
could potentially fall into this category, the most critical issue to address in your process and policy is Child
Sexual Abuse Material (CSAM). Within the open source intelligence community, specifically the crowd-sourced

582 Chapter 47

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

programs investigating missing or exploited persons, we see an increase of investigators locating material with a
reporting requirement. I am not an attorney. I recommend investigators within the U.S. becoming familiar with
Title 18 Part 1 Chapter 110 Section of 2258A of the U.S. legal code. First, let's address what you should do if
you stumble onto content which you feel may be CSAM, or otherwise require reporting responsibility. The
following are recommendations for those who do not already have a policy.
1) Do not capture it: Creating copies of CSAM can result in further harm to the victims depicted in the images
and, unless you are operating under special legal authority (such as law enforcement), the mere possession of
exploitation images on your workstation could constitute a crime, regardless of your intent.
2) Notify a supervisor: Due diligence is essential in these incidents. One of your first actions should be
notifying a superior and starting a paper trail to show that the incident was all handled above board.
3) Report the incident to law enforcement: Reporting requirements will vary between jurisdictions, but ethical
responsibilities for reporting are universal. Reporting the incident to authorities further solidifies the paper trail
and demonstrates due diligence on behalf of your organization.
4) Report the incident to NCMEC: Report the content to the National Center for Missing & Exploited
Children (missingkids.org/gethelpnow/cybertipline). Memorialize this reporting in your notes and consider
saving a screenshot of your submission.
5) Report it to the involved platform: The timing and appropriateness of this will depend on the platform and
your investigation. If the platform itself is potentially involved in the criminal activity, we do not want to tip our
hand. Also, if you are working with law enforcement, ensure that they are ready to disclose the case prior to any
third party notifications.
6) Document the incident: Create a concise record to memorialize encountering the contraband material. If
you are uncertain what to document, consider including the date, time, investigator, supervisor, URLs, and
description of the contents. Again, do not include any exploitation images or videos in your documentation, just
descriptions.
7) Wellness: Even for seasoned investigators, exposure to CSAM or other materials depicting victimization can
be very disturbing. There can be lasting personal emotional impacts if not properly addressed. It is entirely
appropriate to speak with a professional counselor or other support personnel following an exposure to images,
video, and even secondhand accounts of inhumane acts.
The largest pitfalls in properly handling this material are in the reporting. Again, we do not create copies of the
photos or videos unless we are trained to do so. We want to document enough information to direct authorities
to intervene, and yet we want to be certain that we are not making things worse for the victim(s). I believe that
every full time OSINT team should have a procedure for handling CSAM and for those who wish to translate
this into policy, we have sample language included in our policy template within the book portal on our website
at https://inteltechniques.com/osintbook11.
Once you have a policy drafted it is wise to have it reviewed by your in-house council or other legal advisory
body. Remember to provide training for employees on both the policy and procedures. A baseline of awareness
will save you a fair amount of stress when an incident involving CSAM occurs during an investigation or
intelligence operation.
If you are a student or non-professional OSINT practitioner, consider starting a conversation with your
instructors and peers about the proper handling of illicit materials. If you join a crowd-sourced or charity event
related to crimes against children, please ask the organizers for direction and education regarding appropriate
procedures for responding to occurrences of CSAM or other digital contraband. As with most other aspects of
online investigations, the key is having a plan and showing that a reasonable level of due diligence was applied.

Policy, Ethics, & Development 583

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Ethics
Privacy is certainly the cornerstone of ethical considerations related to open source intelligence gathering, but I
will also be discussing issues of intent and deception. Privacy is a broad issue and will pertain to almost every
portion of our case. Deception becomes pertinent when we engage in active covert measures such as undercover
accounts or "friending" targets. We each value privacy in our own lives and we should always be as mindful as
possible in regard to the data we collect during our investigations. Early in an investigation, you should clarify
the scope of engagement. How deep are you going to dig and what is the appropriate balance of intrusion? Here
are two scenarios from the law enforcement world that represent opposing ends of the spectrum.
Scenario #1: I receive a report of online threats against a public official and am asked to make an assessment
and if necessary, identify the owner of the account. I locate the account and posts in question and immediately
see that although they are mean spirited, the comments do not articulate a true intended threat. A common
example of this is similar to, "I hope you get cancer". It is a terrible thing to say, but there is no threat implied.
At this point, I can report back to my boss that there is no threat. If necessary, I can show her a screenshot of
the post. I have accomplished the mission and there is no justification to dig into the details of that person's life.
Scenario #2: We receive a tip from an internet service provider that a specific IP address is pushing traffic
containing a large amount of child pornography. I investigate the IP address and find that it is a listed Tor exit
node. That means the person operating the router at the associated residence or business is allowing people on
Tor to funnel their internet traffic through their device. Now I know there is a fair chance that the person at
that residence is not directly involved in the child pornography and may be unaware of its presence. I do not
stop my investigation. I dig up every piece of public data that I can on the people controlling that router.
My decision to press forward on the second scenario is based on the seriousness of the crime. For a situation
like crimes against children, you need to exhaust all reasonable means up until there is a certainty that the persons
of interest bear no public threat. I am still obeying all laws, but it is far more reasonable for me to sort through
the entirety of someone's public data if failing to do so might cause extraordinary harm to someone. The
seriousness of the crime being investigated justifies a far broader scope of investigation and level of intrusion.
While some data on the internet is clearly public, there is questionable data that is publicly accessible and legally
obtained, despite the owner intending it to be private. An example of this might be an Elasticsearch database
that was improperly configured. If we can access it via a browser and providing no credentials, we should be in
good legal standing. However, we are taking advantage of a mistake on behalf of the owner rather than
something being intentionally shared. My feeling on these types of data sets is that our intentions make all the
difference in deciding if it is appropriate to use them.
In the workflow section, we talked about identifying your mission goals at the beginning of any OSINT
engagement. Establish the reason why you are collecting intelligence on this target. This not only helps you to
get organized in your approach, but also raises the question of intent. It might be that I am following orders or
fielding a request from a colleague. The target might be related to a person of interest on a larger investigation.
They might even be a future employee going through a background investigation. All of these are typical and
reasonable business purposes for exercising our intelligence gathering skills. Whether doing work for the public
or private sectors, receiving your assignment in writing is a wise move in establishing a record of the initial
request and its justification.
Deception is any behavior that misleads another person to believe something that is not true. This seems wrong
when taken at face value, but there are occasions when deception is ethical and warranted. Take for example
using social engineering to get your home address removed from a site run by a data-mining company. You are
doing no harm to others, but you are most certainly using deception to accomplish your goal. The two most
common forms of deception in open source intelligence are the use of covert accounts and the practice of
infiltration or "friending" target individuals or groups. Let's look at each of these and their ethical considerations.

584 Chapter 47

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Covert Accounts: The use of covert accounts violates the "terms of service" of most social media platforms
and online services. However, covert accounts are critical to successful queries into social media platforms, and
not authenticating with these services would hamper the effectiveness of our work. If we have articulated the
reasonable justification for the use of these accounts and stayed within the confines of our investigation, this
deception will not be invasive to the other users. We are one of many anonymous accounts.
Infiltration: Infiltration, such as "friending" individuals or joining social media groups, is far more invasive than
merely using covert accounts to run queries. When you join a group, you are, to a small degree, changing the
dynamics of that group. Infiltration has its place in an ethically conducted OSINT investigation. Joining a
criminal forum to gain the confidence of, and to deanonymize, child predators is a case where the greater good
significantly outweighs the level of intrusion. Regardless of the mission, I make certain that I am able to articulate
my justification before interacting with targets online.
Finally, I believe that we have an ethical responsibility to engage in ongoing training in both OSINT and privacy.
Lack of familiarity with both technique and legal requirements leads to mistakes. Sloppy casework does a
disservice to us all. We owe it to the people we serve our best efforts and discretion in making sure that we
uncover the truth and bring it to light. A big piece of protecting our tradecraft is showing that we wield our
tools and talents with restraint and thoughtfulness.
Professional Development
One of the most common inquiries I receive is regarding the establishment of a career in open source
intelligence. This often comes from individuals in the private sector who are new to online investigations and
those in the public sector looking to move into OSINT as a specialization. Although some concepts are
universal, let's look at each of these scenarios. I will share some considerations for your new career.
Formal Education
If you look at practitioners in the open source intelligence field, you will find a wide variety of educational
backgrounds. While there are universities that offer degrees and programs specific to analysis, intelligence, or
investigations, I do not think you need to necessarily have that specific educational background. Many successful
colleagues have degrees completely unrelated to this line of work, and many more have received their education
from the military or other organizations which provide internal training. Some employers will require a degree
or a certain number of years of secondary education, but these prerequisites tend to be arbitrary. Many will
accept work experience in place of educational requirements.
Some of the most important skills in this line of work can be non-specific to our field. The ability to organize
information and communicate well, both verbally and in written form, are indispensable. There are very few
assignments or contracts which do not involve generating some type of written report. You can be the best
researcher and investigator in the world. However, being unable to package and present your findings in an
understandable and professional fashion will prevent you from successful employment.
Experience
Experience is arguably the most valuable resume item and yet it is probably the most difficult qualification to
gain. Many new analysts and investigators run into the chicken-and-the-egg issue. Most employers are only
looking to hire experienced professionals, but it is difficult to gain experience until you are employed. I have
seen colleagues and students successfully build experience in the following ways.
•

Military Service: Many colleagues received their initial intelligence training and experience in the
military. Military service may also provide opportunities for language studies and exposure to other
cultures, both of which are very valuable in our field.

Policy, Ethics, & Development 585

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

•

•

•

•

Law Enforcement/Gov: Many LE and government agencies have units or entire branches which
provide intelligence operations, investigations, or other OSINT products on a daily basis. The downside
to this approach is that you may need to provide many years of service prior to being eligible for
placement into one of these specialized teams.
Private Sector: Although the intelligence units in larger firms are looking for specific experience and
educational backgrounds, there are other departments, such as loss prevention, which can be a foot in
the door. The requirements tend to be lower but still include opportunities to use investigative skillsets.
Create a Program: If you already work at an organization which does not have an OSINT function
but could benefit from one, you might consider writing a proposal for adding that capability. Put
together a demonstration for management and make sure to include success stories using OSINT.
Volunteer: Find a person, team, or organization that does this type of work and volunteer to assist
them whenever possible. If you can pass a background check, and you are able to work for free, unpaid
internships are fantastic opportunities which can lead to full-time employment.

Early in your career, expect to do a lot of work that is outside of your area of interest. If you expect to be paid
well to do interesting tasks, but you have little work experience, you are probably going to be disappointed. I
have worked many assignments and roles which had very little to do with the intelligence field but were
invaluable experiences. Be gracious, patient, eager to learn, and those disinteresting entry-level positions and
internships will turn into something resembling a gratifying career.
OSINT Specific Training
Learning and honing any skill takes time. The length of time depends on your level of focus and interest, but
this can be greatly influenced by the quality of learning materials. I believe that someone who is motivated can
learn just about anything on a near-zero budget if they are willing to devote time, attention, and dedication.
Materials such as paid courses, and even this book, simply do the research for you and accelerate the learning
process. Therefore, a good learning strategy takes advantage of the resources you have available.
For those with a tight budget, you should expect to do a lot of research and self-learning. However, there are
many benefits to this. Autodidactic learning is the process of figuring out something or solving a problem on
your own. Conducting your own problem solving can make you a stronger investigator. Performing
investigations and gathering intelligence are often exercises in problem solving. When we are given all the
answers, we do not strengthen those important areas of our brains. The beauty of open source intelligence is
that it builds upon itself. We are learning to get better at conducting online research, which is a skillset that we
can use to locate new techniques for improving our online research. This book, a browser, and determination
can get you quite far towards building your own solid skillset.
Where do live courses, bootcamps, and other premium training programs come in? If you or your employer
have a healthy budget for training, and you have less time to spend doing your own research, premium training
may be worth the investment. For most people, live, hands-on training is the fastest way to learn something new
or to improve existing skills. Live courses tend to be quite expensive. The area between live training and selfstudy is where online video training resides. It affords the opportunity to watch concepts and tactics
demonstrated, but often lacks the hands-on labs common to live sessions. You can do a lot with a book and
determination. Having a dedicated instructor and more materials just gets you there quicker.
IntelTechniques provides a variety of training tools, including this book which is affordable for almost anyone.
For those who want to accelerate their learning curve, there is online video training at IntelTechniques.net. If
you are looking for hands on instruction, we also offer live training sessions. Regardless of your budget and
goals, make sure to do your research before settling on a training program. There are dozens of OSINT "experts"
claiming to have the best courses and techniques. Use the research techniques in this book to get a peek at
previously released content or to find communities where people are discussing the courses and instructors.
Identify your goals, do your research, and execute the work to get where you want to be.
586 Chapter 47

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

CONCLUSION
I hope the techniques presented here have sparked your interest in finding new avenues of research and
investigations. With patience and diligent effort, this book will be a helpful reference guide to assist in
performing more accurate and efficient searches of open source intelligence.
Permanently documenting these techniques on paper may will provide outdated content. Technology changes
quickly and methods must adapt to keep up. Ten years from now, this book may be an amusing piece about
how we once managed our online data. To keep up to date with the changes in various OSINT strategies, please
subscribe to my blog at IntelTechniques.com; or monitor my Twitter (X) account at IntelTechniques. The
chances are good that as you read this, new content has been posted about the very topic you are researching.
Since the original publication of the printed edition, we have created an official digital PDF version which is an
exact replica of this eleventh edition. It is designed for those who prefer a digital experience and want the ability
to easily copy text or print a specific page. We respect that a digital version is much easier to access at all times
than a 590-page book, and the full-color screen captures appear nicer than those in the monochrome prints.
More details can be found at https://inteltechniques.com/book1.html.
I am often asked my opinion about the future of OSINT. In short, YOU are the future, not artificial intelligence
or online services. Occasionally, I am asked to advise intelligence collection companies during the creation of a
new "all-in-one" OSINT solution. I decline these requests because the easy solutions are usually short-lived.
Constant changes in technology, and automated data collection restrictions, make these commercial products
less powerful over time. I do not believe these can ever replace your analytical brain. The truly valuable and
powerful OSINT techniques are going to require manual work from an individual investigator. Your OSINT
analysis skills cannot be replaced by a machine. Please go do good things with these methods, and never allow
a program to become more beneficial than you.
With this book, I am passing the torch. YOU are now the search tool. As you find new resources and modify
your files, let the community know over Twitter or other networks. When you configure a new Linux application
in your custom virtual machine, tell us how you did it. When an online OSINT service disappears, I am eager
to hear how you resolve the issue. I am truly excited to see how we all adapt to the impending OSINT changes
sure to come.
Finally, remember that each of these investigation techniques could be used against you. When you find your
own information exposed, take action to protect yourself. Personal defense against OSINT is as important as
offense. If you would like to stay updated on these topics, please consider my other series, Extreme Privacy.
Thank you for reading. ~MB & JE

A special THANK YOU to our editors. You make us appear smarter than we are. This book would be a mess without your input and
guidance. We owe you all more credit than we can possibly give within this closing thought.

Conclusion 587

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Additional Books by Michael Bazzell

Extreme Privacy, 5th Edition (2024): 30 Sections | 228 Chronological Tasks | 340,000 Words | 590 Pages |
8.5" x 11" | $40 - This rewritten privacy manual is PROACTIVE. It is about starting over. It is the complete
guide that I would give to any new client in an extreme situation. It leaves nothing out and provides explicit
details of every step I take to make someone completely disappear, including legal documents and a
chronological order of events. The information shared in this book is based on real experiences with my actual
clients, and is unlike any content released in my other publications.

This Book Was Self-Published (2024): 11 chapters | 79,000 words | 236 pages | 8.5" x 11" | $20 - This book
includes all of the details the author wishes he would have known before starting his self-publishing journey
throughout 30 books. It removes the mysteries surrounding hardware configuration, software requirements,
document formatting, book content, print publishing, E-book publishing, audiobook publishing, podcast
publishing, book piracy, marketing, promotion, affiliate programs, income monitoring, tax reporting, and every
other consideration important for your own publication process.

588 Conclusion

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Index

4chan, 279
Addresses, 319
Aircraft Information, 430
Amazon Web Services, 347
Amazon, 290
Android, 163
Studio, 164
Virtualization, 163
Archives, 198
Barcodes, 366
Bing, 195
Advanced Search, 203
Cache, 199
Images, 196, 355
Maps, 331
Operators, 195
Translator, 201
Videos, 378
Bitcoin, 433
Blackbird, 97
Breach Credentials, 496
Breach Data Scripts, 539
Broadcast Streams, 384
Business Records, 424
Campaign Contributions, 431
Collection & Capture, 564
Contact Exploitation, 269, 327
Corporate Records, 426
Court Records, 424
Craigslist, 287, 326
Criminal Information, 432
Data Breaches, 437, 495
Hardware, 440
Search, 514
Software, 445
Terminal, 459
Data Cleansing, 525
Data Leaks, 437, 471
Dating Websites, 280
Deconfliction, 562
Dehashed, 295
Discord, 283
Documentation, 572
Documents, 345
Metadata, 350
Search, 345
Domain Names, 396
Analytics, 405
Data Breaches, 413
Historical Archives, 400
Historical Captures, 402

Historical Registration, 398
Hosting, 396
Registration, 396
Subdomains, 407
Whois, 396
DuckDuckGo, 205
eBay, 289
Email Addresses, 292
Assumptions, 293, 305
Breaches, 296
Compromised Accounts, 294
Domain Connections, 301
Imitation, 301
Providers, 302
Verification, 292
Emailrep, 292
Ethics, 584
Exif Tool, 351
Facebook, 212
Email Search, 227
Encoding, 217
Friends, 226
IDs, 222
Phone Search, 225
Posts, 219
Profiles, 216
Search, 212
ffmpeg, 86
Firefox, 64
Firefox Profile, 81
Flickr, 362
Flowcharts, 571
FOCA, 351
FOIA Search, 426
Forums, 285
FTP Search, 207
Gab, 270
Genymotion, 171
Gettr, 270
GHunt, 101
Gift Registries, 317
Google, 186
Advanced Search, 203
Alerts, 195
Cache, 199
Dates, 191
Documents, 346
Images, 196, 355
Input Tools, 201
Maps, 329
Networks, 266
News, 202
Operators, 186

Patents, 204
Programmable Engines, 192
Scholar, 204
Search Tools, 191
Translator, 201
Videos, 378
Government Records, 424
Gravatar, 294, 304
H8Mail, 515
Hacker News, 279
Hashes, 503
HaveIBeenPwned, 294
Holehe, 100
Images, 355
Forensics, 367
Manipulation, 367
Reverse Image Search, 355
Imgur, 277
Instagram, 106, 243
Channels, 249
Comments, 248
Followers, 247
Hashtags, 257
Images, 244
Metadata, 245
Search, 243, 250
International Networks, 269
Internet Archive, 131, 381
IP Addresses, 416
DNS, 417
Location, 416
Logging, 422
Search, 416
Threat Data, 421
Tor Search, 418
Torrent Search, 418
JQ, 488
JSON Files, 487
Keyword Tool, 204
Link Analysis, 575
LinkedIn, 259
Companies, 263
Posts, 261
Profiles, 260
Search, 260
Linux, 27
Antivirus, 27
Encrypted Drives, 28
VirtualBox, 31
VM Software, 31
VMWare, 36
VPN Configuration, 29
macOS, 11

589

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

Antivirus, 17
Encrypted Drives, 16
Host Optimization, 11
UTM, 22
VM Software, 22
VPN Configuration, 19
Maigret, 98
Maps, 329
Crowd-Sourced, 334
Historic Imagery, 333
Manipulation, 344
Satellite Imagery, 332
Shadows, 343
Marine Information, 430
Mastodon, 270
Meetup, 280
Metadata, 117, 364
Name Search, 309
Newspaper Archive, 202
Newspaper Comments, 287
Nextdoor, 279
Note Taking, 563, 572
OfferUp, 290
OSINT Methodology, 560
PACER, 425
Page Modifications, 403
Parler, 270
Paste Search, 349
People Search, 309
Pinterest, 291
Policies, 582
Preparation, 8
Prostitution, 286
Proton Mail, 300
PullPush, 274
Qwant, 206
Radio Frequencies, 389
Remote Access, 391
Scanners, 394
Streams, 389
Ransomware, 534
Rebate Tracking, 315
RECAP, 425
Recon-ng, 122
Reddit, 273
Deleted Content, 274
Images, 277
Search, 273
Subreddits, 278
Views, 274
Rental Vehicle, 353
Resumes, 316
Robots.txt, 408

Search Engines, 186
Search Tools, 175
Searx, 205
SEO Tools, 410
Sherlock, 96
Shodan, 419
Shortened Urls, 414
Snapchat, 266
Source Code, 209, 406
Spiderfoot, 121
Spycloud, 295
SQL Files, 508
SSN Records, 427
Start Page, 205
Stealer Logs, 518
Streamlink, 94
Tab Management, 566
Telegram, 268, 523
Telephone Numbers, 320
Caller ID Database, 321
Carrier Identification, 320
Historical Search, 325
Reward Card Search, 327
Search Engines, 324
Search Websites, 323
Threat Data, 411
TikTok, 254
Tinder, 281
Profiles, 283
Tor Browser, 83
Tor Search Engines, 206
Training, 586
Translation, 201
Triage, 561
Tumblr, 267
Twilio, 322
Usernames, 303
Compromised Accounts, 304
Search, 303
Virtual Currencies, 433
Blockchain, 433
Transactions, 435
Validation, 434
Value, 435
Vehicle Data, 428
Vehicle Registration, 429
Videos, 372
Archives, 382
Closed Captions, 382
Deleted Archives, 379
Live Streams, 382
News Archives, 382
Reverse Search, 379

Streams, 384
Virtual Machines, 9
Automated Build, 162
Maintenance, 159
OSINT APIs, 148
OSINT Applications, 85
OSINT Scripts, 136
OSINT VM, 49
UTM, 50
VirtualBox, 54
VMWare, 56
Voter Records, 428
Wayback Machine, 199
Web Browsers, 64
Wigle, 418
Windows, 38
Antivirus, 38
Telemetry, 39
VirtualBox, 42
VM Software, 42
VPN Configurations, 39
X (Twitter), 228
Dates, 233
Deleted Posts, 235
Email Address, 230
Followers, 240
Location, 232
Media, 231
Profiles, 229
Search, 228
Search Operators, 230
Tweet Deck, 238
Yandex, 196
Cache, 199
Operators, 197
Videos, 378
YouTube, 372
Crawler, 377
Metadata, 374
Profiles, 375
Reverse Search, 375
Strategies, 372
Unlisted Videos, 378
YT-DLP, 89

590

~ Get Latest Exclusive Courses at https://hide01.ir ~

