Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices:
A Comprehensive Analysis
Carlton Shepherda,∗∗ , Konstantinos Markantonakisa,∗ , Nico van Heijningenb , Driss Aboulkassimic ,
Clément Gainec , Thibaut Heckmannd,e,f and David Naccached,f
a Information Security Group, Royal Holloway, University of London, Egham, Surrey, United Kingdom
b Netherlands Forensic Institute, The Netherlands
c Equipe Commune CEA Tech – Mines Saint-Etienne, CEA Tech, Centre CMP, Gardanne, France
d French National Gendarmerie Research Center (CREOGN), France
e Institut de Recherche Criminelle de la Gendarmerie Nationale, France
f École Normale Supérieure, Paris, France

ARTICLE INFO

ABSTRACT

Keywords:
Fault Injection Attacks
Side Channel Attacks
System-on-Chips (SoCs)
Mobile Device Security
Embedded Systems Security

Today’s mobile devices contain densely packaged system-on-chips (SoCs) with multi-core, highfrequency CPUs and complex pipelines. In parallel, sophisticated SoC-assisted security mechanisms
have become commonplace for protecting device data, such as trusted execution environments, fulldisk and file-based encryption. Both advancements have dramatically complicated the use of conventional physical attacks, requiring the development of specialised attacks. In this survey, we consolidate
recent developments in physical fault injections and side-channel attacks on modern mobile devices.
In total, we comprehensively survey over 50 fault injection and side-channel attack papers published
between 2009–2021. We evaluate the prevailing methods, compare existing attacks using a common
set of criteria, identify several challenges and shortcomings, and suggest future directions of research.

1. Introduction
Powerful personal mobile devices have become ubiquitous over the past decade, which is coupled with a substantial decline in the use of personal computers [152]. Estimates show that 3.8 billion people worldwide will be active
smartphone users in 2021 [151]. 84% of US citizens use a
smartphone regularly, rising to 96% in the 18–29 year old
category, while 52% also use a tablet device [121]. Mobile
devices are used widely for security- and privacy-sensitive
applications, including banking, instant messaging, navigation, social media, corporate email, and accessing cloudbased media. Consequently, device data is often of major
interest to malicious adversaries and forensic investigators.
In certain scenarios, these actors may resort to physical
attacks to circumvent existing software and hardware security mechanisms on mobile devices, such as trusted execution environments (TEEs), full-disk and file-based encryption, and secure boot procedures. In this work, we analyse
two well-known classes of physical attacks—fault injections
and side-channel attacks—and their application to mobile
devices. Such attacks are well-understood in the smart card
and secure element (SE) domain [104, 67, 128, 82]. Indeed,
they are usually employed during the evaluation of smart
cards and SEs under the Common Criteria framework [98].
Fault injection attacks (FIAs) perturb the device’s physical conditions beyond that which it was intended; for examPart of this work was presented to the European Commission during
the EU Horizon 2020 EXFILES project (No. 88315) [43].
∗ Corresponding author
∗∗ Principal corresponding author
carlton.shepherd@rhul.ac.uk (C. Shepherd);
k.markantonakis@rhul.ac.uk (K. Markantonakis)
ORCID (s): 0000-0002-7366-9034 (C. Shepherd)

ple, using intense electromagnetic (EM) pulses, high ambient temperatures, and under- and over-volting the device’s
supply voltage. These attacks can induce errors in internal electronic components, which can be utilised to recover
cryptographic keys and other secret data. In contrast, physical side-channel attacks (SCAs) exploit physical measurements produced by the device during execution. Particular side-effects, like EM emissions and power consumption,
may expose secret information if the side-effect is dependent
on the data being executed.
Unfortunately, the complexity of today’s mobile devices
has frustrated the application of traditional FIAs and SCAs
used historically against simpler platforms, such as microcontroller units (MCUs). Modern mobile system-on-chips
(SoCs) employ high-frequency (1GHz+), multi-core CPUs
with multi-stage pipelines and instruction-level parallelism;
contain mixed analog and digital components; and are used
to host complex operating systems (OSs) with various concurrent and virtualised processes. These aspects complicate
the acquisition of side-channel measurements and the precise and accurate injection of faults. Ultimately, this has
changed the types of physical attacks that have found success in the current literature.
In this work, we consolidate and extensively evaluate the
state of the art in physical fault injection and side-channel
attacks on mobile devices. In total, over 50 research papers
are examined from 2009 to 2021, which are compared using the attack goals, prerequisites, target platforms, and reported results. From this work, we identify some significant
challenges and limitations, and highlight potential future research directions. To the best of our knowledge, we present
the first comprehensive survey in the area with respect to
modern mobile devices.

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache

Page 1 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis
Table 1
Summary of related surveys.
Work

Year

Summary

Barenghi et al. [25]
Shepherd et al. [144]
Fournaris et al. [46]
Spreitzer et al. [148]
Mirzargar & Stojilović [110]
Sayakkara et al. [135]
Han et al. [68]

2012
2016
2017
2017
2019
2019
2019

Fault injection attacks on cryptographic systems.
Security properties of secure execution platforms and TEEs for embedded systems.
Micro-architectural attacks for embedded systems.
Network, micro-architectural, software, and some hardware SCAs on mobile devices.
Physical SCAs and covert channels for FPGAs and cryptographic ASICs.
Electromagnetic side-channel analysis of embedded systems.
Program analysis using side-channel analysis for embedded systems.

1.2. Related Surveys

Physical Attacks
Fault Injection
Attacks (FIAs)
Invasive
Laser
Beam

Non-Invasive

Heavy-Ion
Micro-Beam

Focussed
Ion Beam

Side-Channel
Attacks (SCAs)

Clock
Glitches

Voltage
Glitches

Electromagnetic
Fault Injections
(EMFIs)

Heating
Attacks

Power
Analysis

Temperature
Analysis

Acoustic
Analysis

Electromagnetic
Analysis (EMA)

Figure 1: Taxonomic scope of this survey.

1.1. Scope
This study examines physical fault injection and sidechannel attacks on SoC-based mobile devices that physically
observe (SCAs) or perturb (FIAs) their execution, whether
wholly or in part. In this context, mobile SoCs are defined
as the primary integrated circuit (IC) for supporting a multitasking OS, e.g. Android, on a commercially available mobile platform. The SoC incorporates a single- or multi-core
CPU with memory management unit (MMU) support; multiple memory modules, e.g. dynamic and non-volatile RAM,
and flash storage; external peripheral interfaces, e.g. interintegrated circuit (I2C); and, optionally, a dedicated GPU.
The taxonomic scope of this paper is shown in Figure 1.
Wholly software attacks are outside the scope of this survey,
which include but are not limited to: micro-architectural attacks exploitable only in software, such as cache timings and
side effects of speculative execution, and software timing attacks on security protocols and cryptosystems. Along with
alternative hardware attack vectors, such as NAND mirroring [146] and hardware trojans [154], these topics constitute
significant distinct research areas that justify separate analyses.
While the focus of our work is physical FIAs and SCAs
on mobile SoCs, references from the embedded systems literature are examined as supporting material where appropriate. This is particularly the case where a fault injection
or side-channel attack has recently compromised a related
evaluation target, like an Internet of Things (IoT) SoC, which
may inspire future attacks on mobile devices.

In prior work, Barenghi et al. [25] (2012) presented a review of FIAs against symmetric and asymmetric cryptosystems on general computing systems. We note that this work
precedes the proliferation of modern mobile SoCs and their
associated security mechanisms, e.g. TEEs and full-disk encryption. In 2016, Shepherd et al. [144] reviewed secure and
trusted execution environments for IoT systems, comparing
their security features and briefly discussing their susceptibility to physical attacks. No FIAs or SCAs were analysed in
detail, however. Spreitzer et al. [148] (2017) surveyed general SCAs on mobile devices, covering physical attacks at
a high level, alongside network traffic analysis, cache timings, and other software channels outside the scope of this
work. Fournaris et al. [46] (2017) focussed on X86 and
ARM Rowhammer attacks, with a brief discussion of electromagnetic analysis (EMA). In 2019, Mirzargar and Stojilović [110] surveyed SCAs on field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) and application-specific ICs (ASICs). The
use of power, electromagnetic, and thermal side-channels
were examined for creating covert channels. Sayakkara et
al. [135] (2019) presented a tutorial on using EMA for digital
forensics. Methods are described for EMA measurement acquisition, their analysis for hardware and software profiling,
and the related standards; it is unrelated to attacks on mobile security mechanisms. Han et al. [68] (2019) presented a
tutorial of program analysis using EMA and power analysis.
The work provided a description of methods for signal acquisition and their statistical analysis using correlation analysis
and machine learning.
These works are summarised in Table 1. Additionally,
other studies have surveyed general mobile attacks [168],
cryptographic analysis methods [31], and attacks on simpler
security devices, e.g. smart cards [104]. However, no survey paper has extensively covered state-of-the-art physical
fault injection and side-channel attacks on modern mobile
devices. This paper addresses that gap.

1.3. Structure
We begin in §2 with background information on mobile SoCs, their high-level system features, and their use in
common hardware-assisted security mechanisms. Following this, comprehensive surveys of physical fault injection
and side-channel attacks are presented in §3 and §4 respectively. The surveyed works are extensively compared in §5,

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache

Page 2 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis
REE
Other REE
Applications

REE Client
Applications

Trusted
Shared
Application
Memory

Shared
Memory

Trusted
Application

GP TEE Protocol
Specifications

2. Background
This section provides background information for understanding recent fault injection and side-channel attacks.
In summary, we provide an overview of mobile SoCs and
widely deployed hardware-assisted security mechanisms, including TEEs, secure boot, key management systems, and
full-disk and file-based encryption.

GP TEE

GP TEE Client API

Rich OS Components
Public Device
Drivers

REE
Communication
Agent

Public Peripherals

Platform Hardware

Isolation Boundary

where several shortcomings, challenges, and potential future
research directions arising from existing work are identified.
Finally, §6 concludes this paper.

GP TEE Internal Core API and
GP TEE Internal Specifications

Trusted OS Components
Trusted Core
TEE
Framework
Communication
Agent
Trusted Kernel

Messages

Trusted
Device
Drivers

Trusted Peripherals

Shared Trusted Peripherals

2.1. Mobile System-on-Chips (SoCs)
System-on-chips—ICs with the core components for establishing a working computing system—have become the
centrepiece of contemporary mobile hardware due to their
reduced energy efficiency and physical footprint. Silicon
vendors typically design SoCs through the configuration of
reusable semiconductor intellectual property (IP) blocks developed in-house or licensed from a third party, like ARM.
Vendors integrate varying numbers of such components according to their specifications, which are fabricated as interconnected subsystems onto a single IC using specialised
buses for data transfer and control. High-frequency multicore CPUs with multi-level cache hierarchies and MMUs
are at the foundation of today’s application processors, e.g.
ARM’s Cortex-A73 [18]. Supporting on-SoC components
include diverse memory units, e.g. dynamic RAM, flash storage and read-only memory; timers and real-time clocks; security extensions and cryptographic accelerators, e.g. ARM
TrustZone and CryptoCell [17]; integrated GPUs and audio digital signal processing (DSP) units; and input/output
(I/O) interfaces for communicating with sensor hubs, input
devices, and other off-SoC peripherals.
The exact capabilities of mobile SoCs varies between silicon vendors. At the time of publication, ARM-based SoC
designs are used in approximately 90% of mobile handsets,
tablets, and IoT devices [150]. The Qualcomm Snapdragon,
HiSilicon Kirin, Samsung Exynos, Apple A, and the MediaTek Helios series are some widely used ARM-based SoCs
used by mobile original equipment manufacturers (OEMs).

2.2. Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs)
A TEE is an isolated, parallel execution environment that
aims to protect sensitive code and data from privileged software attacks. TEEs have gained widespread use on mobile
devices for preserving user authentication algorithms, cryptographic keys, digital rights management systems, and payment processing applications. At present, ARM TrustZone
and the GlobalPlatform TEE—a suite of specifications governing the use of TEEs—are the main enablers on mobile
devices, arising from their compatibility with the ARM architecture [13, 41, 144]. Intel Software Guard Extensions
(SGX) and the AMD Platform Security Processor (PSP) are
two alternative TEE systems for Intel and AMD chipsets;
however, these are independent technologies on predominantly non-mobile platforms, e.g. servers and workstations.

Figure 2: GlobalPlatform TEE system architecture [54].

2.2.1. GlobalPlatform TEE Specifications
The GlobalPlatform TEE (GP TEE) is a suite of specifications for defining the architecture, management and security requirements of a TEE [54, 57, 58]. It divides execution
into two worlds: the rich execution environment (REE, or
the untrusted or non-secure world) and the TEE (trusted or
secure world), as shown in Figure 2. The REE includes the
mobile’s native OS, its firmware and its user applications,
whereas the TEE contains a separate trusted OS with a security kernel, device drivers for security-critical peripherals, and a set of lower-privileged trusted applications (TAs).
Each world must execute with hardware-enforced isolation
if they utilise the same underlying hardware platform. This
to impede privileged REE software adversaries from compromising the control flow, memory regions and peripheral
devices of the secure world.
For inter-world communication, REE applications may
access the TEE using a tightly controlled interface at the
platform’s highest privilege level or, alternatively, using a
shared memory view created by the TEE. The GlobalPlatform Client API [52] standardises the communication interfaces through which REE applications can invoke TEE
TA functions and transmit/receive data, including supported
data types and response codes. The Internal Core API [55]
specifies functions through which TAs can access services
provided by the trusted OS, such as sources of time, external peripherals, cryptographic functions, and secure storage
media. Additionally, the Secure Element [59], Sockets [60]
and Trusted User Interface [53] APIs have also been specified for enabling TAs to access hardware secure elements,
networking services, and user interface devices respectively.
For the full specifications, the reader is referred to the GlobalPlatform Technology Document Library [56].
The GP TEE Protection Profile (PP) characterises the security definitions and requirements for evaluating a target of
evaluation (TOE) under the Common Criteria (CC) framework. It addresses “threats to the TEE assets that arise during the end-usage phase and can be achieved by software
means...focuses on non destructive software attacks that can
be easily widespread...and constitute a privileged vector for

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache

Page 3 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis

getting undue access to TEE assets without damaging the
device itself” [58]. At a minimum, it stipulates that TEEs
should defend against two high-level adversary types:
• Basic remote attacker: “Performs the attack on a remotely controlled device or alternatively makes a downloadable tool that is very convenient to end-users.
The attacker retrieves details of the vulnerability identified in the identification phase and [...] makes a remote tool or malware and uses techniques such as phishing to have it downloaded and executed by a victim
[into the untrusted world].”
• Basic on-device attacker: “Has physical access to
the target device; it is the end-user or someone on his
behalf. The attacker is able to retrieve exploit code,
guidelines written on the internet on how to perform
the attack, and downloads and uses tools to jailbreak,
root, reflash the device in order to get privileged access to the REE allowing the execution of the exploit.
The attacker may be a layman or have some level of
expertise but the attacks do not require any specific
equipment.” [58].
The TEE OS and TAs are deemed trusted software components; security issues within either can compromise the
services that the TEE aims to provide. From a hardware perspective, the GP TEE should have access to a secure clock,
entropy source, and volatile and non-volatile memory. The
GP TEE must also be initialised from a root of trust (RoT) using a secure boot process to ensure authenticity. How this is
implemented in practice is both platform- and architecturespecific. We describe this process for ARM TrustZone in
§2.3, the main method by which GP TEEs are instantiated
on ARM-based mobile SoCs. Crucially, however, the TEE’s
initialisation process must be performed without trusting or
co-operating with the REE. In general, the GP TEE must
operate self-sufficiently without depending on any untrusted
components in the REE [54, 58].
GlobalPlatform-compliant TEEs must satisfy Common
Criteria Evaluation Assurance Level 2 (EAL2) as a minimum baseline. In general, TOEs that meet this level provide
‘low-to-moderate’ security assurances under the CC grading
framework and is satisfied through evidence of structured
testing [163]. This is lower than smart cards and secure elements, which are usually evaluated to CC EAL4+ thereby
providing ‘moderate-to-high’ security assurances. EAL4+
demands a higher degree of security testing rigour, requiring methodical design, testing and review in addition to the
requirements of lower EALs.
It is important to consider that smart cards and secure elements often consider physical attackers with access to specialised testing equipment, such as high-end oscilloscopes,
chemical workbenches, and electromagnetic pulse apparatus [162]. These threats are beyond the minimum protection scope of GlobalPlatform-compliant TEEs.1 This lack of
1 It is still possible that GlobalPlatform TEE implementations may contain countermeasures against advanced physical attacks beyond the minimum compliance requirements.

coverage means that physical fault injection and side-channel
attacks can offer a potential avenue for subverting GP TEE
implementations.

2.2.2. ARM TrustZone
ARM TrustZone is a set of extensions to the ARM architecture for creating a secure world of execution. It is the
main implementation for providing the hardware-enforced
separation required by GlobalPlatform-compliant TEEs on
ARM-based devices [13, 41, 144]. Similarly, TrustZone partitions the execution platform into ‘secure’ and ‘non-secure’
worlds. Each world hosts its own OS and applications at different processor exception levels, which communicate over
a secure monitor at the highest ARM exception level (EL3),
as shown in Figure 3. Secure monitor mode is entered into
using the ARM Secure Monitor Call (SMC) interface, which
handles the world context switch. A reference implementation of the secure monitor code and bootloading process is
provided by the Trusted Firmware project [95], which manufacturers may tailor to their own SoCs.
Non-Secure World
EL3

Secure Monitor

EL2

EL1

EL0

Secure World

Hypervisor

OS 1

App 1

App 2

ARM Trusted Firmware

OS 2

App 3

App 4

Secure OS 1

Secure OS 2

Secure Secure Secure Secure
App 1
App 2
App 3
App 4

Figure 3: The ARM v8.4-A exception model [15].

A control signal, the ‘non-secure’ (NS) bit, is used by
TrustZone-enabled SoCs to store the current world of execution. The NS-bit is propagated through all areas of the
SoC where adversaries may attempt to access secure world
material, including page tables, cache lines, and bus transactions to memory firewalls and peripheral controllers. Unauthorised access attempts to secure world-only resources are
prevented by on-SoC controllers that are configured at boottime. As specific examples, the TrustZone Peripheral Controller (TZPC) prevents non-secure accesses to secure worldonly peripheral interfaces, and the TrustZone Address Space
Controller (TZASC) can be used to prevent non-secure accesses to secure world memory addresses.
At its core, TrustZone is a SoC security architecture; it
does not provide the software components for realising a
complete TEE containing a hardened security kernel, support for multiple TAs, and so on. To bridge this gap, numerous TrustZone-based TEE implementations have been
developed commercially, e.g. Huawei’s iTrustee [76], Samsung’s TEEGRIS [133], Trustonic’s Kinibi [161], and the
Qualcomm TEE [127], many of which conform to the GlobalPlatform TEE specifications. Lastly, we note that TrustZone aims primarily to defend against privileged non-secure

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache

Page 4 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis

world software attacks. Hardware threats are outside of its
protection scope; if such attacks are considered reasonable,
ARM’s SecurCore smart card may be used with a TrustZoneenabled SoC to protect the relevant assets [14].

2.2.3. Apple Secure Enclave
The Secure Enclave is an independent subsystem on Apple SoCs (from the Apple A7 [9]) for protecting content even
when the application processor is compromised. Detailed
technical data is not publicly available besides high-level
features described in the Apple security documentation [9,
87, 11] and outcomes from independent reverse engineering
efforts [102, 40]. From the available information, the Secure Enclave comprises a hardware co-processor—the Secure Enclave Processor (SEP)—a true random number generator (TRNG); a unique root key for implmenting devicespecific key binding; an I2C controller for secure storage
to external non-volatile memory (NVRAM); and a public
key accelerator (PKA). The Secure Enclave manages cryptographic operations for Apple iOS, including file-based encryption, and user data for the Touch ID and Face ID biometric systems [9].
The SEP is a physically separated processor that runs
a security kernel—sepOS, an Apple fork of the L4 microkernel—which is initialised during the secure boot process.
This separation offers inherent resistance to certain classes
of side-channel analysis from software adversaries on the application processor, e.g. cache timing attacks. The confidentiality of run-time Secure Enclave data is protected using a
Memory Protection Engine, which encrypts memory blocks
using AES in XEX (xor-encrypt-xor) mode and computes
cipher-based message authentication code (CMAC) tags that
are both stored in external untrusted DRAM.
The PKA is used to secure public-key cryptographic operations, namely key generation (i.e. from the root SEP key),
encryption and decryption, and digital signature services using RSA and elliptic curve cryptography (ECC). Undisclosed
countermeasures are implemented to resist power analysis
attacks, including differential power analysis (DPA). Besides
this, a separate AES memory encryption engine, located in
the DMA path between the application processor and NAND
flash memory, is used for file-based encryption—discussed
in §2.5—the keys for which are managed by the Secure Enclave. From the Apple A9 SoC series, undisclosed countermeasures are also utilised by this module to thwart power
analysis attacks. Related to this, the Secure Enclave contains
monitoring circuits to enforce the intended operating voltage
and clock frequency against fault injection attacks [10].
2.2.4. Google Titan M
In 2017, Google announced the Titan M for the Pixel
2 smartphone, a mobile hardware security module that executes independently of the application SoC [63]. Similar to
the Apple Secure Enclave, it is also largely undocumented.
From what is known, the Titan contains flash memory, CPU,
RAM and a TRNG in a single package designed to resist
physical side-channel analysis, including power and elec-

Figure 4: Generic ARM boot procedure [16, 169].

tromagnetic analysis, and voltage-, clock- and temperaturebased fault attacks. The Titan M supports general key management and cryptographic operations using the StrongBox
KeyStore APIs (§2.4) and is used for flash memory encryption/decryption. In addition, the Titan stores the last known
safe Android version during legitimate device updates. This
is referenced by the Pixel’s secure boot process for preventing rollback attacks to vulnerable OS versions.

2.3. Secure Boot
Adversaries with the ability to load unauthorised bootloaders and secure/non-secure world binaries may trivially
disable critical security mechanisms. Consequently, secure
boot procedures have been deployed for cryptographically
enforcing the use of authorised software components at boottime. Mobile devices contain multiple bootloader stages of
increasing complexity and decreasing security privilege; a
generic boot procedure is shown in Figure 4. At the beginning, code within on-SoC ROM (BL1) is used to perform basic SoC setup operations, e.g. power-on self-test (POST) and
clock initialisation, after receiving a reset signal. The trusted
world binary and secure monitor firmware (BL2) are subsequently authenticated and loaded thereafter. Importantly,
this is done before loading the non-secure world image containing the native OS and its applications (BL3).
For authenticating each component, a common method
involves verifying a sequence of digital signatures from the
initialisation ROM, which is inherently trusted. The ROM
contains a public key certificate—a hash of which may reside in one-time programmable (OTP) eFuses—for verifying the signature of the second bootloader. Upon successful
verification, this bootloader is loaded, which itself contains
a public key for verifying and loading the following bootloader. The process is repeated until the non-secure world
image is eventually loaded and executed (Figure 5).
Boot images are signed under a private OEM signing
key; if any unauthorised components are introduced, the sig-

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache

Page 5 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis
Trusted Root
Component
Public Key

Intermediate
Bootloader 1

Intermediate
Bootloader n

Signature

Signature

Authenticate
then Load

Public Key

Authenticate
then Load

Final Stage
Bootloader

Public Key

Signature

Authenticate
then Load

Figure 5: High-level authenticated secure boot process.

nature verification check will fail and the boot sequence terminated. Some devices also contain OTP eFuses that are
permanently set (‘blown’) after failed checks, thus signalling
that device assets may have been compromised [134]. Details are scarce about the exact cryptographic algorithms used
by OEMs, although the ARM Trusted Board Boot requirements specify SHA-256 and RSA-2048 or 256-bit ECDSA
for bootloader signatures [16].

2.4. Secure Storage and Key Management
TEEs may utilise one of two methods for secure persistent data storage: 1), encrypting data using keys accessible
only to the TEE; and, 2), directly storing data to an external
device over a trusted path. To support the first case, TEE
implementations usually possess their own key hierarchies
rooted in a device-specific hardware unique key (HUK) from
which descendent keys are generated using a key derivation
function (KDF). These keys may then be used by TAs and
the TEE OS to encrypt arbitrary binary data, including other
cryptographic keys, whether generated within the TEE or
sent from the REE. This provides a notion of device ‘binding’ where data cannot be transferred and decrypted on another device with its own HUK. GP TEEs support a variety
of standard cryptographic algorithms, such as 128/192/256bit AES in various modes of operation, e.g. CBC, XTS, and
CTR; up to 2048-bit RSA; 160- to 521-bit ECC (ECDSA
and ECDH); and 128- or 196-bit triple DES. The Internal
Core API [55] specifies a full list of supported algorithms
and modes of operation.
At present, regular application developers are not given
direct access to TEEs. OEMs have, however, developed key
management systems for providing abstracted access to TEEbased cryptography services. On Android devices, the Keymaster service exposes API functions for generating, using
and containerising cryptographic keys in the TEE from user
applications [7]. Key material is generated within the TEE
and is never exposed to the calling application. Developers are purposefully not given access to these keys; instead,
they indirectly use this material by calling abstracted encryption, decryption, and signature verification and signing functions available through the Android framework. Where supported, the StrongBox Keymaster serves as a TEE substitute
for addressing physical attacks, which implements the Keymaster in a mobile hardware security module, e.g. the Titan
M [65] (§2.2.4).
On Apple devices, the SEP (§2.2.3) is manufactured with
a hardware-based unique ID (UID) from which cryptographic
keys are derived for device binding. These keys are never ex-

posed to the main application processor. The SEP handles
key management for secure boot signature verification, securely storing biometric data at rest, and general OS cryptographic operations. For the latter, additional keys are derived
from a user-inputted password and a hardware secret, which
are used for per-file and volume encryption [9].

2.5. Full-Disk and File-Based Encryption
Full-disk encryption (FDE) encrypts all user data on a
device at a block level using symmetric key encryption, usually AES. Throughout standard device usage, data is continuously encrypted before it is written to a flash storage
device that exposes itself as blocked memory; during read
operations, the data is decrypted before returning it to the
parent process. Android’s FDE implementation is based on
the dm-crypt Linux kernel module, which encrypts data using a device disk encryption key (DEK) with 128-bit AES
in CBC mode. The DEK is encrypted by a key encryption
key (KEK) derived from the user’s PIN or password, both
of which are managed within the TEE. Only if the user successfully passes an authentication challenge are the keys released; failing this, neither the KEK nor the DEK are unlocked, thereby preventing data decryption [6].
File-based encryption (FBE) encrypts data at a filesystem level, unlike FDE that operates at a block or volume
level. FBE is generally considered to be FDE’s successor
on mobile devices: it permits essential data to still be used
for critical device functions—accessibility services, emergency calls, and alarm managers—while keeping sensitive
data encrypted when the device is locked [8]. Commonly,
FBE generates unique AES file encryption keys (FEKs) for
dynamically encrypting and decrypting user files, e.g. documents, as they are written to and read from a persistent storage device. FBE is used by Secure Enclave-enabled Apple
devices, which manages keys within the Apple SEP. In contrast, Android devices (version 7.0+) support directory-level
encryption using keys managed in the Keymaster TEE TA or
a mobile hardware security module.

3. Fault Injection Attacks
Fault injection attacks (FIAs) are active attacks that physically perturb the device beyond its intended operating conditions. This can induce abnormal system behaviour for uncovering secret data under execution or accessing restricted
code regions and functionality. FIAs have a long-standing
history and have been analysed in great depth in the wider
literature, particularly for smart cards and other embedded
MCUs [25, 5, 30, 174, 21, 119, 72].
FIAs are categorised as transient vs. permanent, and invasive vs. non-invasive. Transient faults are temporary errors that are recoverable following a system reset or cessation of the fault source. Their aim is to (temporarily) disrupt the program control flow or corrupt the results of an
instruction to gain unauthorised access to sensitive code and
data. While having the same end goal, permanent faults indefinitely alter the state of target components, the effects of
which persist irrespective of device restarts and resets.

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache

Page 6 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis
Oscilloscope

Configures

Controller PC

Traces

Probe
Measurements

Commands
Triggers

Target

Fault Injection

Generator

Communicates

Figure 6: Generic FIA and SCA setup. For FIAs, the generator
injects the fault after receiving the trigger; for SCAs, the trigger
activates the measurement process.

A typical physical FI (and SCA) setup is shown in Figure 6. The investigator instruments the device under test
(DUT) to activate an external generator at run-time following a hardware- or software-based trigger. The generator
perturbs the DUT with a precisely timed and calibrated fault
using the desired method; for example, an EM burst over
a particular SoC die location or a momentarily high voltage at the DUT’s power supply.2 The investigator uses a
control computer to analyse the resulting outputs—register
values, memory address contents, encryption/decryption results, oscilloscope traces, etc.—in order to discover useful
faults, such as instruction corruption and decryption errors.

3.1. Invasive FIAs
Invasive FIAs involve significant alteration to the DUT,
whether during the attack’s preparation or execution. Relevant preparation techniques include depackaging the SoC
or IC and removing any protective layers (decapsulation) to
directly induce faults into its internal components. These
processes risk irreparable damage or destruction of the target under evaluation, potentially leading to permanent data
loss. At the execution stage, the application of high-energy
visible light and ultraviolet pulses, near-infrared lasers, and
focussed ion beams may be used to flip the transistor states
of memory cells and other components [147, 165, 124, 136,
159, 92, 167]. Such methods have been historically successful against simpler systems [82, 25, 165], but have found
limited utility against mobile SoCs from publicly available
information.

3.1.1. Ion-based FIAs
The costliest FIAs employ focussed ion beams (FIB)—
typically liquid metal ion sources, e.g. gallium ions—and
heavy-ion microbeams (HIMs) that operate with extreme precision (∼2.5nm). In the semiconductor industry, FIB workstations permit the manipulation of IC silicon substrates in
2 Instrumenting device triggers is a significant challenge in black-box

environments, rendering accurate and precisely calibrated fault injections
more difficult than white-box testing.

situ, potentially enabling hardware-level reworking (microsurgery) of security-critical components and the reading of
hardware-fused keys. In 2009, Torrance and James [159]
used FIBs to perform IC microsurgery for reading encryption keys from an application-specific IC (ASIC) implementation of the DES cipher. In comparison, HIMs ionise IC
semiconductor material with high-energy radiation to induce
single-event upsets (SEUs) in digital logic systems. This
was leveraged by Li et al. [92] (2015) to trigger exploitable
decryption faults in an RSA implementation on an SRAM
FPGA. The FPGA was irradiated using 1 GeV of carbon ions
that generated decryption bit errors at a rate of 8 times per
hour. The authors theorise that 1024-bit private key recovery
can be achieved after ∼128 hours, but experimental results
were not given. FIB and HIM attacks impose substantial
cost ($100,000+ USD) and require access to specialised expertise and testing equipment. No such attacks have been
publicly disclosed against mobile SoCs to date.

3.1.2. Laser FIAs
Laser FIAs target ICs with intense sources of visible, infrared or ultraviolet light with the aim of inducing SEUs. In
2017, Vasselle et al. [167] presented the results of a laser FIA
that bypassed the secure boot process of an undisclosed Android smartphone with an ARM Cortex A9-based (1.4GHz)
SoC. This was achieved following physical and software reverse engineering, package decapsulation, and targeting the
SoC with a 978nm infrared laser. The authors could modify the Secure Configuration Register (SCR) containing the
TrustZone NS-bit with 95% accuracy (see §2.2.2) in order to
access secure world assets during non-secure execution.
Beyond mobile SoCs, Colombier et al. [37] (2019) described laser FIAs for modifying the bits of words fetched
from flash memory on a ChipWhisperer board with a 32-bit
ARM Cortex-M3 (7.4MHz). The MCU was decapsulated
before applying a 3W infrared laser (1,064 nm), which generated faults that modified movw ARM instructions to movt.3
Using these errors, 128-bit AES key recovery was possible
from a reference AES software implementation after 128 attempts and two faulty ciphertexts. Additionally, the faults
were also used to bypass the authentication check of a mock
PIN verification algorithm.

3.2. Non-Invasive FIAs
Non-invasive FIAs require little-to-no tampering of the
DUT, e.g. SoC/IC decapsulation, removing adjacent components, and the use of corrosive chemicals. With reasonable
care, their effects usually disappear after removing the stimulus or resetting the device. As a rule of thumb, such attacks
can be conducted using lower cost, commercially available
equipment and risk significantly less damage than their invasive counterparts [25]. Four well-studied classes of fault
injection attacks fall into this category:
• Voltage-based glitch attacks: Under- or over-volt the
3 The movw instruction moves the least significant 16 bits of an immedi-

ate integer value into a target register’s lowest 16 bits, while movt moves the
most significant bits to a register’s upper 16 bits.

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache

Page 7 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis
Table 2
Summary of FIAs based on [25] and [92].
Technique
Voltage Glitch
EMFI
Clock Glitch
Heating
Light Pulse
Laser Beam
FIB
HIM

Precision (Space)

Precision (Time)

Cost

Skill

Damage Risk

Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Moderate
High
Very High
Very High

Moderate
Moderate
High
Low
Moderate
High
Very High
Very High

Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Moderate
High
Very High
Highest

Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Low
High
High
Very High
High

Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
High
High
High

EMFI: Electromagnetic FI, FIB: Focussed ion beam, HIM: Heavy-ion micro-beam.

device’s power supply beyond its intended operating
limits [125, 24, 156, 158, 157, 23, 115] (§3.2.1).
• Clock glitches: Increase or decrease the device’s clock
frequency used to synchronise the operation of internal components [29, 2, 153, 85] (§3.2.2).
• Heating attacks: Expose the DUT to temperatures
beyond its maximum or minimum guidelines [86, 88,
66] (§3.2.3).
• Electromagnetic FIs (EMFIs): Expose DUT components to targeted, high-energy EM pulses [39, 129, 42]
(§3.2.4).
Table 3.2 presents a summary of FIAs and their temporal
and spacial precision, relative complexity, and damage risk.

3.2.1. Voltage-based Glitch Attacks
Voltage glitches manipulate the target’s supply voltage.
An attacker can generate single- or multi-bit faults by underor over-volting this source or redirecting it to ground to generate brownouts. This can corrupt the contents of memory units or coerce microprocessors into misinterpreting and
even skipping program instructions. In existing literature,
such effects have been used to skip security-critical checks,
e.g. digital signature verification; bypass system-level access
control features; and to recover information about cryptographic key material under execution.
One of the first voltage glitches against a mobile phone
SoC was presented by Barenghi et al. [23] (2009), who targeted a reference software RSA implementation on a 32-bit
ARM9 CPU (ARM926EJ-S).4 The work exploited errors in
energy-intensive load instructions after the target was provided a low supply voltage (underfeeding). During instruction fetches, the authors could change the binary encoding of
logical operations (AND to EOR), conditional additions (ADDNE
to ADDEQ), and conditional branches (BNE to BEQ). These errors
were used in three attacks against OpenSSL v0.9.1i: 1), for
RSA factorisation when using the Chinese remainder theorem (CRT); 2), an e-th root attack for recovering an input
4 We note that the target is a single-core, low-frequency (266 MHz)
SoC, which can be considered obsolete nowadays.

Figure 7: Voltage FIA parameters [156].

message encrypted under a correct and faulted encryption
procedure; and 3), a theoretical attack for secret key recovery
during message signing. For the first, 6.6%–39% RSA-CRT
computations could be faulted of which 3.0%–39% were exploitable, while, for the second, 36.42%–62.77% of 1,000
faulted instances were useful. The instruction swaps occurred only a small number of times, which “may be reduced
up to a single one in the whole computation of a target algorithm,” thus rendering the third attack impractical.
Later, Barenghi et al. [24] (2010) used the same method
to recover AES round sub-keys using differential fault analysis (DFA). The approach is independent of the key length
and the number of rounds, and requires both fault-free and
faulted ciphertexts from the same plaintext. The authors interrogated the same SoC from [23], which executed Linux
2.6 and a software AES implementation based on OpenSSL.
After experimental analysis, key recovery could be achieved
following 100,000 encryptions with different plaintexts and
2,000,000 encryptions of the same plaintext.
In 2016, Timmers et al. [158] demonstrated two voltage
FIAs for privilege escalation on a Xilinx Zynq-7010 SoC
(ARM Cortex-A9). Both attacks exploited instruction corruption vulnerabilities with two load instructions (LDR and
LDMIA) on the 32-bit ARM architecture (AArch32), which occurred when under-volting the device. The first FIA targeted
the BL1 bootloader (see §2.3) to gain code execution privileges within the TEE. It required the BL1 image to be initially overwritten with a malicious payload containing shellcode and relevant pointers; the fault was then precisely injected after shellcode was copied into volatile memory and

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache

Page 8 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis

Figure 8: VoltJockey attack sequence [125].

during the copying of the pointers. On successful occasions,
the instruction corruption caused the processor to copy the
pointer into its program counter (PC) register, therefore executing the shellcode and transferring control flow to the attacker. The second method used the same approach as an
exploit delivery mechanism in situations where the REE and
TEE communicate over a shared memory buffer. The fault
was injected after loading the shellcode during the world
context switch, causing the CPU to load the shellcode pointer
into the PC register thereby triggering its execution in the
TEE. In total, 10,000 fault attacks on the LDR and LDMIA instructions were conducted. Only a single (0.01%) corruption occurred using LDR, whereas 27 glitches were successful
(0.27%) against LDMIA. Neither attack was mounted against
TEEs or secure boot processes on an OEM mobile device.
In 2017, Timmers and Mune [156] demonstrated voltage
FIAs for Linux-based privilege escalation on an undisclosed
ARM Cortex-A9-based SoC. After determining the glitch
parameters—the voltage, length, and delay (Figure 7)—the
authors targeted the open syscall when an unprivileged application attempted to access physical memory via /dev/mem/.
The application was instrumented to trigger the fault during the kernel’s access control check, which caused it to be
skipped. The second FIA used the instruction corruption
attack from [158] to change the CPU PC register to a predetermined address while executing random kernel syscalls,
generating system crashes as a proof of concept. The third
attack used an FIA to bypass the kernel’s security check during the setresuid syscall in order to set an unprivileged application’s process ID to root. The success rates of each attack
were 0.53% (attack one), 0.63% (two), and 0.41% (three) following 22,118, 12,705 and 18,968 experiments respectively
over 17–21 hours.
The NCC Group [117] (2020) published a voltage glitch
vulnerability on a MediaTek MT8163V SoC (ARM CortexA53). A potential voltage glitch was discovered after the
first bootloader is loaded from eMMC into RAM, causing
a signature verification check to be skipped. A glitch trigger was implemented on eMMC activity to dynamically insert and load an unauthorised boot component containing
code for privileged execution (EL3) with a success rate of
15.21%–23.44%. While not practically demonstrated, the

authors posited that the glitch could be used to load an unauthorised TEE image.
The previous attacks mounted voltage FIAs from external generators, but recent work has shown that dynamic voltage and frequency scaling (DVFS) frameworks can be used
for on-SoC fault generation. DVFS regulates the operating frequency and voltage of CPUs for minimising its energy consumption. In 2019, Qiu et al. [125] released the
VoltJockey attack on TrustZone-based SoCs, which made
use of kernel drivers for controlling the power management
IC (PMIC) in software. After establishing root access, the
CPU voltage was lowered to the point where cross-core faults
were generated on a multi-core system (Figure 8). Because
both worlds of execution use the same physical processor,
faults could be triggered in the non-secure world for key recovery from the secure world. The authors could induce byte
errors during RSA signature verification and AES’s eighth
round using reference software implementations. The former was used to force the loading of an unsigned TEE application by the TrustZone OS. Proof-of-concept attacks were
mounted on a Google Nexus 6 smartphone with a Qualcomm
APQ8084AB SoC, with presented rates of 4.6% (RSA verification) and 2.2% (AES key recovery). The code for these
attacks, however, have never been released. On non-mobile
systems, similar attacks have been used since against Intel
SGX on X86-64 platforms [35, 126, 115].

3.2.2. Clock Glitch Attacks
Clock glitch attacks perturb device clock cycles, e.g. introducing additional edges (Figure 9), in order to induce hardware synchronisation issues. This can trigger instruction
misses, caused by forcing the execution of an instruction
before the CPU has completed the previous one, and data
misreads from attempting to read values before the memory
has latched out the request. Clock glitches have attracted
significant attention against simpler systems [20, 104, 105].
However, at the time of publication, they have found limited
application to mobile device SoCs.
An exception is CLKSCREW by Tang et al. [153] (2017),
which uses software-controlled power management for crosscore fault generation on TrustZone-enabled SoCs. The attack also exploits DVFS—see Qiu et al. [125] in §3.2.1—

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache

Page 9 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis

Figure 9: Using an FIA to introduce an additional positive
clock edge [85].

for overclocking the CPU to fault secure world operations
from the non-secure world. Two attacks are presented: 1),
secure world AES key recovery; and 2), corrupting RSA signature verification checks used by the trusted OS prior to
loading TAs. CLKSCREW has several prerequisites: kernel
access is required to control the power manager, the core
clock frequency must be modifiable, interrupts must be disabled, and the target TA must be repeatedly invoked from the
non-secure world to decrypt arbitrary ciphertexts. The authors evaluated a Google Nexus 6 using a Qualcomm Kraitbased SoC and a TEE OEM implementation. On average,
useful faults were generated at a 5% rate for inducing a onebyte fault to a desired AES round for AES key recovery, and
1.51% for the RSA attack.
Besides CLKSCREW , no other publications have used
clock glitches against mobile SoCs to our knowledge. In
the recent MCU literature, Korak and Hoefler [85] (2014)
used clock FIAs to skip arithmetical (adds), branch (beq and
breq), and memory instructions (ldr and str) on a 16-bit
AVR ATxmega256 and 32-bit ARM Cortex-M0. They discovered that solely using clock glitches was ineffective on
the Cortex-M0, leading to a combined approach of using
voltage underfeeding in conjunction with a clock FIA; the
ARxmega256 did not require underfeeding. The attacks principally affected the fetch and execute stages of the MCUs’ instruction pipelines, which could be induced with high probability (up to 100%). The test hardware was a Xilinx Spartan6 XC6SLX45 FPGA with a NXP LPC 1114 (ARM CortexM0) and ATxmega256A3 extension board. No attacks were
presented against security mechanisms or cryptosystems.
In 2014, Blömer et al. [29] presented a clock FIA against
an Atmel AVR XMEGA A1 that executed an implementation of pairing-based cryptography (PBC) from the RELIC
toolkit [12]. The authors discovered a clock glitch vulnerability that triggered the skipping of a jump instruction (rjmp),
which was used for secret key recovery following 4,000 fault
attempts (0.025% success rate).
A difficulty of performing clock glitches on modern systems is the prevalence of phase-locked loop (PLL) circuits
(Figure 10), which process external clock sources into the
system frequency thereby acting as a filter. Traditional FIAs
that manipulate external clock frequency do not, therefore,
straightforwardly influence the internal clock on modern ICs.
In 2019, Selmke et al. [140] were able to successfully attack
a PLL-equipped STM32F0308R with an ARM Cortex-M0
CPU. The approach necessitated an extreme clock glitch that
effectively overclocked the PLL in order to produce deterministic perturbations in its output frequency. Using this,

Figure 10: A microcontroller with and without a phase-locked
loop (PLL) circuit using an external clock input [140].

full key recovery was achieved against a reference software
implementation of AES in electronic codebook (ECB) mode.
In total, 1,000 faults were injected of which 16.4% were exploitable.

3.2.3. Heating Attacks
Exposing ICs to extreme temperatures has been known
for >15 years to generate multi-bit errors in DRAM memory
and read/write threshold mismatches in non-volatile memory [82]. Govindavajhala and Appel [66] (2003) presented
a proof-of-concept showing that temperature-induced bit errors can lead to security vulnerabilities on a personal computer. A 50W light bulb increased the DRAM working temperature to 100◦ C, which triggered up to 10 flipped bits per
32-bit word with a 71.4% probability. The authors used this
to circumvent the Java type system to expose vulnerabilities in two commercial Java virtual machine (JVM) implementations. In general, heating attacks are among the most
destructive of FIAs, leading to long-lasting component/IC
damage if the exposure is too high and for too long [25]. As
far as we are aware, no heating attacks have been published
against mobile device SoCs.
In the MCU literature, Hutter and Schmidt [77] (2013)
published heating FIAs on an AVR ATmega162. A low-cost
laboratory heating plate heated the MCU to >150◦ C, beyond its maximum specified temperature limit (125◦ C). The
IC exhibited faults between a 152–158◦ C window in which
RSA-CRT decryptions were executed at 650ms intervals using a reference software implementation over a 70 minute
period. This elicited 100 faults of which 31 were exploitable
using the Boneh et al. [30] RSA-CRT fault attack to recover
one of the prime moduli. In 2014, Korak et al. [86] exposed
an AVR ATmega162 to temperatures of up to 100◦ C to facilitate clock glitches against an 8-bit smart card MCU. They
showed that higher temperatures led to higher success rates
for inducing erroneous instruction repetitions, replacements,
and modifications of their destination registers. Attacks on
particular cryptosystems or security mechanisms were not
shown, however.

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache Page 10 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis

3.2.4. Electromagnetic FI (EMFI)
Another widely studied attack vector is to expose device components to strong electromagnetic pulses. One of
the earliest fault models was presented by Quisquater and
Samyde [129] (2002) in which EM-induced Eddy currents
in the target circuit are captured by its latches, thus generating bit faults. Subsequent fault models have been developed since, such as Raoult et al. [130] (2015) who examined the coupling of a near-field probe to a printed circuit board (PCB) micro-strip line. Generally, electromagnetic FIs (EMFIs) have greater spatial precision than other
non-invasive FIAs. High-precision probes connected to EM
pulse generators can be used to perturb specific IC regions
while shielding other components. EMFIs have attracted
significant attention from the research community since their
use on smart cards in the early-2000s [129, 104, 105].

EMFIs on Mobile Phone SoCs. To our knowledge, Cui

and Housley [38] (2017) presented the first attack on a moblie
phone SoC, known as BADFET, which used second-order
effects of EMFIs where faults in one component also induced
faults in dependent components. A low-cost test-bed ($300
USD) was used to corrupt the contents of DRAM and NAND
flash memory, which triggered a CPU instruction cache fault
where bootloader code was loaded. The authors were able
to skip into an unreachable code region of the bootloader
containing a command line interface (CLI) for debugging
purposes. Through this, a separate binary was loaded that
exploited an existing vulnerability in the TrustZone SMC
implementation (see §2.2.2) for privileged TEE code execution. A Cisco 8861 IP Phone with a Broadcom BCM11123
SoC was used as the DUT, where the attack could be repeated across 72/100 attempts (72%).
In 2019, Aït El Mehdi [3] presented the first public results on applying EMFIs against a package-on-package (PoP)
SoC. The initial research goal was to disable the Android
lock-screen’s timeout countermeasure to protect against brute
force attacks. While this did not succeed, EMFIs could be
used against the PoP SoC’s upper DRAM package to trigger
instruction corruption errors for modifying program control
flow. Interestingly, the glitched instructions persisted in the
CPU instruction cache as long as it was not replaced. The
specific device and SoC models are redacted, however.
Gaine et al. [48] (2020) presented a privilege escalation
attack on a 64-bit (non-PoP) SoC with four ARM CortexA53 CPUs (1.2GHz) on a mobile development board, which
ran version 4.14 of the Linux kernel from the Yocto Project’s
Sumo release. EM pulses were fired using an injection probe,
shown in Figure 11, on an XYZ motorised stage. Only one
CPU on the DUT was sensitive to EMFIs after characterising the temporal and spatial requirements using a test program. An instruction skip vulnerability was identified with
a conditional branch instruction (cbz) in the string comparison (strcmp) C function. This was exploited to bypass the
password comparison check used by the substitute user command (su) using a software trigger in the libpam kernel module. Without DVFS enabled, EMFIs were generated every

Figure 11: EMFI probe used by Gaine et al. [48].

two minutes for the same CPU with a fixed frequency and
probe position (overall success rate of 2%). With DVFS enabled, 21 of 6000 FIs were useful (0.35%), equivalent to one
success for every 300 attempts (15 minutes).
In other work, Trouchkine et al. [160] (2019) detailed
micro-architectural and instruction-level software methods
for expediting EMFI characterisation on modern SoCs. Using these, the authors were able to establish the location of
useful faults on ARM and Intel CPUs; that is, whether they
perturbed data in CPU registers, the pipeline, MMU, caches
or external memory. Experimental results showed that faults
on CPU registers, the CPU pipeline, or memory could be
identified on a Broadcom BCM2837 SoC (ARM CortexA53 at 1.2GHz) and an undisclosed Intel Core i3 CPU with
95% and 80% accuracy respectively.

EMFIs on MCUs. Dehbaoui et al. [39] (2013) mounted

an EMFI-based key recovery attack on a reference software
AES implementation on a 32-bit ARM Cortex-M3 MCU
(24MHz). The work targeted the AES round counter at the
ninth and tenth rounds to induce an additional round of execution with high success (up to 100%). This enabled feasible
cryptanalysis with which the encryption key could be recovered using two pairs of correct and faulty ciphertexts.
Menu et al. [107] (2019) presented data corruption EMFIs against the transfer bus from flash memory to the internal buffer of an Atmel SAM3X8E MCU (ARM Cortex-M3).
Without disturbing code execution, the authors could reset
data items of length 0–128 bits with byte-level precision by
targeting the pre-fetch mechanism using an EM generator
with a square voltage pulse (200V maximum amplitude), a
6ns minimum width and a 2ns transition time. Four components were shown to be vulnerable: the flash memory, the
128-bit pre-fetch buffer, bus interfaces, and the register file.
A reference software AES implementation was then interrogated using a key is stored in flash memory. For the first
attack, the EMFI could reset the value of the entire key as
it was fetched from memory (100% repeatability). The second applied the DFA from Biham and Shamir [28], which
assumes the attacker can collect ciphertexts of known plaintexts while incrementally resetting one bit of the secret key
until a zeroed key is reached. This was used to reduce the
potential key-space of a 128-bit AES key to 16 × 28 , which
could be brute-forced. The final investigation presented a
fault attack that uses an EMFI to induce a persistent fault
in AES S-box look-up elements. Encryptions using the S-

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache Page 11 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis

box produced faulty ciphertexts if the corrupted entry was
accessed, where it was shown that the effective key entropy
reduced to 32-bits when four such S-box elements were used.
Similar to the aforementioned work in [160], Majéric et
al. [101] (2016) showed how EM side-channels could expedite EMFI parameter setting against an AES implementation
aboard the security co-processor of an IoT SoC’s security
co-processor. The EMFI location was set using EM emissions corresponding to particular Hamming weights during
intermediate AES operations. The ninth AES round was
successfully faulted at a rate of 0.03% after which faulty ciphertexts could be used for key recovery using the Piret and
Quisquater [123] DFA. Unfortunately, the identities of the
SoC and its co-processor are undisclosed.
Liao and Gebotys [94] (2019) combined EMFIs and overclocking for disrupting the pre-fetch stage of an 8-bit MCU
(Microchip PIC16F687). After performing backside decapsulation, the authors caused instruction replacement errors
by inducing bit-level opcode faults within specific test programs. An exclusive-or (xorwf) and move-literal (movlw) instruction were particularly vulnerable, which could be replaced with alternatives—e.g. goto, inclusive-or (iorwf) and
bit-clear (bcf)—with a frequency of 1.8%–98.7%. A key recovery attack was then shown against a reference AES software implementation requiring 222 EM pulses and 5.3 plaintexts on average. It is mentioned that goto instruction replacement errors may be used bypass boot-time authentication checks, but a concrete attack was not presented.
Other than examining cryptographic implementations,
several works have applied EMFIs to trigger general instruction and data corruption faults. Moro et al. [113] (2013)
discovered instruction and data corruption vulnerabilities by
targeting the data and instruction buses on an ARM CortexM3. EMFIs were used to: 1), modify the values of ldr instructions to alter data flow; 2), generate hardware exceptions to modify control flow; 3), replace memory store (str)
instructions; and 4), modify CPU registers. Experimental
results explored the effect of EMFI pulse amplitudes on the
number and relative frequency of bit faults on data fetches
from flash memory.
In a similar vein, Riviere et al. [131] (2015) interrogated
the instruction cache of an ARM Cortex-M4 by targeting
an EMFI during the updating of the CPU’s pre-fetch queue
buffer with 96% success. Using custom assembly programs,
four instructions could be skipped while the subsequent four
instruction could be replayed. No security-critical systems
were compromised, but the authors posit that the fault model
could be used against CRT-based RSA, AES, and for privilege escalation on ARMv7-M targets.
Elmohr et al. [42] (2020) discovered an EMFI-based instruction corruption fault during the execution stage of load
(ldr) instructions on an NXP LPC1114 (ARM Cortex-M0).
Using a test program, the errors appeared when a branch
(bne) instruction was fetched at the same time. EMFIs were
used to fault two, three, four and instructions at the same
time with a frequency of 31%, 13%, 12% and 12% respectively. Like [94], the MCU must be decapsulated.

4. Side-channel Attacks
Rather than inducing abnormal conditions into electronic
components, physical side-channel attacks exploit observable phenomena emitted during their operation. This can
reveal key material and other data if the phenomenon can
be reliably associated with data or operations under execution. The origin of these attacks date back to the disclosure
of the NSA TEMPEST programme [47], which described
how vulnerable cryptographic implementations can produce
certain electromagnetic characteristics depending on the input key and data. The area has since attracted tremendous
attention from the research community, with associated vulnerabilities still plaguing today’s systems [34, 61, 170, 171,
175, 103].
A standard SCA testing setup was shown in Figure 6.
Here, an oscilloscope acquires measurements (traces) of the
chosen phenomenon, e.g. EM emissions, using probes attached to sensitive DUT regions, which are then analysed
by the investigator on an external computer. Like FIAs, the
target may be instrumented with hardware or software triggers to collect precise measurements of particular operations
of interest. In existing literature, two SCA approaches have
been widely utilised:
• Power analysis: Leverages time-series differences in
the target’s power consumption during sensitive procedures [61, 122, 137, 74, 120, 114].
• EM analysis: Exploits electromagnetic radiation signatures produced by the target [1, 81, 116, 111, 19, 62,
99, 26, 33, 34, 4, 171].
Beyond these approaches, two alternative methods have
also been explored in the wider literature, albeit with limited
applicability to mobile systems:
• Acoustic cryptanalysis: Capitalises on properties of
sound waves, such as the emission of certain frequencies and their change over time [50].
• Temperature analysis: Uses differences in the target’s temperature during its operation [77].
We observe that only EM-based attacks have been used
extensively on mobile phone SoCs. The others have been
employed predominantly against simpler SoCs and MCUs,
which we discuss as supplementary information.

4.1. Power Analysis
Power analysis exploits device power consumption measurements to discover information about sensitive code and
data under execution. Modern ICs contain millions of transistors that act as voltage switches. These are continually
switched on and off during execution, causing voltage fluctuations that can be measured using commercially available
testing equipment. The resulting measurements are analysed, whether through direct inspection or using statistical
analysis, for inferring information about cryptographic keys
and individual instructions under execution [114, 104, 137].

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache Page 12 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis

Interestingly, very few power analysis attacks have been
conducted on mobile devices. In one exception, Genkin et
al. [49] (2016) used a power tap on an Apple iPhone 4 USB
charging port, requiring a USB pass-through adapter with a
0.33Ω resistor placed in series with the ground line. The authors connected the phone to a battery pack via the adapter
and collected measurements using voltage changes over the
resistor. Through analysis, five ECDSA scalar-by-point multiplication operations (using the same point and four different scalar values) could be distinguished using OpenSSL’s
NIST P-521 implementation. Details were not presented regarding its effectiveness for full recovery or its transferability to other devices. The second instance we are aware of,
published by Lisovets et al. [97] (2021), is an additional investigation of an EM-based side-channel attack on an iPhone
4, which we discuss in §4.2.
In general, power analysis attacks on mobile SoCs face
a myriad of challenges. Firstly, their density renders it difficult to capture reliable measurements, with varying power
planes, voltage regulators, and landside decoupling capacitors compared to MCUs. Modifying mobile SoCs to access
reliable power sources is not a trivial endeavour and risks serious damage to the device. Secondly, attacks must account
for potential interference from multi-core CPUs and multitasking OSs; the power consumption of specific operations
of interest must be distinguished from aggregate measurements of the entire system. Furthermore, modern PoP designs require researchers to account for the power consumption of multiple packages in addition to the aforementioned
complexities. All of these aspects dramatically complicate
power analysis attacks on mobile devices.
In the remainder of this section, we cover recent research
targeting embedded systems, e.g. IoT SoCs, which may provide a gateway for analysing mobile SoCs in future work.

4.1.1. Key Recovery
Most key recovery attacks employ a common set of techniques for analysing power traces. Simple power analysis
(SPA) involves directly inspecting traces to deduce secret
information when measurements can be mapped to certain
data properties, e.g. distinct voltages corresponding to individual key bits. Differential power analysis (DPA), an advanced technique presented by Kocher et al. [83], uses correlations between the Hamming weight of intermediate cryptographic operations and measurement traces to determine
the likelihood of particular key bytes. Template analysis involves collecting a set of traces and labelling them with the
corresponding cryptographic operation. Freshly measured
traces are then classified by mapping it to its closest matching template from the set.
Over the last 20 years, SPAs, DPAs, and template analyses have been studied in great detail on smart cards, FPGAs
and embedded systems [104, 103, 44, 112]. Recent work has
explored machine and deep learning methods for providing
greater discriminative power using fewer traces over existing
statistical methods. Heuser and Zohner [74] (2012) explored
the use of support vector machines (SVMs) for this purpose.

Power traces were collected from an 8-bit AVR ATMega256-1 MCU (8MHz) using a reference AES software implementation. The AES S-box was used as the profiling target
in which the SVM predicted the Hamming weight from the
measurement trace. The authors were able to recover the key
using 20 traces in low-noise and up to 60 traces in high-noise
environments. Beyond power analysis, traditional machine
learning has also been used for side-channel analysis in other
problem spaces, such as recovering information about physically unclonable functions (PUFs). We refer to Hettwer et
al. [73] for a detailed survey of this work.
Deep learning (DL) methods—neural networks with multiple hidden layers—are also being increasingly used in stateof-the-art attacks, which can capture complex, non-linear
interactions between power traces and target cryptographic
operations. Maghrebi et al. [100] (2016) presented some
of the first results applied to AES key recovery by targeting AES’s first-round S-box. The first attack focussed on
an unprotected FPGA-based AES implementation, showing
that key recovery can be achieved with 200 traces using a
convolutional neural network (CNN). In the second, an unprotected reference software AES implementation was examined on a Chipwhisperer—a development board for sidechannel analysis with an AVR ATMega328P MCU. Using
an autoencoder neural network, the first four AES key bytes
could be recovered with 20 traces. In the final experiment,
a masked AES software implementation on the Chipwhisperer was investigated; in the best case, an autoencoder and
CNN could recover the secret key using 500 and 1,000 traces
respectively.
The application of CNNs was also explored by Picek et
al. [122] alongside simpler machine learning methods. Similarly, they used the Hamming weight model at first-round
AES S-box operations. Protected AES implementations were
examined using the DPAContestV2 [36] dataset, comprising
50,000 traces from an Atmel AVR MCU. A 91.2% test accuracy was achieved for correct Hamming weight classification
using a CNN. Simpler methods—XGBoost, Naïve Bayes,
and Random Forests—were also used effectively, where the
key was recovered in under 10 traces. Wang [170] (2019)
conducted similar work using CNNs for key recovery against
two AVR ATXmega128D4 MCUs with a 128-bit AES-ECB
reference software implementation. Interestingly, the average number of required traces differed significantly between
the boards (160 and 400 traces per MCU).
As an alternative to tapping into current-carrying wires,
Schmidt et al. [137] (2010) used miniscule power fluctuations measured at exposed I/O pins. The authors targeted five
devices running a reference 128-bit AES software implementation without side-channel countermeasures: an 8-bit
Atmel ATMega163 and AT89S2853 MCU, an NXP LP2148
MCU with a 32-bit ARM ARM7TDMI-S CPU, a Virtex-II
Pro XC2VP7 FPGA, and an ASIC. Plaintexts were over a
serial interface to the targets and, during encryption, an oscilloscope recorded the voltage variations at an exposed I/O
pin. DPAs were reportedly successful on all devices, but the
required number of traces were not given.

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache Page 13 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis

Figure 12: Power consumption of the NOP, MOV, ADD, and SUB
ATMega163 instructions [114].

Recently, Gnad et al. [61] (2019) showed that crosstalk
in analog signals from adjacent on-SoC digital components
could be exploited for key recovery. The threat model is an
on-device malicious program that wishes to learn information about secret data used by a parallel program on another
CPU core. The authors used the effect of noise fluctuations
generated by digital subsystems that were modulated into
(on-SoC) analog-to-digial (ADC) converter signals. A spy
program accessed ADC measurements while the victim used
a software AES implementation from mbedTLS to execute single 128-bit AES encryptions of plaintext messages. Using a
range of IoT SoCs—a ESP32-devkitC, an STM32L475 IoT
Node, and an STM32F407VG Discovery—correlation analysis attacks were mounted by targeting the final AES round
and analysing 10 million ADC noise traces.

4.1.2. Instruction Profiling on MCUs
Another less-studied use of power analysis is to identify
individual instructions in use, which has applications to reverse engineering and detecting unauthorised program execution. In this area, Msgna et al. [114] (2014) analysed
power consumption traces from an Atmel ATMega163 using
the voltage drop across a shunt resistor on the MCU. 11 instructions were profiled—Figure 12 shows a sample trace of
four ATMega163 instructions—using template analysis after applying dimensionality reduction as a feature extraction
technique. The work used two statistical models—k-Nearest
Neighbour (kNN) and a multi-variate Gaussian probability
distribution function—to classify instructions from their associated traces, achieving a 66.78–100% recognition accuracy depending on the method. In 2018, Park et al. [120]
profiled a much larger set of instructions on an AVR ATMega328P MCU (112 in total). A classification model was
developed based on quadratic discriminant analysis, which
was trained on 2,500 power traces per instruction, achieving
a recognition accuracy of 99.03%.

4.2. Electromagnetic Emission (EM) Analysis
Using EM emissions to compromise vulnerable security
systems can be dated back to 1943 when a Bell Telephone
engineer discovered oscilloscope perturbations while using
an encrypted teletype, the Bell 131-B2. The partial declassification of the NSA’s TEMPEST programme in 1972 subsequently documented more elaborate efforts to subvert electronic systems in this way, as well as identifying potential
countermeasures [173, 47]. These side-effects arise from
charge movements through transistor gates, wires etc., which
emit electromagnetic radiation that can be measured using

Figure 13: Experimental setup used by Aboulkassimi et al. [1].

non-invasive means.5 EM analysis has been widely used to
break security and cryptographic implementations on systems from simple smart cards to high-frequency SoCs [83,
68, 118, 108, 109]. This section surveys state-of-the-art EMbased SCAs, which, unlike power analysis, has been employed extensively against mobile devices.

EM SCAs on Mobile Phone SoCs. To our knowledge,

Aboulkassimi et al. [1] (2011) published the first EM-based
SCA on a mobile phone, targeting reference AES software
implementations on the Java Platform, Micro Edition (Java
ME). Measurements were triggered using the device’s microSD card interface, which were acquired using a commercially available EM probe and oscilloscope (see Figure 13).
The authors presented methods to overcome temporal distortions in EM traces from just-in-time (JIT) compilation and
garbage collection used by the Java Virtual Machine (JVM).
Two methods—a spectral density-based approach (SDA) and
a template-based resynchronisation approach (TRA)—were
proposed to statistically navigate these issues. Using the second approach, one AES key byte could be recovered in an
hour with 250 traces from an undisclosed device with a 32bit RISC processor (370MHz). Like [23], however, this platform can be considered obsolete nowadays.
In 2012, Kenworthy and Rohatgi [81] reported ECC-,
RSA- and AES-based key recovery attacks on three undisclosed mobile devices. The first—a “4G LTE smart phone
from a major manufacturer”—performed RSA-CRT encryptions (2048-bits) using a self-written square-and-multiply implementation. From a single trace, the secret exponent could
be recovered using a Yagi antenna, magnetic probe, ICOM
7000 receiver, and an Ettus Research USRP digitizer costing $1000 (USD) at the time. The second device, “a mobile
PDA,” performed elliptic curve point multiplication over P571 using a self-written double-and-sometimes-add implementation. The authors achieved full key recovery using a
single trace from an EM probe located three meters (10 feet)
from the device. The third, “another mobile phone from a
major mobile manufacturer,” used an OEM cryptographic
5 While EM-based SCAs are usually non-invasive, more reliable traces
may be collected after invasive intervention, e.g. IC decapsulation, to eliminate unwanted attenuation.

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache Page 14 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis

Figure 14: Device under test used by Goller and Sigl [62]. The
red cross indicates the optimal EM probe position.

library to perform 128-bit AES-CBC encryption on a 200kB
data buffer. In this attack, traces corresponding to 12,500
individual AES block operations were required to perform
DPA-based key recovery. For all targets, the SoCs were not
disclosed nor were the use of any triggers.
Nakano et al. [116] (2014) presented EM-based key recovery attacks against ECC and RSA implementations from
Android’s Java Cryptography Extension (JCE) library on an
undisclosed smartphone (832MHz clock frequency). The
RSA implementation used a square-and-multiply approach,
which was already known to be vulnerable to side-channel
analysis. Like [81], identifiable ECC double-and-multiply
operations were also exploited. Both methods used simple power analysis at the 10 MHz and 20 MHz frequencies
for key recovery using a single trace. The precise nature in
which triggers were implemented are not disclosed.
In 2015, Balasch et al. [19] presented EM-based DPA
attacks against a Texas Instruments AM3358 Sitara SoC on
a Beaglebone Black single-board computer (SBC) with an
ARM Cortex-A8 (1GHz) and a Debian 7-based Linux distribution (kernel v3.8.13-bone47). The authors targeted an
unprotected 128-bit AES software implementation and a bitsliced version from Könighofer [84] (2008) designed to resist side-channel analysis. After analysis, 1.2 million traces
were needed for key recovery using the bit-sliced implementation and a first-order DPA, while a second-order DPA was
possible using 400,000 traces. In contrast, only 10,000 traces
were required for the unprotected algorithm.
Goller and Sigl [62] (2015) attacked a reference software
RSA implementation using the square-and-multiply method
on five unnamed smartphones.6 The device’s shielding plate
was removed to reduce EM attentuation; a software-defined
radio, a probe and a high-gain amplifier at a capacitor near
the main CPU were then used for the measurement acquisition. Using simple power analysis, the waveforms were
strongly correlated with individual bits of the secret key (Figure 15). 276 traces were required for full key recovery with
high confidence (0.999 correlation) and the shielding plate
installed, while 170 were needed without the shielding.
6 While formally undisclosed, a PCB serial number pictured in the paper corresponds to a Samsung Galaxy S3 (Figure 14).

Figure 15: Average of 1063 RSA EM traces. Grey regions
show the key bits recovered by Goller and Sigl [62].

Also using a BeagleBone Black SBC, Longo et al. [99]
(2015) conducted EM DPAs against two AES implementations: 1), software-based 128-bit AES in CBC mode taken
from OpenSSL; and 2), a 256-bit AES implementation on
the SoC’s cryptographic co-processor. For the software implementation, 20,000 traces produced the correct key hypothesis, while the co-processor required 500,000 sets of
1,000 averaged traces (500 million traces in total). Notably,
they state that the latter may be useful against full-disk encryption implementation. While no exploits were presented
to this end, it is one of the few papers to successfully attack a
physical cryptographic co-processor, although no proof-ofconcept code has been publicly released.
In 2016, Belgarric et al. [26] used EM analysis to identify ECC addition and multiplication operations in Android’s
Bouncy Castle ECDSA implementation. Full key recovery
was performed using a lattice attack against an undisclosed
smartphone with a Qualcomm MSM7225 SoC. After opening the device’s external casing, an EM probe was placed
on the SoC while traces were triggered using the USB interface. 39 ECDSA signature traces were needed for full
key recovery, taking 102 seconds; the authors were also able
to recover an Android Bitcoin wallet key as a example use
case. Similar work was published concurrently by Genkin
et al. [49] (2016) who achieved full key recovery against
OpenSSL’s ECDSA implementation on iOS and Android.
The attack was less invasive than [26], requiring only a probe
to be placed in proximity of the device with no hardware or
software triggers. A Sony-Ericsson Xperia X10 and iPhone
3GS were exploited using 5,000 signature traces from both
devices, two of which (0.04%) were useful.
In 2018, Alam et al. [4] presented the One&Done attack for recovering RSA keys from a single decryption EM
trace using OpenSSL (v1.1.0g). The attack, based on modelling potential control flow transitions of Montgomery multiplications, examined emissions at 40MHz around the target
device’s clock frequency using an Ettus USRP B200-mini
software-defined radio. Interestingly, the authors subverted
a side-channel resistant 2048-bit fixed-window constant-time

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache Page 15 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis

Figure 16: Lock-in thermography of the SoC die used by Vasselle et al. [166] showing heat maps of IR amplitudes (left) and
in-phase AES emissions (right).

RSA implementation and after the plaintext was blinded.
Two Android phones were evaluated: a Samsung Galaxy
Centura SCH-S738C with a Qualcomm MSM7625A (ARM
Cortex-A5 at 800MHz) and an Alcatel Ideal with a Qualcomm Snapdragon 210 MSM8909 (ARM Cortex-A7). A
OLinuXino SBC was also evaluated with an Allwinner 13
SoC (ARM Cortex-A7). During experimental validation,
95.7%–99.6% of the target key bits could be recovered depending on the chosen platform.
To our knowledge, Bukasa et al. [33] (2017) were the
first to investigate the EM properties of program execution
in ARM TrustZone. They analysed an unprotected reference AES software implementations and a mock PIN verification algorithm on a Raspberry Pi 2 with a Broadcom
BCM2836 SoC (quad-core ARM Cortex-A7 at 900MHz).
The effect of multi-core vs. single-core and secure world vs.
non-secure world execution was examined. Using template
analysis, key recovery could be achieved by targeting AES’s
first-round S-box and collecting 150,000 EM traces. The key
could be recovered with a success rate of 17.81%–38.30%
depending on the system configuration. Multi-core execution in the secure world yielded the lowest success (17.81%),
while single-core execution in the non-secure world with the
MMU disabled produced the best results (38.30%). Leignac
et al. [91] (2019) further examined TEE vs. REE execution
using EM emissions from a reference software AES implementation on a HiKey SBC with an eight-core ARM CortexA53 CPU (1.2GHz), Android Oreo in the REE, and Trustonic
Kinibi as the TEE OS. This same SoC is used by the Huawei
P88 and Honor 5A smartphones. They showed that the TEE
was still vulnerable, although synchronising the correlation
power analysis attack was more complicated. TEE AES key
recovery was achieved after 6,000 traces, while the REE required 10,000 to produce the correct key hypothesis.
In 2019, Vasselle et al. [166] published the first publicly
available side-channel attack on a PoP SoC, which recovered
a decryption key used by on-SoC boot ROM for decrypting
BL1 firmware during the secure boot process (see §2.3). The
main SoC was first separated from the PoP DRAM package using a hot air station, as the DRAM package produced
the most EM interference. This process required practice
on multiple PoP units to prevent irreparable damage to the

Figure 17: Partial PCB modifications made by Lisovets et
al. [97] for providing an artificial power supply to the Apple A4
via an external board (modified: left; unmodified: right).

main SoC. EM measurements were acquired by targeting
the on-SoC cryptographic co-processor using a Lecroy WaveRunner oscilloscope, a Langer H-Field probe, and a lownoise amplifier. Lock-in thermography was used to identify the co-processor from infrared measurements during encryption and decryption operations (Figure 16), which was
used for accurately positioning the EM probe. 2,500 traces
of 5,000 firmware binary decryptions were acquired (12.5
million AES-CBC operations in total). Correlation power
analysis was then used to recover the co-processor’s AES key
from two firmware encryptions and 2,500 averaged traces.
All details pertaining to the identity of the PoP, SoC and
cryptographic co-processor are redacted; information about
the trigger implementation is also not made public. We note
that the approach worked only for BL1 as the missing PoP
DRAM package caused a fatal boot deadlock at BL2.
Recently, Lisovets et al. [97] (2021) described the first
physical SCA on an Apple iPhone 4 for extracting the 256bit hardware-based user identifier (UID) key. The UID is
used with the user’s passcode to generate a passcode key
from a password-based KDF to unwrap keys from the system keybag, which contains per-file data encryption keys
for FBE using the SoC’s AES encryption engine.7 A twopart attack was conducted: 1), using a known bootloader
exploit to introduce an unauthorised component for submitting unlimited encryption queries to the AES engine; which
was followed by, 2), using EM correlation power analysis
against the AES engine. EM traces were measured from a
probe on the Apple A4 SoC using a trigger from a GPIO
pin re-configured by the unauthorised bootloader. For the
specific equipment, a Langer EMV-Technik RF-B 0,3-3 EM
probe, a Langer EMV-Technik PA 303 SMA amplifier, and
a LeCroy WaveRunner 8254M oscilloscope (2.5GHz bandwidth, 40GS/s sampling rate) were used for trace acquisition.
7 The work targets an Apple iPhone 4, which does not include a Se-

cure Enclave Processor found on modern iPhone models (§2.2.3). The SEP
prevents the application processor from accessing the UID for ultimately
unwrapping FBE keys. Exploiting vulnerable boot ROM is, therefore, not
enough to access the AES engine to mount the same attack.

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache Page 16 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis

Key recovery was achieved after 300 million traces collected
over a two week period, which required up to three hours of
analysis using two Nvidia RTX 2080 TI GPUs. In addition
to the EM SCA, a power analysis attack was also mounted
by measuring the voltage across a 1Ω shunt resistor on an
external board connected between the external power supply and the iPhone. This required invasive modifications to
the PCB (Figure 17). The UID could then be recovered after
200 million traces using correlation analysis. The authors
state that the attack could be extended to modern models,
although SCA countermeasures are likely to be present.

SCAs on MCUs and Related Systems. In the broader

literature, Montminy et al. [111] (2013) extracted AES keys
using a reference 128-bit AES-ECB software implementation on a Stellaris LM4F232H5QD MCU with a 32-bit ARM
Cortex-M4F (50MHz). The authors targeted intermediate
operations during the first AES round using the Hamming
weight attack model. EM traces were acquired using a nearfield probe and a software-defined radio to collect EM waveforms using a modified digital television receiver that costed
$20 (USD) at the time. A correlation analysis attack was
then mounted to extract all of the AES key bits using 100,000
traces without instrumenting any triggers.
On an Intel SBC, Saab et al. [132] (2016) presented an
EM DPA attack against the Intel AES-NI cryptographic instruction set extension on an Intel Core i7-3517UE. A dedicated C application was developed that made called the Intel AES-NI sample library (version 1.2), which looped over
AES-256 (CBC mode) calls to the iEnc256_CBC assembly routine. After collecting 1.5 million traces over 17 days, statistically significant Hamming weight leakage was discovered arising from CPU cache loading differences. A second
investigation also discovered Hamming weight information
leakage caused by the mixing of round keys between successive AES rounds, which was found from ∼1.3 million
traces collected over 22 days. The authors provide initial evidence that Intel’s AES-NI is not well-protected against sidechannel analysis. This was further reinforced in the PLATYPUS attack by Lipp et al. [96] (2021), who demonstrated a
software-based power analysis attack using the Intel Running Average Power Limit (RAPL) interface, which leaked
AES-NI key information used by Intel SGX enclaves.
In 2018, Camurati et al. [34] showed that mixed-signal
SoCs can leak exploitable EM emissions from the effects
of analog/digital component crosstalk. Specifically, this occurred when the CPU noise was modulated into the radio
transceiver’s analog emissions. The authors investigated a
Nordic Semiconductor nRF52832, a Bluetooth SoC with a
2.4GHz transceiver and an ARM Cortex-M4 CPU; and a
Qualcomm Atheros AR9271, a wireless 802.11N SoC. 128bit AES keys could be recovered at a 10 meter distance by
observing EM emissions produced by tinyAES and mbedTLS in
the 2.4GHz spectrum. Using template analysis, key recovery was demonstrated against tinyAES at a 10m distance using 70,000 traces for offline template creation and 428 traces
for the actual attack For mbedTLS, a successful attack was

mounted at a 1 meter distance with 40,000 traces.
In 2020, Benadjila et al. [27] published work on using
deep learning for EM analysis. The authors comprehensively
assessed the application of CNNs to perform AES key recovery using the Hamming weight model. They targeted
masked and unmasked reference software AES implementations on an 8-bit AVR microcontroller (ATmega8515) and
released a publicly available dataset, the ASCAD dataset, to
facilitate future research. Surprisingly, it was found that the
VGG-16 image recognition network architecture was effective for EM-based side-channel analysis.
On an IoT SoC, Wang et al. [171] (2020) also applied
deep learning for recovering AES keys using EM emissions.
Three neural networks were trained—two CNNs with different layer configurations and one multi-layer perceptron
(MLP) network—on traces captured from five Bluetooth devices at five distances from the target. Like [34], the Nordic
Semiconductor nRF52832 SoC was used with a reference
128-bit AES software implementation from the tinyAES C
library. 500,000 traces were collected across various distances from the device (wired, then at 1m–8m) and in different locations (an office and corridor environment). In the
best case, 367 traces of the same encryption were needed to
recover an AES sub-key at a 15m distance using a 24dBi TPLink TL-ANT2424B antenna and a software-defined radio.

4.3. Other Physical Side Channels
Another side-channel explored in historical literature is
acoustic cryptanalysis, although it has not been applied successfully to mobile SoCs to the best of our knowledge. This
involves analysing sound waves produced by a system whose
emitted pitch is dependent on the current operation. In 2014,
Genkin et al. [50] demonstrated that RSA key extraction using acoustic cryptanalysis was feasible against a Lenovo laptop from a smartphone in its proximity. The authors targeted GnuPG’s RSA implementation using a laboratory microphone setup and a Samsung Note II, showing that a 4096bit key could be recovered within one hour using audible and
ultrasonic sound emanations.
Examining temperature emissions is also a known vector
for side-channel analysis that, likewise, has found no application to mobile SoCs. In 2013, Hutter and Schmidt [77]
demonstrated information leakage from an 8-bit AVR ATmega162 MCU by monitoring its temperature using a PT100
sensor element with a 100ms thermal response time. As
a proof of concept, the move (mov) instruction was used to
move all possible values of one input byte (i.e. 256) into 24
internal registers. The temperature was measured for a period of 20 seconds, where noticeable increases were apparent
depending on the Hamming weight of the processed value;
however, a full key recovery attack was not shown. Crucially, the attack is appropriate only for simple devices that
use long-running operations with low-frequency signatures
on a single thread of execution. As such, it is unlikely to be
practical against modern mobile systems.

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache Page 17 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis

5. Evaluation
This section evaluates state-of-the-art FIAs and SCAs,
compares their features and results, and identifies challenges
and limitations arising from existing literature.

5.1. Comparison Criteria
The previous sections showed that a large range of techniques, platforms, algorithms, and success rates have been
reported by existing fault injection and side-channel attacks.
To assist in their comparison, we distilled existing research
into a common set of characteristics for evaluating their prerequisites, goals and results. These are as follows:
• Work and year: The reference under comparison and
its year of publication.8
• Attack class: The type of SCA or FIA that was used,
such as a voltage or clock glitch, EMFI, or power analysis attack.
• SoC type: The high-level SoC class, i.e. single- or
multi-core, mixed-signal and/or high-frequency SoC.
If a non-mobile phone SoC was used, such as an IoT
SoC or MCU, then this is stated explicitly.
• Trigger?: Whether the DUT was instrumented with
hardware/software triggers to generate precise faults
or acquire side-channel measurements.
• Evaluation platform: The device, SoC, MCU, or microprocessor model used as the target of attack.
• Attack prerequisites: Any preconditions that must be
satisfied before their execution, such as gaining kernellevel code execution, decapsulating the SoC, or the
use of a specific microprocessor architecture.

2. TEE AES/RSA/ECC key recovery: Recover cryptographic keys from services that use AES-, RSA- or
elliptic curve-based cryptography in the secure world.
This has potential applications to TEE key management systems (§2.4) and FDE and FBE implementations (§2.5).
3. Load unauthorised TEE TAs: Load unauthorised
trusted applications, which may be used to further understand the TEE’s internals and for attempting secure
world privilege escalation attacks.
4. Bypass secure boot verification: Circumvent boottime procedures that enforce the loading of authorised
components, e.g. OEM-signed bootloaders, with the
aim of loading unauthorised self-signed or unsigned
images.
5. REE code execution: Gain privileged access to the
REE, including device drivers, memory management,
and applications in less privileged protection modes.
6. AES/RSA/ECC key recovery: Recover keys against
AES-, RSA- or elliptic curve-based cryptography implementations in the non-secure world.
7. Bypass verification checks: Bypass run-time security verification steps, such as those using RSA- and
ECC-based digital signature verification algorithms.
8. Load unauthorised data into RAM: Corrupt the device’s data flow integrity protections to load unauthorised data items, e.g. cryptographic keys, into RAM
during program execution.
9. Key resetting: Perform run-time bit reset attacks on
part or all of a cryptographic key to disrupt target cryptosystems.
10. Reverse engineering: Recover instruction-level information about device programs under execution.

• Implementation: The software or hardware implementation type targeted by the SCA or FIA; for example, a proprietary OEM, an open-source, or a reference implementation. Generally, we consider attacks
on OEM targets to most likely to generalise to other
commercial implementations.

We mapped this set of criteria to each publication surveyed in this work. Table 3 provides a comprehensive comparative summary of fault injection attacks from §3, while a
separate comparison is provided in Table 4 for side-channel
attacks from §4.

• Success criteria: The reported number of faults/traces
required to mount the attack and/or the accuracy of the
proposed method (if reported).

5.2. Challenges and Limitations

Lastly, existing work covers a multitude of scenarios,
such as AES key recovery, privilege escalation, and skipping verification checks during secure boot processes. We
abstracted these attack goals into 10 distinct categories to
help researchers gauge their potential applicability:
1. TEE code execution: Enables privileged access to
different TEE targets on the device, including TEE secure world applications in lower protection levels, device drivers to security-critical peripherals, and TEE
memory management.
8 We note that older attacks may generalise poorly to today’s devices if
obsolete platforms were evaluated, e.g. due to the use of modern systemon-chip design features and the deployment of countermeasures.

Applying fault injection and side-channel attacks on mobile devices poses unique difficulties for researchers compared to traditional computing systems. Among the principal challenges, digital subsystems—CPUs, GPUs, DRAM,
flash memory, etc.—are connected at significant distances
(>10cm) over relatively accessible buses on traditional systems. In contrast, these components are condensed into one
or more millimeter-sized packages using wiring distances
measured at the micrometer scale on modern mobile SoCs.
This renders wire-level or pin-level attacks extremely difficult on mobile devices without risking permanent damage
to the target. To compound this issue, the density of mobile
SoCs, the use of high-frequency CPUs, and mixed-signal
components generate acute levels of electrical interference
that must be disentangled to accurately target operations of
interest [1, 49, 116].

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache Page 18 of 28

2018

2019

2009

2010

2016

2017

2019

2020

2014

2014

2017

2019

2013

2014

2013

2013

2015

2017

2019

2019

2020

2020

Vasselle et al. [167]

Colombier et al. [37]

Barenghi et al. [23]

Barenghi et al. [24]

Timmers et al. [158]

Timmers & Mune [156]

VoltJockey [125]

NCC Group [117]

Korak & Hoefler [85]

Blömer et al. [29]

CLKSCREW [153]

Selmke et al. [140]

Hutter & Schmidt [77]

Korak et al. [86]

Dehbaoui et al. [39]

Moro et al. [113]

Riviere et al. [131]

BADFET [38]

Liao & Gebotys [94]

Menu et al. [107]

Elmohr et al. [42]

Gaine et al. [48]

EMFI

HFI +
CFI

CFI

VFI

LFI

Class

Multi-core
1GHz+

MCU

Single-core

MCU

Multi-core
1GHz+

MCU

Multi-core
1GHz+

Multi-core

Single-core

MCU

Multi-core

SoC Type

ARM Cortex-A53

AES key resides in Flash memory.

Atmel SAM3X8E
ARM Cortex-M3
NXP LPC1114
ARM Cortex-M0
E31 RISC-V
SiFive FE310-G002
—

NXP LPC1114 chip decapsulation

—

Microchip PIC16F687

Linux kernel
(libpam)

Reference

OSS

Reference

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

Y

Y

Cisco 8861 IP Phone
Broadcom BCM11123 SoC

OEM

Reference

OEM TrustZone
(AES and RSA)

RELIC toolkit [12]

Y

N

Y
Exploitable TrustZone SMC code

—

SW-controlled PMIC
Kernel-space access
Repeated TEE TA invocation

Reference

OEM

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Trigger?

ARM Cortex-M4

ARM Cortex-M3

AVR ATmega162I

ARM Cortex-M0
STM STM32F0308R

Qualcomm APQ8084AB SoC
Google Nexus 6

Atmel XMEGA A1

—

Linux kernel
OEM TrustZone
(AES and RSA)

AArch32 architecture
User-space access
SW-controlled PMIC
Kernel-space access

ARM Cortex-A9
Qualcomm APQ8084AB SoC
Google Nexus 6
ARM Cortex-A53
MediaTek MT8163V SoC
AVR ATxmega256
ARM Cortex-M0
NXP LPC 1114

Reference

AArch32 architecture

ARM Cortex-A9
Xilinx Zynq-7010 SoC

OpenSSL (v0.9.1i)
and Reference

Reference

—

SoC decapsulation

Implementation

ARM ARM926EJ-S

ARM Cortex-M3

ARM Cortex-A9

Prerequisites

Table 3: Summary of recent fault injection attacks on mobile and embedded systems.
Evaluation Platform

Attack Goals

AES key recovery.

N/A†
Two correct and two faulty
plaintext-ciphertext pairs

0.35%–2% (DVFS on–off)

12%–31%

Up to 100%

Up to 222 EM pulses and
5.3 plaintexts required on average

72%

Up to 96%

Linux privileged access (REE).

Bypass verification checks.† .
Load unauthorised data into RAM.

Load unauthorised data into RAM.
Bypass verification checks.
AES and RSA-CRT key recovery.†
Privilege escalation.†
Bypass secure boot verification.
Load unauthorised bootloaders.
Privileged TEE access.
AES key recovery.
Bypass secure boot verification.†
AES key recovery.
AES key resetting.

RSA key recovery.
Bypass security verification checks.
AES key recovery

31%

N/A†

AES key recovery.
Glitch PLL-equipped CPUs.

Secure world AES key recovery.
Load unauthorised TEE TAs.

ECC (PBC) key recovery.

Bypass verification checks.
AES key recovery.

Secure world AES key recovery.
Load unauthorised TEE TAs.
Bypass secure boot verification.
Load unauthorised bootloaders.

Linux privileged access (REE).

Bypass secure boot verification.
Load unauthorised bootloaders.
Secure world privileged access.

AES key recovery.

RSA key recovery.

AES key recovery.

Secure world privileged access.

16.4%

5% (AES key recovery)
1.51% (RSA verification fault)

0.025%

Up to 100%

15.21%–23.44%

2.2% (AES key recovery)
4.6% (RSA decryption fault)

0.41%–0.63%

0.01%–0.27%

Up to 100%
6.6%–39% (RSA-CRT attack)
6.42%–62.77% (e-th Root)
100K ciphertexts (different plaintexts)
2M ciphertexts (same plaintext)

Up to 95%

Success Rate/Criteria

Gray-coloured works do not target mobile SoCs.
*: Device model and manufacturer are not disclosed, †: Discussed as a potential attack but not experimentally verified, Y: Yes, N: No.
OEM: OEM implementation, OSS: Open-source software, Reference: Reference implementation.
FI: Fault injection, LFI: Laser-based FI, VFI: Voltage-based FI, CFI: Clock-based FI, HFI: Heating-based FI, EMFI: Electromagnetic FI, SW: Software, PMIC: Power management integrated circuit, MCU: Microcontroller unit, PBC:
Pairing-based cryptography, PLL: Phase locked loop, SoC: System-on-chip, DVFS: Dynamic voltage and frequency scaling.

Year

Work

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache Page 19 of 28

Y
N

?
IoT SoC
Multi-core
1GHz+

2015

2015

2016

2016

2016

2017

2018

2018

2019

2019

2020

2021

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2018

2019

2019

2014

Goller & Sigl [62]

Longo et al. [99]

Belgarric et al. [26]

Genkin et al. [49]

Saab et al. [132]

Bukasa et al. [33]

Camurati et al. [34]

Alam et al. [4]

Leignac et al. [91]

Vasselle et al. [167]

Wang et al. [171]

Lisovets et al. [97]

Schmidt et al. [137]

Heuser & Zohner [74]

Msgna et al. [114]

Maghrebi et al. [100]

Picek et al. [122]

Park et al. [120]

Wang [170]

Gnad et al. [61]

Genkin et al. [50]

Mixed-signal
IoT SoC
Multi-core
1GHz+

MCU

Multi-core
1GHz+

Single-core

Multi-signal
IoT SoC

Multi-core

Multi-core
1GHz+

Single-core
1GHz+

?

Single-core
1GHz+

Undisclosed

Decomposable PoP SoC
—
Exploitable boot ROM
Unlimited AES engine encryptions

Undisclosed
Nordic nRF52832 SoC
Apple iPhone 4
Apple A4 SoC
NXP LP2148 (ARM7TDMI-S)
AVR ATMega163 + AT89S2853

Lenovo laptop

AVR ATXmega128D4
STM 32L475 and 32F407VG
ESP32-devkitC

—

Mixed-signal SoC

Accessible power line

Reference

GnuPG (v1.x)

tinyAES and
mbedTLSC

N

Y

N

N

N

AVR ATMega328P

Y

AVR ATMega163

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

N

N

Y

N

N

AVR ATMega-256-1

Exposed I/O pins

OEM

tinyAESC

OpenSSL (v1.1.0g)

tinyAES and
mbedTLSC

Reference

Undisclosed

—

Mixed-signal SoC

—

Intel Ivy Core architecture

—

Y

OEM and OpenSSL
(v1.0.1j)

Cryptographic co-processor
Bouncy Castle
(v1.5)
OpenSSL (v1.0.x)
iOS 7.1.2–8.3
Intel AES-NI
(Ivy Bridge)

Y

Android JCE

Square-and-multiply RSA
External casing is opened

External casing is opened

N

Reference

Y

N

N

—

Android JCE

Raspberry Pi 2
Broadcom BCM2836 SoC
ARM Cortex-A7 (900MHz)
Nordic nRF52832
ARM Cortex-M4
Qualcomm Atheros AR9271
Samsung Galaxy Centura
Alcatel Ideal
HiKey LeMaker SBC
ARM Cortex-A53 (1.2GHz)

Intel i7-3517UE

—
Square-and-multiply RSA

AES key recovery.

REE and TEE AES key recovery.

6000 traces

One-hour audio trace

10M traces

160.3–400.2 traces

RSA key recovery.

AES key recovery.

AES key recovery.

AES key recovery.
Reverse engineering.

10 traces

Masked AES key recovery.

Reverse engineering.

99.03% (112 instructions)

66.78–100% (11 instructions)
20 traces (unprotected AES)
500 traces (masked AES)

AES key recovery.

Key recovery.
20–60 traces (low–high noise)

AES key recovery.
N/A†

AES key recovery.

367 traces
300M traces (EM-SCA)
200M traces (P-SCA)

Co-processor AES key recovery.
Boot-time firmware decryption.

Constant-time
RSA key recovery.
Single trace (95.7%–99.6% recovery)

2500 traces, two ciphertexts

AES key recovery.

Secure world AES key recovery.

AES key recovery.

ECDSA key recovery.

ECDSA key recovery.

AES key recovery.
Co-processor AES key recovery.
FDE key recovery.†

RSA and AES key recovery.

Masked AES key recovery.

70,000 traces (tinyAES)
40,000 traces (mbedTLS)

17.81%–38.30% with 150,000 traces

1.3–1.5 million traces

5000 traces

39 traces

20,000 traces (SW AES)
500M traces (co-processor AES)

276 traces (EM shielding)
170 traces (no EM shielding)

400,000 traces (masked AES)
10,000 traces (unmasked AES)

ECC and RSA key recovery.

100,000 traces
Single trace

RSA, ECC and AES key recovery.

AES key recovery.

250 traces
Single trace (RSA and ECC)
12,500 AES block op. traces

Attack Goals

Success Rate/Criteria

Gray-coloured works do not target mobile SoCs.
?: Method not disclosed. *: Device model and manufacturer are not disclosed, †: Discussed as a potential attack but not experimentally verified, Y: Yes, N: No.
OEM: Proprietary OEM implementation, OSS: Open-source software implementation, Reference: Reference implementation, C: Implementation and/or version not disclosed.
SCA: Side-channel attack, EM-SCA: Electromagnetic SCA, P-SCA: Power-analysis SCA, AC-SCA: Acoustic SCA, JVM: Java virtual machine, Java ME: Java Platform – Micro Edition, JCE: Java cryptography extensions library, ECC: Elliptic curve
cryptography, SBC: Single-board computer, SoC: System-on-chip, FDE: Full-disk encryption.

AC-SCA

P-SCA

EM-SCA+
P-SCA

EM-SCA

2015

Balasch et al. [19]

MCU

Single-core

OEM

2014

Nakano et al. [116]

Android smartphone* (832MHz)
ARM Cortex-A8 (1GHz)
TI AM3358 Sitara SoC
Beaglebone Black
Four smartphones*
Samsung Galaxy S3 (see text)
ARM Cortex-A8 (1GHz)
TI AM3358 Sitara SoC
Beaglebone Black SBC
Android smartphone*
Qualcomm MSM7225 SoC
Sony-Ericsson Xperia X10
Apple iPhone 3GS

2013

Montminy et al. [111]

?

Y

Trigger?

2012

MicroSD interface
Square-and-multiply RSA
Double-and-sometimes-add ECC

Implementation
Bouncy Castle
and Reference
OEM, OSS and
Reference

Kenworthy & Rohatgi [81]

Single-core

Prerequisites

Table 4: Summary of recent physical side-channel attacks on mobile and embedded systems.
Evaluation Platforms
Java ME phone*
32-bit RISC CPU (350MHz)
4G LTE smartphone*
Mobile PDA*
Stellaris LM4F232H5QD
ARM Cortex-M4F (50MHz)

2011

SoC Type

Aboulkassimi et al. [1]

Class

Year

Work

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache Page 20 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis

Compare this to existing work against desktop computers: VoltPillager [35] subverted Intel SGX enclaves by targeting an accessible voltage regulation interface on a desktop
motherboard, while Govindavajhala and Appel [66] used a
50W placed near visible DRAM chips for heating-assisted
fault injections. Such attacks leverage an important advantage of targeting desktop computers: component sizes and
wiring distances are, on the whole, significantly larger and
can be targeted with a greater degree of precision using lower
cost equipment. While attacks against traditional computing
systems share some similarities to mobile platforms—for example, the shared use of statistical techniques like differential fault and power analysis—differences in their physical
form factors introduce major technical challenges that must
be overcome.
Further to these inherent limitations, we have also identified some methodological shortcomings in the current state
of the art. The rest of this section discusses these issues
and provides recommendations to researchers in the field
for their remediation. Furthermore, we pose several open
research challenges arising from some major difficulties for
executing FIAs and SCAs on mobile devices.

5.2.1. Few Attacks Against Implementations with
Known Countermeasures
From the inception of physical fault injection and sidechannel attacks, a range of hardware- and software-based
countermeasures have been developed to mitigate their effectiveness. Specifically, hardware-based power filters have
been known for 20 years to thwart voltage glitches [82]; EM
shielding units, such as Faraday cage packages [128], can
mitigate EMFIs and EM SCAs; and frequency detection circuits and hardware frequency locking can be deployed to
hinder clock glitches. Hardware- and software-based redundancy checks of security-critical procedures and introducing randomness into program execution, e.g. random timing
waits and CPU clock frequency fluctuations, have also been
touted as general solutions [22].
While these methods are known in the community, recent research has still focussed on evaluating unprotected
reference implementations. Consequently, the reported success rates of many attacks most likely represent idealistic
testing scenarios. In some work, researchers have used implementations that are known to exhibit side-channel leakage, such as double-and-sometimes-add ECC and squareand-multiply RSA [81], in place of constant-time, blinded,
masked and fixed-window counterparts. We observed generally that cryptographic co-processors have been subjected to extremely few attacks [99, 166]. Indeed, there
are no published attacks against state-of-the-art OEM
co-processors with known countermeasures, e.g. Apple’s
SEP (§2.2.3) and Google’s Titan M (§2.2.4). Protected implementations are not invulnerable, but they usually increase
the requirements, e.g. number of traces, by some orders of
magnitude [19, 100, 99].
★ Recommendation 1: We recommend that researchers
investigate implementations with established counter-

measures as part of an evaluation test-bed and provide
appropriate justification where this is not possible.

5.2.2. Limited Diversity of Evaluation Platforms
Published research has also tended to focus on a small
set of evaluation platforms. Specifically, only a single target was investigated in 80%+ fault injection and 60%+
side-channel attack publications examined in this survey.
The reported success rates of single-target research papers
are vulnerable to device-specific biases and may, therefore,
be a significant overestimate when applying them to alternative targets. SoC-by-SoC differences in power management
systems, voltage regulators, power planes, land-side decoupling capacitors (LDCs), clock frequencies and CPU architectures may pose hidden issues that severely hinder if not
prevent the reproducibility of such attacks.
Poor methodological transparency is also an issue: we
note that many authors simply do not disclose proof-ofconcept code or even the target under test [1, 62, 81, 116,
3, 166]. Only high-level details are shared in some cases, e.g.
“an Android smartphone” [116] or a “4G LTE smart phone
from a major manufacturer” [81], while, in other work, this
information is clearly redacted [3, 166]. In addition, Benadjila et al. [27] criticised the closed-source nature of SCA data
analysis frameworks: “hyperparameterisation [of machine
learning models] has often been kept secret by the authors
who only discussed the main design principles and on the attack efficiencies.” Critically, Wang et al. [171] showed that
the effectiveness of such models can vary severely between
devices: a deep learning model with a purported 96% accuracy dropped to only 2.45% when tested on traces captured
from another board with the same IC.
★ Recommendation 2: In pursuit of open science, we
strongly advise researchers publish proof-of-concept
code, precise device/SoC models and any equipment
details needed to reproduce attacks wherever possible. (To this end, we welcome the move by prominent events to normalise the submission of paper artifacts [79, 78, 164]).

5.2.3. Few Attacks Against Package-on-Package ICs
Package-on-package designs pose new challenges as researchers must account for the target SoC’s activity in addition to side-effects from other packages, e.g. DRAM modules. Alas, we are not aware of any successful fault injection attacks on PoP systems used by modern mobile
devices, e.g. Apple’s A14 on the iPhone 12 series. Aït El
Mehdi [3] presented initial signs that PoP EMFIs are possible, but a complete attack could not be mounted. To our
knowledge, only two SCAs have been published against PoP
SoCs. Vasselle et al. [166] used EM analysis for key recovery from an on-SoC cryptographic co-processor, but this
exploited a unique part of the device’s system initialisation
process where executing a partially disassembled PoP was
possible. Recent work by Lisovets et al. [97] demonstrated
EM- and power-based SCAs against an Apple A4 PoP SoC
on an iPhone 4. While there are complexities in generalising

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache Page 21 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis

the attack to current Apple devices, the authors showed that
PoP side-channel attacks are a practical reality.
♢ Research Challenge 1: We suggest greater focus on
developing novel methods against PoP modules that
are increasingly being used by mobile device vendors.
We believe that this area presents pressing research
challenges for overcoming interference generated by
multiple ICs in a single package, particularly for fault
injections where there are no publicly known attacks.
To assist in this area, we point to recent research that
demonstrated the possibility of desoldering PoP components
without alteration [69]. Combining conductive and insulating adhesives to stabilise PoP systems is a solution that can
potentially be used for enabling fault injection attacks on PoP
SoCs [45]. In digital forensics, polymeric adhesives are of
particular interest that can be used for complex repairs or
even in realising advanced man-in-the-middle attacks to reverse engineer secure systems. Heckmann et al. [70] (2017)
illustrated this in a home-made memory man-in-the-middle
attack platform. This platform aims to provide read/write access to data exchanged between the CPU and its volatile and
non-volatile memory, providing a first step for fault injection
attacks on PoP SoCs.

5.2.4. Chosen-Plaintext and Chosen-Ciphertext Attack
Feasibility
A significant practical challenge of chosen-plaintext and
-ciphertext attacks is the difficulty of collecting an adequate
number of useful measurement traces and faulted outputs.
In particular, voltage- and clock-based FIAs typically generate exploitable faults at an extremely low rate (<0.1% of
all faults) [158, 156, 29], while reported key recovery attacks have required 1–500 million traces or faulted ciphertexts from modern SoCs [19, 99, 166, 132, 97, 61]. Related
to this issue, some work has required cryptographic operations to be performed multiple times under the same message
and key [39] and TEE applications to be invoked repeatedly
without limitation [153, 125]. Depending on the target system, these conditions can be time-consuming to reproduce
in practice. As a concrete example, targeting secure boot
cryptographic operations, e.g. digital signature checks, may
only be possible once per component and per power cycle.
Data-demanding approaches may be useful if their conditions can be easily repeated and automated, otherwise they
are unlikely to be feasible in time-constrained environments.
♢ Research Challenge 2: Can the requirements of dataheavy attacks be minimised while remaining transferable across multiple targets? As a potential way forward, transfer learning [172, 155, 75] has been recently explored for training a base model using a large
set of easily collectable measurements, which is then
fine-tuned to a target device using a smaller dataset for
capturing any platform-specific idiosyncrasies. This
research avenue remains in its infancy, however.

5.2.5. Inaccessible Hardware
Accessing hardware components to inject faults and acquire exploitable measurements remains a major challenge
on today’s mobile devices. For power-based SCAs, voltage supply pins are not easily accessible on modern SoCs
as they are occluded by ball-grid array (BGA) assembled
packages; BGA-level analysis requires specialist test equipment and expertise, significantly increasing attack complexity [19]. Indeed, invasive methods are needed just to evaluate the feasibility of an attack, let alone execute one successfully. It is likely, for this reason, that researchers have used
power-based SCAs and FIAs attacks on platforms with easily accessible supply pins and power planes, e.g. SBCs and
MCUs. We also posit that this is behind the popularity of
EM SCAs on mobile SoCs because of their predominantly
non-invasive means of signal acquisition.
♢ Research Challenge 3: Moving beyond the current
state of play, can low-cost methods be developed for
interrogating BGA-assembled PoP/SoC packages in
order to modernise power-based side-channel and fault
injection attacks?
A related issue is the lack of publicly available data sheets
provided by OEMs and SoC vendors. Unfortunately, without
a radical shift to open hardware, this is difficult to circumnavigate without movement from device and silicon vendors.
This has forced researchers into evaluating devices under
test using black-box methods, raising a security by obscurity concern: the absence of attacks on a given SoC does not
imply that it is secure against SCAs and FIAs. Given the
large number of commercially available SoCs, fault injections and/or side-channel attacks may be possible if previously unevaluated SoCs undergo a dedicated investigation.

5.2.6. Risk of Device Damage
Fault injections, by definition, leverage unexpected behaviour when the target is subjected to conditions beyond its
intended operating conditions. Over-glitching, e.g. extreme
over- and under-volting, can inflict permanent and unpredictable damage on device components, often in ways that
are not immediately observable. In practice, this is likely to
occur during the exploration of previously unknown glitch
parameters. This extends to recent side-channel attacks requiring the decapsulation of ICs and disassembling of PoPs
to enhance the acquisition of exploitable traces. In some
work, preparation techniques have been refined on spare components before mounting the actual attack [166]. Researchers
operating on a budget or with access to only a single or a
small number of relevant SoCs may struggle to replicate such
attacks.
In digital forensics, investigators have also resorted to
laser or chemical decapsulation to gain appropriate hardware
access for reverse engineering and/or data extraction [149].
Such methods significantly increase the risk of destroying
the target IC, particularly its wire bonding [71]. This damage can occur in two ways: 1), from the direct application
of high-energy lasers or corrosive chemicals [71]; and 2),

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache Page 22 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis

when manipulating probes during chip-on SCAs and FIAs
or to monitor on-SoC memory units, buses and other peripherals [70]. As a risk mitigation measure, Staller [149]
(2010) proposed a method coupling electrically conductive
adhesives (ECAs) and the precision of laser ablation—also
known as photoablation—for the repair of damaged bonding
wires and to minimise permanent device damage.
♢ Research Challenge 4: Can safer interrogation techniques be developed for mobile SoCs and, in particular, PoP systems without necessitating elaborate preparation methods or the application of high-energy lasers
and corrosive substances?

tecting the most critical device assets, such as cryptographic
keys and user credentials, rather than TEEs. This is highlighted by Google’s recent release of the Titan M module
(§2.2.4) and the formation of the Android Ready SE Alliance for accelerating the adoption of SEs on Android devices [64]. The alliance identifies that using tamper-resistant
hardware for hosting digital keys for physical items, e.g. car
keys; ePassport and national identity credentials; and digital
wallets “offers the best path for introducing these new consumer use cases in Android” [64]. These targets have significant protections against FIAs and SCAs, which necessitates
the development of fresh approaches.

5.3. Future Directions

6. Conclusion

The growth of mixed-signal and multi-SoC architectures
are an important development for advancing the state of the
art in fault injection and side-channel attacks on mobile systems. Recent research, e.g. [34] and [61], showed that these
can offer new vectors for recovering secret data. Given the
economic incentives to miniaturise hardware into ever-more
compact packages, it is likely that this trend will continue,
and that new attack avenues may be opened from the interaction between increasingly diverse and closely located
SoC components. In parallel, manufacturers continue to delegate long-running but low-complexity device features, such
as sensor hubs, to separate device SoCs. This paradigm,
also known as heterogeneous ‘big-little’ architectures, permits the relatively power-hungry primary SoC to remain in a
low-powered state while less energy-intensive SoCs are used
for low-complexity processing. Similarly, novel interactions
between these heterogeneous SoCs could yield novel attack
methods in future research.
A second notable trend has been the rise of deep learningbased approaches for side-channel analysis, which can model
highly non-linear interactions for complex classification tasks.
This contrasts with traditional statistical methods that use
carefully chosen parametric models. While this area is in its
relative infancy, preliminary results show fewer traces may
be needed for the same if not an improved level of effectiveness relative to correlation- and template-based analyses [75, 122, 170].
Researchers should also be aware of emerging mobile
TEE applications in recent research. Examples include secure mobile deep learning [89], protecting cryptocurrency
wallets [51], authenticating adverts from mobile advertising
networks [93], preserving the integrity of system logs [141,
80], novel remote attestation mechanisms [142, 143], protecting healthcare data [139], and confidential image processing [32]. Such proposals could serve as future attack
targets. Moreover, new TEEs and security mechanisms continue to be developed using the RISC-V open-source instruction set architecture [90, 106, 138, 145]. Examining the application of SCAs and FIAs against these systems will gain
importance if RISC-V becomes widely adopted by mobile
device OEMs.
Finally, we observe that manufacturers are increasingly
returning to discrete secure element (SE) hardware for pro-

Data extraction methods from mobile devices have significantly increased in difficulty due to the growing complexity of mobile SoCs and an increased focus on security. While
this represents progress from a privacy perspective, it poses
major challenges in the context of digital forensics, such as
lawful evidence recovery. In this report, we presented an
extensive survey of state-of-the-art physical fault injection
and side-channel attacks on mobile system-on-chips. In total, over 50 research publications published between 2009
and 2021 were examined, which were individually mapped
to their relevant attack goals, prerequisites, published success rates, and evaluated platforms. Our aim was to consolidate the large base of existing literature into a format that
can be digested by working practitioners in the field.
Beyond this, we presented a series of challenges and limitations arising from the current literature, identifying a series of recommendations and open research challenges pertaining to fault injection and side-channel attacks on mobile systems. In particular, we raised the issue of attack reproducibility: redacted platform details, an extremely small
number of evaluation devices, increasingly complex SoCs,
and poor analysis transparency may all lead to generalisation
issues on current and future targets. Moreover, we identified
that the regular targeting of unprotected reference or custom software implementations is a cause for concern. Notably, many works do not evaluate software and hardware
implementations with widely known FIA or SCA countermeasures. As a consequence, it is likely that researchers in
the field will face significant difficulties when applying many
attacks to other platforms, particularly OEM devices.
Lastly, we discussed potential future developments in the
state of the art. Specifically, the exploitation of mixed-signal
SoCs, novel interactions in ‘big-little’ multi-SoC architectures, and the application of deep learning methods are all
potentially fruitful areas of research. In addition, the relative absence of published attacks against PoP architectures
and OEM cryptographic co-processors with known countermeasures is a pressing concern in light of their growing use
by mobile vendors. These could obsolete many published attacks on mobile phone SoCs, which we see as an important
research area going forward.

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache Page 23 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis

Acknowledgements
Funding: This work received funding from the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme
under grant agreement No. 88315 (EXFILES). The authors
would like to thank the EXFILES WP5 project partners for
comments and discussions around the topic of this work.

References
[1] D. Aboulkassimi, M. Agoyan, L. Freund, J. Fournier, B. Robisson,
and A. Tria. Electromagnetic analysis (EMA) of software AES on
Java mobile phones. In IEEE International Workshop on Information Forensics and Security, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2011.
[2] M. Agoyan, J.-M. Dutertre, D. Naccache, B. Robisson, and A. Tria.
When clocks fail: On critical paths and clock faults. In International
Conference on Smart Card Research and Advanced Applications,
pages 182–193. Springer, 2010.
[3] N. Aït El Mehdi. Analyzing the resilience of modern smartphones
against fault injection attacks. Master’s thesis, Delft University of
Technology, 2019.
[4] M. Alam, H. A. Khan, M. Dey, N. Sinha, R. Callan, A. Zajic, and
M. Prvulovic. One&Done: A single-decryption EM-based attack on
OpenSSL’s constant-time blinded RSA. In 27th USENIX Security
Symposium, pages 585–602, 2018.
[5] R. Anderson and M. Kuhn. Low cost attacks on tamper resistant
devices. In International Workshop on Security Protocols, pages
125–136. Springer, 1997.
[6] Android. Full-disk encryption, 2020. https://source.android.com/
security/encryption/full-disk.
[7] Android. Keystore System, 2020. https://developer.android.com/
training/articles/keystore.
[8] Android. File-based encryption, 2021. https://source.android.com/
security/encryption/file-based.
[9] Apple, Inc. iOS Security: iOS 11, 2018. https://www.apple.com/ca/
business-docs/iOS_Security_Guide.pdf.
[10] Apple, Inc.

Apple Platform Security, 2021.

https:

//manuals.info.apple.com/MANUALS/1000/MA1902/en_US/
apple-platform-security-guide.pdf.

[11] Apple, Inc. Apple platform security: Secure enclave, 2021. https:
//support.apple.com/en-gb/guide/security/sec59b0b31ff/web.
[12] D. F. Aranha and C. P. L. Gouvêa. RELIC cryptography toolkit,
2014. https://code.google.com/archive/p/relic-toolkit/.
[13] G. Arfaoui, S. Gharout, and J. Traoré. Trusted execution environments: A look under the hood. In 2nd IEEE Int’l Conference on
Mobile Cloud Computing, Services and Engineering, 2014.
[14] ARM Holdings.
ARM security technology building a secure system using TrustZone technology, 2009.
https:
//developer.arm.com/documentation/genc009492/c/Introduction/
What-are-the-threats-/How-are-devices-attacked-?lang=en.

[15] ARM Holdings.
ARM architecture,

Introducing 2017’s extensions to the
2017.
https://community.arm.com/

developer/ip-products/processors/b/processors-ip-blog/posts/
introducing-2017s-extensions-to-the-arm-architecture.

[16] ARM Holdings. ARMv8-A Trusted Board Boot Requirements,
2018. https://static.docs.arm.com/den0006/d/DEN0006D_Trusted_
Board_Boot_Requirements.pdf.
[17] ARM Holdings. Security IP: Layered Security for Your Next SoC,
2020. https://www.arm.com/products/silicon-ip-security.

[20] J. Balasch, B. Gierlichs, and I. Verbauwhede. An in-depth and blackbox characterization of the effects of clock glitches on 8-bit MCUs.
In Workshop on Fault Diagnosis and Tolerance in Cryptography,
pages 105–114. IEEE, 2011.
[21] F. Bao, R. H. Deng, Y. Han, A. Jeng, A. D. Narasimhalu, and
T. Ngair. Breaking public key cryptosystems on tamper resistant devices in the presence of transient faults. In International Workshop
on Security Protocols, pages 115–124. Springer, 1997.
[22] H. Bar-El, H. Choukri, D. Naccache, M. Tunstall, and C. Whelan.
The sorcerer’s apprentice guide to fault attacks. Proceedings of the
IEEE, 94(2):370–382, 2006.
[23] A. Barenghi, G. Bertoni, E. Parrinello, and G. Pelosi. Low voltage
fault attacks on the RSA cryptosystem. In Workshop on Fault Diagnosis and Tolerance in Cryptography, pages 23–31. IEEE, 2009.
[24] A. Barenghi, G. M. Bertoni, L. Breveglieri, M. Pellicioli, and
G. Pelosi. Low voltage fault attacks to AES. In IEEE Int’l Symposium on Hardware-Oriented Security and Trust. IEEE, 2010.
[25] A. Barenghi, L. Breveglieri, I. Koren, and D. Naccache. Fault injection attacks on cryptographic devices: Theory, practice, and countermeasures. Proceedings of the IEEE, 100(11):3056–3076, 2012.
[26] P. Belgarric, P.-A. Fouque, G. Macario-Rat, and M. Tibouchi. Sidechannel analysis of Weierstrass and Koblitz curve ECDSA on Android smartphones. In Cryptographers’ Track at the RSA Conference, pages 236–252. Springer, 2016.
[27] R. Benadjila, E. Prouff, R. Strullu, E. Cagli, and C. Dumas.
Deep learning for side-channel analysis and introduction to ASCAD
database. Journal of Cryptographic Engineering, 10(2), 2020.
[28] E. Biham and A. Shamir. Differential fault analysis of secret key
cryptosystems. In Annual International Cryptology Conference,
pages 513–525. Springer, 1997.
[29] J. Blömer, R. G. Da Silva, P. Günther, J. Krämer, and J.-P. Seifert. A
practical second-order fault attack against a real-world pairing implementation. In Workshop on Fault Diagnosis and Tolerance in
Cryptography, pages 123–136. IEEE, 2014.
[30] D. Boneh, R. A. DeMillo, and R. J. Lipton. On the importance of
checking cryptographic protocols for faults. In International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques,
pages 37–51. Springer, 1997.
[31] J. Breier and D. Jap. A survey of the state-of-the-art fault attacks. In
Int’l Symposium on Integrated Circuits. IEEE, 2014.
[32] T. Brito, N. O. Duarte, and N. Santos. ARM TrustZone for secure
image processing on the cloud. In IEEE 35th Symposium on Reliable
Distributed Systems Workshops, pages 37–42. IEEE, 2016.
[33] S. K. Bukasa, R. Lashermes, H. Le Bouder, J.-L. Lanet, and
A. Legay. How TrustZone could be bypassed: Side-channel attacks
on a modern system-on-chip. In IFIP Int’l Conference on Information Security Theory and Practice. Springer, 2017.
[34] G. Camurati, S. Poeplau, M. Muench, T. Hayes, and A. Francillon.
Screaming channels: When electromagnetic side channels meet radio transceivers. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Computer and Communications Security, 2018.
[35] Z. Chen, G. Vasilakis, K. Murdock, E. Dean, D. Oswald, and F. D.
Garcia. VoltPillager: Hardware-based fault injection attacks against
Intel SGX enclaves using the SVID voltage scaling interface. In 30th
USENIX Security Symposium. USENIX Association, 2021.
[36] C. Clavier, J.-L. Danger, G. Duc, M. A. Elaabid, B. Gérard, S. Guilley, A. Heuser, M. Kasper, Y. Li, V. Lomné, et al. Practical improvements of side-channel attacks on AES: feedback from the 2nd DPA
contest. Journal of Cryptographic Engineering, 4(4), 2014.

[18] ARM Holdings. Cortex-A73, 2021. https://developer.arm.com/
ip-products/processors/cortex-a/cortex-a73.

[37] B. Colombier, A. Menu, J.-M. Dutertre, P.-A. Moëllic, J.-B. Rigaud,
and J.-L. Danger. Laser-induced single-bit faults in flash memory:
Instructions corruption on a 32-bit microcontroller. In IEEE Int’l
Symposium on Hardware Oriented Security and Trust. IEEE, 2019.

[19] J. Balasch, B. Gierlichs, O. Reparaz, and I. Verbauwhede. DPA, bitslicing and masking at 1 GHz. In Int’l Workshop on Cryptographic
Hardware and Embedded Systems. Springer, 2015.

[38] A. Cui and R. Housley. BADFET: Defeating modern secure boot
using second-order pulsed electromagnetic fault injection. In 11th
USENIX Workshop on Offensive Technologies, 2017.

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache Page 24 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis
[39] A. Dehbaoui, A.-P. Mirbaha, N. Moro, J.-M. Dutertre, and A. Tria.
Electromagnetic glitch on the AES round counter. In Constructive
Side-Channel Analysis and Secure Design. Springer, 2013.

[64] Google.
Announcing the Android Ready SE Alliance, 2021.
https://security.googleblog.com/2021/03/
announcing-android-ready-se-alliance.html.

[40] Duo Security. Apple iMac Pro and Secure Storage, 2018. https:
//duo.com/blog/apple-imac-pro-and-secure-storage.

[65] Google.

[41] J.-E. Ekberg, K. Kostiainen, and N. Asokan. The untapped potential
of trusted execution environments on mobile devices. IEEE Security
& Privacy, 12(4):29–37, 2014.
[42] M. A. Elmohr, H. Liao, and C. H. Gebotys. EM fault injection on
ARM and RISC-V. In 21st International Symposium on Quality
Electronic Design, pages 206–212, 2020.
[43] European Commission. (Unpublished) D5.1.: Vulnerabilities analysis and attack scenarios description, 2021. Horizon 2020: Extract
Forensic Information for LEAs from Encrypted SmartPhones (EXFILES).
[44] J. Fan, X. Guo, E. De Mulder, P. Schaumont, B. Preneel, and I. Verbauwhede. State-of-the-art of secure ECC implementations: a survey on known side-channel attacks and countermeasures. In IEEE
International Symposium on Hardware-Oriented Security and Trust,
pages 76–87. IEEE, 2010.
[45] J. Felba. Thermally conductive adhesives in electronics. In Advanced Adhesives in Electronics, pages 15–52. Elsevier, 2011.
[46] A. P. Fournaris, L. Pocero Fraile, and O. Koufopavlou. Exploiting
hardware vulnerabilities to attack embedded system devices: A survey of potent microarchitectural attacks. Electronics, 6(3):52, 2017.
[47] J. Friedman. TEMPEST: A signal problem. NSA Cryptologic
Spectrum, 35:76, 1972. https://www.nsa.gov/Portals/70/documents/
news-features/declassified-documents/cryptologic-spectrum/
tempest.pdf.

[48] C. Gaine, D. Aboulkassimi, S. Pontié, J.-P. Nikolovski, and J.-M.
Dutertre. Electromagnetic fault injection as a new forensic approach
for SoCs. In IEEE Int’l Workshop on Information Forensics and
Security, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2020.
[49] D. Genkin, L. Pachmanov, I. Pipman, E. Tromer, and Y. Yarom.
ECDSA key extraction from mobile devices via nonintrusive physical side channels. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGSAC Conference
on Computer and Communications Security, 2016.
[50] D. Genkin, A. Shamir, and E. Tromer. RSA key extraction via lowbandwidth acoustic cryptanalysis. In Annual Cryptology Conference, pages 444–461. Springer, 2014.
[51] M. Gentilal, P. Martins, and L. Sousa. TrustZone-backed bitcoin
wallet. In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Cryptography
and Security in Computing Systems, pages 25–28, 2017.
[52] GlobalPlatform. TEE Client API (v1.0), 2010.
[53] GlobalPlatform. Trusted User Interface API (v1.0), 2013.
[54] GlobalPlatform. TEE System Architecture (v1.2), 2017.
[55] GlobalPlatform. TEE Internal Core API (v1.2.1), 2019.
[56] GlobalPlatform. Technology Document Library, 2020. http://
globalplatform.org/specs-library/?filter-committee=tee.
[57] GlobalPlatform. TEE Management Framework (v1.1.2), 2020.
[58] GlobalPlatform. TEE Protection Profile (v1.3), 2020.
[59] GlobalPlatform. TEE Secure Element API (v1.1.2), 2021.
[60] GlobalPlatform. TEE Sockets API (v1.0.2), 2021.
[61] D. Gnad, J. Krautter, and M. B. Tahoori. Leaky noise: New sidechannel attack vectors in mixed-signal IoT devices. IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems, 2019.
[62] G. Goller and G. Sigl. Side channel attacks on smartphones and
embedded devices using standard radio equipment. In Constructive
Side-Channel Analysis and Secure Design. Springer, 2015.
[63] Google.
phone yet,

Titan M makes Pixel 3 our most secure
2020.
https://blog.google/products/pixel/
titan-m-makes-pixel-3-our-most-secure-phone-yet/.

Hardware security best practices, 2021.

https:

//source.android.com/security/best-practices/hardware#
strongbox-keymaster.

[66] S. Govindavajhala and A. W. Appel. Using memory errors to attack
a virtual machine. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy,
pages 154–165. IEEE, 2003.
[67] S. Guilley, L. Sauvage, J.-L. Danger, and N. Selmane. Fault injection resilience. In Workshop on Fault Diagnosis and Tolerance in
Cryptography, pages 51–65. IEEE, 2010.
[68] Y. Han, I. Christoudis, K. I. Diamantaras, S. Zonouz, and A. Petropulu. Side-channel-based code-execution monitoring systems: a survey. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 36(2):22–35, 2019.
[69] T. Heckmann, K. Markantonakis, D. Naccache, and T. Souvignet.
Forensic smartphone analysis using adhesives: Transplantation of
package on package components. Digital Investigation, 26:29–39,
2018.
[70] T. Heckmann, T. Souvignet, and D. Naccache. Electrically conductive adhesives, thermally conductive adhesives and UV adhesives in
data extraction forensics. Digital Investigation, 21:53–64, 2017.
[71] T. Heckmann, T. Souvignet, and D. Naccache. Decrease of energy
deposited during laser decapsulation attacks by dyeing and pigmenting the ECA: Application to the forensic micro-repair of wire bonding. Digital Investigation, 29:210–218, 2019.
[72] L. Hemme. A differential fault attack against early rounds of (triple-)
DES. In International Workshop on Cryptographic Hardware and
Embedded Systems, pages 254–267. Springer, 2004.
[73] B. Hettwer, S. Gehrer, and T. Güneysu. Applications of machine
learning techniques in side-channel attacks: A survey. Journal of
Cryptographic Engineering, pages 1–28, 2020.
[74] A. Heuser and M. Zohner. Intelligent machine homicide: Breaking
cryptographic devices using support vector machines. In Constructive Side-Channel Analysis and Secure Design. Springer, 2012.
[75] A.-T. Hoang, N. Hanley, and M. O’Neill. Plaintext: A missing feature for enhancing the power of deep learning in side-channel analysis? IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded
Systems, pages 49–85, 2020.
[76] Huawei.

iTrustee, 2020.
https://www.huawei.com/en/
sustainability/stable-secure-network/privacy-protection.

[77] M. Hutter and J.-M. Schmidt. The temperature side channel and
heating fault attacks. In International Conference on Smart Card Research and Advanced Applications, pages 219–235. Springer, 2013.
[78] IEEE. Call for Papers: 7th IEEE European Symposium on Security
and Privacy, 2021. https://www.ieee-security.org/TC/EuroSP2022/
cfp.html.
[79] International Association for Cryptologic Research. CHES 2021:
Artifact evaluation, 2021. https://ches.iacr.org/2021/artifacts.
php.
[80] V. Karande, E. Bauman, Z. Lin, and L. Khan. SGX-Log: Securing
system logs with SGX. In Proceedings of the ACM Asia Conference
on Computer and Communications Security, pages 19–30, 2017.
[81] G. Kenworthy and P. Rohatgi. Mobile device security: The case for
side channel resistance. Mobile Security Technologies, 2012.
[82] C. H. Kim and J.-J. Quisquater. Faults, injection methods, and fault
attacks. IEEE Design & Test of Computers, 24(6):544–545, 2007.
[83] P. Kocher, J. Jaffe, and B. Jun. Differential power analysis. In Annual
International Cryptology Conference. Springer, 1999.
[84] R. Könighofer. A fast and cache-timing resistant implementation of
the AES. In Cryptographers’ Track at the RSA Conference, pages
187–202. Springer, 2008.
[85] T. Korak and M. Hoefler. On the effects of clock and power supply
tampering on two microcontroller platforms. In Workshop on Fault
Diagnosis and Tolerance in Cryptography, pages 8–17. IEEE, 2014.

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache Page 25 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis
[86] T. Korak, M. Hutter, B. Ege, and L. Batina. Clock glitch attacks
in the presence of heating. In Workshop on Fault Diagnosis and
Tolerance in Cryptography, pages 104–114, 2014.
[87] I. Krstić. Behind the scenes with iOS security. Black Hat Conference, 2016.
[88] R. Kumar, P. Jovanovic, and I. Polian. Precise fault-injections using
voltage and temperature manipulation for differential cryptanalysis.
In IEEE 20th Int’l On-Line Testing Symposium. IEEE, 2014.
[89] R. Kunkel, D. L. Quoc, F. Gregor, S. Arnautov, P. Bhatotia, and
C. Fetzer. TensorSCONE: A secure TensorFlow framework using
Intel SGX. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.04413, 2019.
[90] D. Lee, D. Kohlbrenner, S. Shinde, K. Asanović, and D. Song. Keystone: An open framework for architecting trusted execution environments. In 15th European Conference on Computer Systems,
2020.
[91] P. Leignac, O. Potin, J.-B. Rigaud, J.-M. Dutertre, and S. Pontié.
Comparison of side-channel leakage on rich and trusted execution
environments. In Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Cryptography
and Security in Computing Systems, pages 19–22, 2019.
[92] H. Li, G. Du, C. Shao, L. Dai, G. Xu, and J. Guo. Heavy-ion microbeam fault injection into SRAM-based FPGA implementations
of cryptographic circuits. IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science,
62(3):1341–1348, 2015.
[93] W. Li, H. Li, H. Chen, and Y. Xia. Adattester: Secure online mobile advertisement attestation using TrustZone. In Proceedings of
the 13th Annual International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services, pages 75–88, 2015.
[94] H. Liao and C. Gebotys. Methodology for EM fault injection:
Charge-based fault model. In Design, Automation & Test in Europe
Conference and Exhibition, pages 256–259. IEEE, 2019.
[95] Linaro Ltd. Trusted Firmware Open Governance Project, 2020.
https://www.trustedfirmware.org/.
[96] M. Lipp, A. Kogler, D. Oswald, M. Schwarz, C. Easdon, C. Canella,
and D. Gruss. PLATYPUS: Software-based power side-channel attacks on x86. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2021.
[97] O. Lisovets, D. Knichel, T. Moos, and A. Moradi. Let’s take it offline: Boosting brute-force attacks on iPhone’s user authentication
through SCA. IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and
Embedded Systems, 2021.

[106] A. Menon, S. Murugan, C. Rebeiro, N. Gala, and K. Veezhinathan.
Shakti-T: A RISC-V processor with lightweight security extensions.
In Proceedings of the Hardware and Architectural Support for Security and Privacy, pages 1–8. ACM, 2017.
[107] A. Menu, S. Bhasin, J.-M. Dutertre, J.-B. Rigaud, and J.-L. Danger. Precise spatio-temporal electromagnetic fault injections on data
transfers. In Workshop on Fault Diagnosis and Tolerance in Cryptography, pages 1–8. IEEE, 2019.
[108] T. S. Messerges, E. A. Dabbish, and R. H. Sloan. Investigations
of power analysis attacks on smartcards. Smartcard, 99:151–161,
1999.
[109] T. S. Messerges, E. A. Dabbish, and R. H. Sloan. Examining smartcard security under the threat of power analysis attacks. IEEE Transactions on Computers, 51(5):541–552, 2002.
[110] S. S. Mirzargar and M. Stojilović. Physical side-channel attacks and
covert communication on FPGAs: A survey. In 29th Int’l Conference on Field Programmable Logic and Applications. IEEE, 2019.
[111] D. P. Montminy, R. O. Baldwin, M. A. Temple, and M. E. Oxley. Differential electromagnetic attacks on a 32-bit microprocessor using
software defined radios. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 8(12):2101–2114, 2013.
[112] A. Moradi and A. Poschmann. Lightweight cryptography and DPA
countermeasures: A survey. In International Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security, pages 68–79. Springer, 2010.
[113] N. Moro, A. Dehbaoui, K. Heydemann, B. Robisson, and E. Encrenaz. Electromagnetic fault injection: Towards a fault model on a
32-bit microcontroller. In Workshop on Fault Diagnosis and Tolerance in Cryptography, pages 77–88. IEEE, 2013.
[114] M. Msgna, K. Markantonakis, and K. Mayes. Precise instructionlevel side channel profiling of embedded processors. In Int’l Conference on Information Security Practice and Experience. Springer,
2014.
[115] K. Murdock, D. Oswald, F. D. Garcia, J. Van Bulck, D. Gruss, and
F. Piessens. Plundervolt: Software-based fault injection attacks
against Intel SGX. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy,
2020.
[116] Y. Nakano, Y. Souissi, R. Nguyen, L. Sauvage, J.-L. Danger, S. Guilley, S. Kiyomoto, and Y. Miyake. A pre-processing composition for
secret key recovery on Android smartphone. In IFIP Int’l Workshop
on Information Security Theory and Practice. Springer, 2014.

[98] V. Lomne. Common criteria certification of a smartcard: A technical overview (tutorial). International Workshop on Cryptographic
Hardware and Embedded Systems, 2016.

[117] NCC Group. There’s a hole in your SoC: Glitching the MediaTek BootROM, 2020. https://research.nccgroup.com/2020/10/15/
theres-a-hole-in-your-soc-glitching-the-mediatek-bootrom/.

[99] J. Longo, E. De Mulder, D. Page, and M. Tunstall. SoC it to EM:
electromagnetic side-channel attacks on a complex system-on-chip.
In International Workshop on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems, pages 620–640. Springer, 2015.

[118] S. B. Örs, E. Oswald, and B. Preneel. Power-analysis attacks on an
FPGA—first experimental results. In Cryptographic Hardware and
Embedded Systems, pages 35–50. Springer, 2003.

[100] H. Maghrebi, T. Portigliatti, and E. Prouff. Breaking cryptographic
implementations using deep learning techniques. In Int’l Conference on Security, Privacy, and Applied Cryptography Engineering.
Springer, 2016.
[101] F. Majéric, E. Bourbao, and L. Bossuet. Electromagnetic security
tests for SoC. In IEEE International Conference on Electronics, Circuits and Systems, pages 265–268. IEEE, 2016.
[102] T. Mandt, M. Solnik, and D. Wang.
Demystifying
the Secure Enclave Processor.
Black Hat Conference,
2016.
https://www.blackhat.com/docs/us-16/materials/
us-16-Mandt-Demystifying-The-Secure-Enclave-Processor.pdf.
[103] S. Mangard, E. Oswald, and T. Popp. Power analysis attacks: Revealing the secrets of smart cards, volume 31. Springer Science &
Business Media, 2008.
[104] K. Markantonakis, M. Tunstall, G. Hancke, I. Askoxylakis, and
K. Mayes. Attacking smart card systems: Theory and practice. Information Security Technical Report, 14(2):46–56, 2009.
[105] K. E. Mayes and K. Markantonakis. Smart cards, tokens, security
and applications, volume 2. Springer, 2008.

[119] D. Page and F. Vercauteren. A fault attack on pairing-based cryptography. IEEE Transactions on Computers, 55(9):1075–1080, 2006.
[120] J. Park, X. Xu, Y. Jin, D. Forte, and M. Tehranipoor. Powerbased side-channel instruction-level disassembler.
In 55th
ACM/ESDA/IEEE Design Automation Conference. IEEE, 2018.
[121] Pew Research Center. Number of smartphone users worldwide
from 2016 to 2021, 2019. https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/
fact-sheet/mobile/.
[122] S. Picek, I. P. Samiotis, J. Kim, A. Heuser, S. Bhasin, and A. Legay.
On the performance of convolutional neural networks for sidechannel analysis. In International Conference on Security, Privacy,
and Applied Cryptography Engineering. Springer, 2018.
[123] G. Piret and J.-J. Quisquater. A differential fault attack technique
against SPN structures, with application to the AES and KHAZAD.
In International Workshop on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems, pages 77–88. Springer, 2003.
[124] V. Pouget, A. Douin, G. Foucard, P. Peronnard, D. Lewis, P. Fouillat,
and R. Velazco. Dynamic testing of an SRAM-based FPGA by timeresolved laser fault injection. In 14th IEEE International On-Line
Testing Symposium, pages 295–301. IEEE, 2008.

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache Page 26 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis
[125] P. Qiu, D. Wang, Y. Lyu, and G. Qu. VoltJockey: Breaching TrustZone by software-controlled voltage manipulation over multi-core
frequencies. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Computer and Communications Security, 2019.

[143] C. Shepherd, R. N. Akram, and K. Markantonakis. Remote credential management with mutual attestation for trusted execution environments. In IFIP International Conference on Information Security
Theory and Practice, pages 157–173. Springer, 2018.

[126] P. Qiu, D. Wang, Y. Lyu, and G. Qu. VoltJockey: Breaking SGX
by software-controlled voltage-induced hardware faults. In Asian
Hardware Oriented Security and Trust Symposium. IEEE, 2019.

[144] C. Shepherd, G. Arfaoui, I. Gurulian, R. P. Lee, K. Markantonakis,
R. N. Akram, D. Sauveron, and E. Conchon. Secure and trusted
execution: Past, present, and future-a critical review in the context
of the internet of things and cyber-physical systems. In 15th IEEE
Int’l Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and
Communications, pages 168–177. IEEE, 2016.

[127] Qualcomm.
Guard
comm
Snapdragon

Your Data with the
Mobile
Platform,

Qual2020.

https://www.qualcomm.com/media/documents/files/
guard-your-data-with-the-qualcomm-snapdragon-mobile-platform.
pdf.

[128] J.-J. Quisquater and D. Samyde. Electromagnetic analysis (EMA):
Measures and counter-measures for smart cards. In International
Conference on Research in Smart Cards. Springer, 2001.
[129] J.-J. Quisquater and D. Samyde. Eddy current for magnetic analysis
with active sensor. Proceedings of Esmart, pages 185–194, 2002.
[130] J. Raoult, P. Payet, R. Omarouayache, and L. Chusseau. Electromagnetic coupling circuit model of a magnetic near-field probe to a
microstrip line. In 10th International Workshop on the Electromagnetic Compatibility of Integrated Circuits. IEEE, 2015.
[131] L. Riviere, Z. Najm, P. Rauzy, J.-L. Danger, J. Bringer, and
L. Sauvage. High precision fault injections on the instruction cache
of ARMv7-M architectures. In IEEE International Symposium on
Hardware Oriented Security and Trust, pages 62–67. IEEE, 2015.
[132] S. Saab, P. Rohatgi, and C. Hampel. Side-channel protections
for cryptographic instruction set extensions. IACR Cryptol. ePrint
Arch., 2016:700, 2016.
[133] Samsung.

TEEGRIS, 2020.

https://developer.samsung.com/

teegris/overview.html.

[134] Samsung.
triggered?,

What is a Knox Warranty Bit and how is it
2020.
https://docs.samsungknox.com/admin/
knox-platform-for-enterprise/faqs/faq-115013562087.htm.

[135] A. Sayakkara, N.-A. Le-Khac, and M. Scanlon. A survey of
electromagnetic side-channel attacks and discussion on their caseprogressing potential for digital forensics. Digital Investigation,
29:43–54, 2019.
[136] J.-M. Schmidt, M. Hutter, and T. Plos. Optical fault attacks on AES:
A threat in violet. In Workshop on Fault Diagnosis and Tolerance
in Cryptography, pages 13–22. IEEE, 2009.
[137] J.-M. Schmidt, T. Plos, M. Kirschbaum, M. Hutter, M. Medwed, and
C. Herbst. Side-channel leakage across borders. In International
Conference on Smart Card Research and Advanced Applications,
pages 36–48. Springer, 2010.
[138] D. Schrammel, S. Weiser, S. Steinegger, M. Schwarzl, M. Schwarz,
S. Mangard, and D. Gruss. Donky: Domain keys–efficient inprocess isolation for RISC-V and X86. In 29th USENIX Security
Symposium, pages 1677–1694, 2020.
[139] C. Segarra, R. Delgado-Gonzalo, M. Lemay, P.-L. Aublin, P. Pietzuch, and V. Schiavoni. Using trusted execution environments for
secure stream processing of medical data. In IFIP International
Conference on Distributed Applications and Interoperable Systems,
pages 91–107. Springer, 2019.
[140] B. Selmke, F. Hauschild, and J. Obermaier. Peak clock: Fault injection into PLL-based systems via clock manipulation. In 3rd ACM
Workshop on Attacks and Solutions in Hardware Security Workshop,
2019.

[145] C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, and G.-A. Jaloyan. LIRA-V:
Lightweight remote attestation for constrained RISC-V devices. In
IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops. IEEE, 2021. (Preprint:
arXiv:2102.08804, https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.08804).
[146] S. Skorobogatov. The bumpy road towards iPhone 5c NAND mirroring. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.04327, 2016.
[147] S. P. Skorobogatov and R. J. Anderson. Optical fault induction attacks. In International Workshop on Cryptographic Hardware and
Embedded Systems, pages 2–12. Springer, 2002.
[148] R. Spreitzer, V. Moonsamy, T. Korak, and S. Mangard. Systematic
classification of side-channel attacks: A case study for mobile devices. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 20(1), 2017.
[149] K. D. Staller. Low temperature plasma decapsulation of copperwire-bonded and exposed copper metallization devices. In 36th Int’l
Symposium for Testing and Failure Analysis, 2010.
[150] Statista. ARM’s market share and targets across key technology markets in 2019 and 2028 fiscal years, 2020. https://www.statista.com/
statistics/1132112/arm-market-share-targets/.
[151] Statista. Number of smartphone users worldwide from 2016
to 2021, 12 2020. https://www.statista.com/statistics/330695/
number-of-smartphone-users-worldwide/.
[152] Statista. COVID-19 pandemic revives PC demand, January 2021.
https://www.statista.com/chart/12578/global-pc-shipments/.
[153] A. Tang, S. Sethumadhavan, and S. Stolfo. CLKSCREW: Exposing the perils of security-oblivious energy management. In 26th
USENIX Security Symposium, pages 1057–1074, 2017.
[154] M. Tehranipoor and F. Koushanfar. A survey of hardware trojan taxonomy and detection. IEEE Design and Test of Computers,
27(1):10–25, 2010.
[155] D. Thapar, M. Alam, and D. Mukhopadhyay. TranSCA: Crossfamily profiled side-channel attacks using transfer learning on deep
neural networks. IACR Cryptol. ePrint Arch., 2020:1258, 2020.
[156] N. Timmers and C. Mune. Escalating privileges in Linux using voltage fault injection. In Workshop on Fault Diagnosis and Tolerance
in Cryptography, pages 1–8. IEEE, 2017.
[157] N. Timmers and A. Spruyt. Bypassing secure boot using fault
injection, 2016. https://www.blackhat.com/docs/eu-16/materials/
eu-16-Timmers-Bypassing-Secure-Boot-Using-Fault-Injection.pdf.
[158] N. Timmers, A. Spruyt, and M. Witteman. Controlling PC on ARM
using fault injection. In Workshop on Fault Diagnosis and Tolerance
in Cryptography, pages 25–35, 2016.
[159] R. Torrance and D. James. The state-of-the-art in IC reverse engineering. In International Workshop on Cryptographic Hardware
and Embedded Systems, pages 363–381. Springer, 2009.
[160] T. Trouchkine, G. Bouffard, and J. Clédière. Fault injection characterization on modern CPUs. In IFIP International Conference on
Information Security Theory and Practice. Springer, 2019.

[141] C. Shepherd, R. N. Akram, and K. Markantonakis. EmLog: Tamperresistant system logging for constrained devices with TEEs. In IFIP
International Conference on Information Security Theory and Practice, pages 75–92. Springer, 2017.

[161] Trustonic.

[142] C. Shepherd, R. N. Akram, and K. Markantonakis. Establishing mutually trusted channels for remote sensing devices with trusted execution environments. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security, pages 1–10, 2017.

[163] United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team (USCERT). The Common Criteria, 2013. https://us-cert.cisa.

technology/.

Trustonic TEEs, 2020.

https://www.trustonic.com/

[162] M. Tunstall. Smart card security. In Smart Cards, Tokens, Security
and Applications, pages 217–251. Springer, 2017.

gov/bsi/articles/best-practices/requirements-engineering/
the-common-criteria.

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache Page 27 of 28

Physical Fault Injection and Side-Channel Attacks on Mobile Devices: A Comprehensive Analysis
[164] USENIX. USENIX Security ’21 Call for Artifacts, 2021. https://
www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity21/call-for-artifacts.
[165] J. G. Van Woudenberg, M. F. Witteman, and F. Menarini. Practical
optical fault injection on secure microcontrollers. In Workshop on
Fault Diagnosis and Tolerance in Cryptography. IEEE, 2011.
[166] A. Vasselle, P. Maurine, and M. Cozzi. Breaking mobile firmware
encryption through near-field side-channel analysis. In 3rd ACM
Workshop on Attacks and Solutions in Hardware Security Workshop,
2019.
[167] A. Vasselle, H. Thiebeauld, Q. Maouhoub, A. Morisset, and
S. Ermeneux. Laser-induced fault injection on smartphone bypassing the secure boot. In Workshop on Fault Diagnosis and Tolerance
in Cryptography, pages 41–48, 2017.
[168] T. Vidas, D. Votipka, and N. Christin. All your droid are belong
to us: A survey of current Android attacks. Workshop on Offensive
Technologies, 11:8–9, 2011.
[169] Virtual Open Systems.
Mixed criticality systems enabled
on ARMv8 architectures to power automotive IVI gateways, 2021.
http://www.virtualopensystems.com/en/services/
arm-trusted-firmware-extended-services/.
[170] H. Wang. Side-channel analysis of AES based on deep learning.
Master’s thesis, KTH Stockholm, 2019. https://www.diva-portal.
org/smash/get/diva2:1325691/FULLTEXT01.pdf.
[171] R. Wang, H. Wang, and E. Dubrova. Far field EM side-channel attack on AES using deep learning. In Proceedings of the 4th ACM
Workshop on Attacks and Solutions in Hardware Security, 2020.
[172] K. Weiss, T. M. Khoshgoftaar, and D. Wang. A survey of transfer
learning. Journal of Big Data, 3(1):1–40, 2016.
[173] Wired.
Declassified NSA document reveals the secret history of TEMPEST, 2008.
https://www.wired.com/2008/04/
nsa-releases-se/.
[174] S.-M. Yen and M. Joye. Checking before output may not be enough
against fault-based cryptanalysis. IEEE Transactions on Computers,
49(9):967–970, 2000.
[175] Y. Zhou and D. Feng. Side-channel attacks: Ten years after its publication and the impacts on cryptographic module security testing.
IACR Cryptol. ePrint Arch., 2005:388, 2005.

Carlton Shepherd (B.Sc., Ph.D.) received his
Ph.D. Information Security from the Information
Security Group at Royal Holloway, University of
London, and his B.Sc. in Computer Science from
Newcastle University. He is currently a Senior Research Fellow at the Information Security Group
at Royal Holloway, University of London. His
research interests centre around the security of
trusted execution environments (TEEs) and their
applications, secure CPU design, embedded systems, applied cryptography, and hardware security.
Konstantinos Markantonakis (B.Sc., M.Sc.,
MBA, Ph.D.) is a Professor of Information Security
in Royal Holloway University of London, and the
Director of the Information Security Group Smart
Card and IoT Security Centre (SCC). He obtained
his B.Sc. (Lancaster University), M.Sc., Ph.D.
(London) and his MBA in International Management from Royal Holloway, University of London.
His research interests include smart card security
and applications, secure cryptographic protocol
design, embedded systems security, autonomous
systems and trusted execution environments.

Nico van Heijningen (M.Sc.) is a forensic researcher at the Netherlands Forensic Institute (NFI). His
main interest is applied cryptanalysis, which includes password recovery, fault injections and sidechannel analysis.

Driss Aboulkassimi (S’09) received his master
and engineering degree from the University of
Montpellier. He joined the Secure Architectures
and Systems (SAS) lab in 2010 from Ecole Nationale Superieure des Mines de St Etienne (ENSMSE) as a research engineer in the physical security characterisation of embedded systems. In
2014, Driss joined CEA-leti specialising in hardware security testing of mobile devices. He participates in and manages several European (EXFILES,
MOBITRUST, HINT, PCAS) and French projects
(CSAFE+, PACLIDO, TISPHANIE, BIOFENCE,
SESAME, HOMERE, etc.).
Clément Gaine is a Ph.D. student at the CEA in
France. He is in the joint research team between
the CEA and the Mines de Saint-Etienne, France.
His research interests are fault injections and particularly electromagnetic fault injections.

Thibaut Heckmann (B.Sc., M.Sc., Ph.D.) is currently a military senior officer at the French national gendarmerie, associate researcher at the
École normale supérieure of Paris, and a member of the national gendarmerie research center
(CREOGN). From 2015 to 2020 he was the head
of the national data extraction unit of the French
gendarmerie Laboratory’s digital forensic department (IRCGN) and he was associate researcher at
the Royal Holloway, University of London from
2017 to 2018. He received a M.Sc in fundamental
physics and a Ph.D. in mathematics from the Ecole
normale supérieure of Paris (ENS). In 2018, he
received the European Emerging Forensic Scientist Award 2018-2021 from the European Academy
of Forensic Science (EAFS) and the Cybersecurity
Award from Cercle K2 in 2020.
David Naccache is a cryptographer, currently a
professor at the École normale supérieure and a
member of its Computer Laboratory. He was previously a professor at Panthéon-Assas University. He
received his Ph.D. in 1995 from the École nationale
supérieure des télécommunications. His most notable work is in public-key cryptography, including
the cryptanalysis of digital signature schemes. His
areas of interest are side channel attacks, forensics
and the detection of software flaws in embedded
systems.

C. Shepherd, K. Markantonakis, N. van Heijningen, D. Aboulkassimi, C. Gaine, T. Heckmann, and D. Naccache Page 28 of 28

