BOOK 9781420010367 | chapters=72 ok=72 empty=0 total_chars=677196



===== [1/72] chapter-01.html =====

C4630“Raval and Ray provide a comprehensive and modern exposition of a rapidly evolving eld: network biology. This text will help biology, mathematics, and computer science students alike to become acquainted with the history and frontiers of research in this exciting area.”—Joshua B. Plotkin, University of Pennsylvania“Finally a book has arrived that describes the basics of biological complexity. Written by leading scientists Raval and Ray, it provides a scholarly account of the concepts of network theory. It describes in great detail the experimental and computational methods for identifying and predicting biological networks and reveals how network analysis can be applied to solve fundamental questions in biology and medicine. Introduction to Biological Networks is easily the best read available on this important and rapidly developing eld.” —Cornelis Murre, University of California, San DiegoFeatures• Provides a conceptual overview of biological interaction networks as a unifying theme in genomics-inspired biology• Explains the biological signicance of interaction networks through numerous examples• Gives a technical introduction to network analysis and the methods by which interaction networks are constructed• Describes relevant biological and mathematical/statistical concepts in separate boxes • Leads readers from very fundamental concepts to the most current research in biology and medicineComputational BiologyINTRODUCTION TO BIOLOGICAL NETWORKSRAVAL RAYINTRODUCTION TOBIOLOGICAL NETWORKSALPAN RAVALANIMESH RAYC4630_Cover.indd 1 3/22/13 10:15 AMINTRODUCTION TOBIOLOGICAL NETWORKSALPAN RAVALINSTITUTE OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES CLAREMONT GRADUATE UNIVERSITYANIMESH RAYSCHOOL OF APPLIED LIFE SCIENCES KECK GRADUATE INSTITUTEINTRODUCTION TOBIOLOGICAL NETWORKSC4630_FM.indd 1 3/28/13 10:15 AMCHAPMAN & HALL/CRC Mathematical and Computational Biology SeriesAims and scope: This series aims to capture new developments and summarize what is known over the entire spectrum of mathematical and computational biology and medicine. It seeks to encourage the integration of mathematical, statistical, and computational methods into biology by publishing a broad range of textbooks, reference works, and handbooks. The titles included in the series are meant to appeal to students, researchers, and professionals in the mathematical, statistical and computational sciences, fundamental biology and bioengineering, as well as interdisciplinary researchers involved in the eld. The inclusion of concrete examples and applications, and programming techniques and examples, is highly encouraged.Series EditorsN. F. BrittonDepartment of Mathematical SciencesUniversity of BathXihong LinDepartment of BiostatisticsHarvard UniversityHershel M. SaferSchool of Computer ScienceTel Aviv UniversityMaria Victoria SchneiderEuropean Bioinformatics InstituteMona SinghDepartment of Computer SciencePrinceton UniversityAnna TramontanoDepartment of Biochemical SciencesUniversity of Rome La SapienzaProposals for the series should be submitted to one of the series editors above or directly to:CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group3 Park Square, Milton ParkAbingdon, Oxfordshire OX14 4RNUKC4630_FM.indd 2 3/28/13 10:15 AM


===== [2/72] chapter-02.html =====

Published TitlesAlgorithms in Bioinformatics: A Practical Introduction Wing-Kin SungBioinformatics: A Practical Approach Shui Qing YeBiological Computation Ehud Lamm and Ron UngerBiological Sequence Analysis Using the SeqAn C++ Library Andreas Gogol-Döring and Knut ReinertCancer Modelling and Simulation Luigi PreziosiCancer Systems Biology Edwin WangCell Mechanics: From Single Scale-Based Models to Multiscale Modeling Arnaud Chauvière, Luigi Preziosi, and Claude VerdierCellular Potts Models: Multiscale Extensions and Biological Applications Marco Scianna and Luigi PreziosiClustering in Bioinformatics and Drug Discovery John D. MacCuish and Norah E. MacCuishCombinatorial Pattern Matching Algorithms in Computational Biology Using Perl and R Gabriel Valiente Computational Biology: A Statistical Mechanics Perspective Ralf BlosseyComputational Hydrodynamics of Capsules and Biological Cells C. PozrikidisComputational Neuroscience: A Comprehensive Approach Jianfeng FengComputational Systems Biology of Cancer Emmanuel Barillot, Laurence Calzone, Philippe Hupé, Jean-Philippe Vert, and Andrei Zinovyev Data Analysis Tools for DNA Microarrays Sorin DraghiciDifferential Equations and Mathematical Biology, Second Edition D.S. Jones, M.J. Plank, and B.D. SleemanDynamics of Biological Systems Michael SmallEngineering Genetic Circuits Chris J. MyersExactly Solvable Models of Biological Invasion Sergei V. Petrovskii and Bai-Lian LiGame-Theoretical Models in Biology Mark Broom and Jan Rychtáˇr Gene Expression Studies Using Affymetrix Microarrays Hinrich Göhlmann and Willem TalloenGenome Annotation Jung Soh, Paul M.K. Gordon, and Christoph W. SensenGlycome Informatics: Methods and Applications Kiyoko F. Aoki-KinoshitaHandbook of Hidden Markov Models in Bioinformatics Martin GolleryIntroduction to Bioinformatics Anna TramontanoIntroduction to Biological Networks Alpan Raval and Animesh RayIntroduction to Bio-Ontologies Peter N. Robinson and Sebastian BauerIntroduction to Computational Proteomics Golan YonaIntroduction to Proteins: Structure, Function, and Motion Amit Kessel and Nir Ben-TalAn Introduction to Systems Biology: Design Principles of Biological Circuits Uri AlonC4630_FM.indd 3 3/28/13 10:15 AMKinetic Modelling in Systems Biology Oleg Demin and Igor GoryaninKnowledge Discovery in Proteomics Igor Jurisica and Dennis WigleMeta-analysis and Combining Information in Genetics and Genomics Rudy Guerra and Darlene R. GoldsteinMethods in Medical Informatics: Fundamentals of Healthcare Programming in Perl, Python, and Ruby Jules J. BermanModeling and Simulation of Capsules and Biological Cells C. PozrikidisNiche Modeling: Predictions from Statistical Distributions David StockwellNormal Mode Analysis: Theory and Applications to Biological and Chemical Systems Qiang Cui and Ivet BaharOptimal Control Applied to Biological Models Suzanne Lenhart and John T. Workman Pattern Discovery in Bioinformatics: Theory & Algorithms Laxmi ParidaPython for Bioinformatics Sebastian BassiQuantitative Biology: From Molecular to Cellular SystemsSebastian BassiSpatial Ecology Stephen Cantrell, Chris Cosner, and Shigui RuanSpatiotemporal Patterns in Ecology and Epidemiology: Theory, Models, and Simulation Horst Malchow, Sergei V. Petrovskii, and Ezio VenturinoStatistics and Data Analysis for Microarrays Using R and Bioconductor, Second Edition Sorin Dr˘aghiciStochastic Modelling for Systems Biology, Second Edition Darren J. WilkinsonStructural Bioinformatics: An Algorithmic Approach Forbes J. BurkowskiThe Ten Most Wanted Solutions in Protein Bioinformatics Anna TramontanoPublished Titles (continued)C4630_FM.indd 4 3/28/13 10:15 AMINTRODUCTION TOBIOLOGICAL NETWORKSALPAN RAVALANIMESH RAYC4630_FM.indd 5 3/28/13 10:15 AMFlowering Apple Tree, c.1912, by Piet Mondrian (reproduced with permission, courtesy Gemeentemuseum Den Haag).CRC PressTaylor & Francis Group6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742© 2013 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLCCRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa businessNo claim to original U.S. Government worksVersion Date: 20130403International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4200-1036-7 (eBook - PDF)This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmit-ted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site athttp://www.taylorandfrancis.comand the CRC Press Web site athttp://www.crcpress.com


===== [3/72] chapter-03.html =====

ContentsPreface xi1 The Living Interactome 11.1 Biological Function Depends on Context . . . . . . . . 91.2 The Nature of Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121.2.1 Protein–Protein Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . 121.2.2 Protein–DNA Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141.2.3 Genetic Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141.3 Network as a Metaphor in Biology . . . . . . . . . . . . 201.4 Metabolic Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211.5 Robustness at the Network Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . 282 Experimental Inference of Interactions 332.1 Direct versus Indirect Inference of Interactions . . . . . 332.2 Physical versus Genetic Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . 362.3 The Two-Hybrid Interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.4 Aﬃnity Co-puriﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 452.5 DNA-Protein Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 492.6 Classiﬁcation and Interpretation of Genetic Interactions 512.7 Inference of Genetic Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . 562.7.1 Finding Genetic Interactions with InhibitoryRNA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 582.7.2 Genetic Interactions in Organisms with MultipleCell Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 613 Prediction of Physical Interactions 653.1 Entropy and Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 663.1.1 Interpretations of Mutual Information . . . . . . 703.2 Boolean Networks REVEAL Regulatory Interactions . 723.2.1 The REVEAL Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . 733.3 Variants of the REVEAL Method . . . . . . . . . . . . 763.4 Dynamic Bayesian Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 803.4.1 Scoring and Network Inference with DBNs . . . 813.4.2 Extensions, Variants, and Applications of DBNs 843.5 Predicting Protein-Protein Interactions . . . . . . . . . 893.5.1 Structural Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.5.2 Gene Neighborhood Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . 933.5.3 Phylogenetic Proﬁles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 943.5.4 Gene Fusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96viiviii3.5.5 History of Correlated Mutations . . . . . . . . . 973.5.6 Existence of “Interologs” . . . . . . . . . . . . . 983.6 Data Integration to Improve Prediction Performance . . 993.6.1 Bayesian Networks and Feature Integration . . . 1014 Metabolic Networks and Genetic Interactions 1074.1 Optimal Metabolic States and Flux Balance Analysis . 1094.1.1 Flux Balance Analysis: Basic Assumptions . . . . 1114.1.2 Flux Balance Analysis: The Objective Function . 1154.1.3 Optimization Problem in Flux Balance Analysis 1164.1.4 FBA Enables the Genotype–Phenotype Connec-tion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1174.2 Minimization of Metabolic Adjustment and Gene Dele-tions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1194.3 Predicting Genetic Interactions among Metabolic Genes 1204.3.1 Computational Simulation of Mutation Eﬀects . 1244.4 General Methods for Predicting Genetic Interactions . . 1274.4.1 “2hop” Properties and Genetic Interactions . . . 1314.4.2 Predicting Genetic Interactions from Protein In-teraction Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1334.5 Approaches for Integrated Prediction of Networks . . . 1335 Testing Inferred Networks 1395.1 Co-expression as a Test of Physical Interaction . . . . . 1395.2 An Experimental Test of Predicted Protein–Protein In-teractions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1415.3 Combining Protein Interactions Discovered by High-Throughput Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1455.3.1 Polya’s Proofreaders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1465.3.2 Integration of Independent High-ThroughputDatasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1475.4 From Curated Protein–Protein Interactions to ProteinComplexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1515.4.1 Complex Identiﬁcation Using Markov Clustering 1525.4.2 Complex Identiﬁcation Using Supervised Clus-tering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1565.5 Testing DNA–Protein Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . 1595.6 Congruence of Biological Function among InteractingPartners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1615.7 Testing Genetic Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1655.8 Structure-Based Tests of Interaction . . . . . . . . . . . 1686 Small Model Networks 1716.1 Life Cycle of the Lambda Phage . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1726.2 Interaction Network in the Lysis–Lysogeny Decision . . 1756.2.1 Regulatory Loops in the Lysis–Lysogeny Deci-sion and Maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175ix6.2.2 The Lysis–Lysogeny Switch . . . . . . . . . . . . 1786.2.3 Stability of the Prophage . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1796.2.4 Induction of the Lytic Cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . 1816.3 Recruitment of Proteins as a Theme in Regulatory Net-works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1826.3.1 Regulatory Mechanisms Other than Passive Re-cruitment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1826.4 The Network of Cell Cycle Regulation . . . . . . . . . . 1837 Tractable Models of Large Networks 1937.1 Models of Regular Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1957.1.1 Path Length in a Regular Network . . . . . . . . 1977.1.2 Clustering Coeﬃcient of a Regular Network . . . 1977.2 Random Network Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1997.2.1 Random Networks with Speciﬁed Degree Distri-butions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2017.2.2 Clustering Coeﬃcient of a General Random Net-work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2027.2.3 Path Length in a General Random Network . . . 2047.2.4 The Conﬁguration Model and Its Modiﬁcations . 2067.2.5 Erd¨os–Renyi Random Networks . . . . . . . . . . 2097.2.6 Small-World Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2097.3 Evolving Networks by Preferential Attachment . . . . . 2117.4 Evolving Networks Based on Gene Duplication . . . . . 2167.4.1 Network Growth via Node Duplication Alone . . 2177.4.2 A Duplication–Mutation–Complementation Modelof Network Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2197.4.3 A Generalized Model of Duplication Followed byDivergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2227.5 Reconstruction of Ancient Networks from Modern Ones 2267.5.1 Network Reconstruction Based on the DMCModel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2277.6 Large-Scale Biophysics-Inspired Models for Protein In-teraction Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2297.6.1 The MpK Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2297.6.2 A Conﬁguration-Like Model Based on Protein“Stickiness” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2347.6.3 Growing Crystals on Evolutionary Timescales . . 2358 Network Modularity and Robustness 2378.1 Modularity Implies Robustness in the Drosophila Seg-ment Polarity Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2388.2 Topological and Functional Aspects of Network Modu-larity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2468.2.1 Newman–Girvan Modularity . . . . . . . . . . . 2488.2.2 Functional Modules from Expression Data . . . . 253x8.3 Robustness Implications of Topology of Biological Net-works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2558.4 Robustness and Network Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . 2578.5 Network Robustness by Rewiring . . . . . . . . . . . . 2619 Networks and Disease 2659.1 Disease Loci Identiﬁcation and Mapping . . . . . . . . 2679.2 Network as a Paradigm for Linking Diseases and DiseaseGenes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2719.3 Network-Based Prediction of Disease Genes . . . . . . . 2769.3.1 Predicting Disease Genes from Known DiseaseGenes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2769.3.2 Predicting Disease Genes ab initio . . . . . . . . 2819.4 Network Analysis of Disease Mechanisms and DiseaseResponse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2839.5 Network-Based Prediction of Disease Comorbidity . . . 2889.6 Cancer and Synthetic Lethality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 291References 295Index 313


===== [4/72] chapter-04.html =====

PrefaceIn the 1940s and 1950s, biology was transformed by physicists and phys-ical chemists, who employed simple yet powerful concepts and engagedthe powers of genetics to infer mechanisms of biological processes. Thebiological sciences borrowed from the physical sciences the notion ofbuilding intuitive, testable, and physically realistic models by reducingthe complexity of biological systems to the components essential forstudying the problem at hand. Molecular biology was born.A similar migration of physical scientists and of methods of physicalsciences into biology has been occurring in the decade following thecomplete sequencing of the human genome, whose discrete characterand similarity to natural language have additionally facilitated the ap-plication of the techniques of modern computer science. Furthermore,the vast amount of genomic data spawned by the sequencing projectshas led to the development and application of statistical methods formaking sense of this data. The sheer amount of data at the genomescale that is available to us today begs for descriptions that go beyondsimple models of the function of a single gene to embrace a system-level understanding of large sets of genes functioning in unison. It isno longer suﬃcient to understand how a single gene mutation causes achange in its product’s biochemical function, although this is in manycases still an important problem. It is now possible to address how theconsequences of a mutation might reverberate through the intercon-nected system of genes and their products within the cell.The scale of a system-level description of genes necessitates an ap-proximate treatment of the biochemical entities involved: the DNA andRNA molecules, and the enzymes that interact with them to alter theirlevels of activity. In the simplest approximation, these entities can bedescribed as featureless nodes in a genome-scale network whose edgesrepresent various typ es of interaction between the nodes. This network-based description appears to dramatically reduce the complexity ofbiology to the formalism of idealized physical systems, computing sys-tems, their architecture, and their dynamical properties.Today the modeling of biological processes can typically involve thexixii Prefacesimultaneous description of tens of thousands of genes and their prod-ucts; the set of interactions among them has become an equally impor-tant object of study as the set of biological entities themselves. Thisnew way of thinking about biological complexity requires new theo-retical and quantitative concepts and methodologies, and biology isonce again attracting students and practitioners from the mathemat-ical, physical, and computer sciences. Concurrently, biology curriculain many educational institutions are being augmented by mathematicsand computer science courses. It is hoped that this book will serve asan entry point for both these groups of students to the key concepts inmodern, genomics-inspired network biology.This book is about the networks of interaction among biologicalmolecules—the experimental methods of uncovering and testing thesenetworks (Chapters 1, 2, 5, and 6), computational methods for predict-ing them (Chapters 3 and 4), general mechanisms of network formationand evolution (Chapter 7), and the application of network approachesto important problems in biology and medicine (Chapters 8 and 9).It should be accessible to students with undergraduate degrees in thephysical, mathematical, and computer sciences with some exposure tomolecular biology, as well as to students with undergraduate degrees inbiology with exposure to calculus and probability and linear algebra.There are portions of the book that will challenge both sets of readers:for example, Chapter 6 is expected to be diﬃcult for the mathemati-cally inclined student with little exposure to biology, while the biologystudent might ﬁnd Chapter 7 daunting.Network biology is a large ﬁeld that is very much in a state of ﬂux asnew directions emerge. While we have tried to acquaint our readers withmany areas of modern research, the choice of topics covered necessarilyreﬂects our bias and expertise. There are important areas that we do notcover which we think are very well addressed in other textbooks. Theseinclude detailed treatments of gene regulatory dynamics and the roleof network motifs, networks of cells including networks of nerve cells,genome-wide disease association studies, and disease models. Overall,the book emphasizes concepts over techniques; the reader will not ﬁnddetailed experimental protocols or computer algorithms here but it isour hope that she will come away with a conceptual understanding ofboth.This book would not have adopted its present form without the con-structive criticism and help oﬀered by students and colleagues. WePreface xiiiwould especially like to thank Sonali Talele, Mitsunori Ogihara, andCarsten Peterson for comments on a preliminary draft of the book.Sonali Talele contributed Figure 9.3, and helped in seeking permissionsfor the reproduction of ﬁgures. Jesse Frumkin contributed to Section6.4. Sonal Majeethia helped with other ﬁgures, and Roma Panjwaniwith references. Roshni Ray-Ricchetti provided feedback on an earlyversion of Chapter 6. Krishanu Ray served as a sounding board formany of the ideas during long drives with one of us. Rachel Holt keptus organized. Perhaps like many ﬁrst-time authors, we vastly underes-timated the time and eﬀort needed to undertake this ambitious project.This has been all the more challenging because the topics of this bookare inherently interdisciplinary. The book would not have b een com-pleted were it not for the constant encouragement and support of oureditor, Sunil Nair. Needless to say, any errors that survived our endlessrevisions are the sole responsibility of the authors.Last but not least, we thank our spouses Sonal and Sumita for deepunderstanding and sacriﬁce, without which this book would not be.Alpan RavalAnimesh Ray


===== [5/72] chapter-05.html =====

Chapter 1The Living InteractomeBiology presents many perplexing themes to one trained in the physicalor mathematical sciences. It has very few general laws or universal rules.While evolutionary theory represents a general framework, the natureof evolutionary forces and the precise entities upon which these forcesact are matters of debate. The genetic code, universal for terrestriallife, appears to be a historical accident in the sense that among severalplausible alternative codes, only the present coding scheme has survivedthrough evolution. Almost everything else in biology dep ends on thecontext; every rule has its exception.1One of the most puzzling aspects of biology is that the line between aliving cell and its “non-living” parts is fuzzy at best. Is a mitochondrionalive? This intracellular organelle is ubiquitous in cells that possess nu-clei and live in an oxygen-rich environment. Mitochondria apparentlyevolved through a symbiosis of ancient bacteria-like organisms (calledEubacteria or Proteobacteria) with another class of organisms calledthe Archaea (Box 1.1 and Figure 1.1). In this process, interactions andcommunication among genes and proteins needed to be reestablishedin the two organisms so as to make the symbiosis possible. The sym-biosis presumably involved losing certain genes that are required forindependent existence and gaining some that are needed for a mutu-ally dependent and entangled way of life for the two partners. Moreover,specialized functions of certain genes needed to be generalized, and newspecialized genes needed to have evolved.If mitochondria are not themselves alive, then at what stage in theprocess of establishing a mutually dependent relationship with anotherorganism did a prokaryote (Box 1.1) lose its “living” status? Moregenerally, it is unclear how much of the biological world is a resultof historical accident and how much follows inexorable deterministic1A similar view was best expressed by Max Delbr¨uck in an essay entitled “A PhysicistLo oks at Biology” (Delbr¨uck, 1966).12 Introduction to Biological NetworksBox 1.1 Eukaryotes, Prokaryotes, and Archaea.Eukaryotes are organisms that have a nucleus in each of their constituent cells.The nucleus contains the chromosomal DNA. Eukaryotes can be unicellular ormulticellular. Most “higher” organisms, such as ﬂowering plants, mammals,etc., are eukaryotes, as are certain unicellular plants (some algae), animals(e.g., the malaria-causing parasite Plasmodium falciparum), and fungi (e.g.,the baker’s yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae). Prokaryotes are organisms thatdo not possess a nucleus within their cells. Their genomic DNA is not com-partmentalized. Prokaryotes are almost always unicellular, and consist of twomajor types: the eubacteria and the archaebacteria (or archaea). Eubacteriaare found almost everywhere on Earth, whereas archaebacteria usually oc-cur in extreme environments, such as thermal hot springs and highly salinelakes. Archaebacterial DNA is compositionally diﬀerent from that of eubac-terial DNA. The chromosomes of eubacteria are circular, whereas the lineararchaebacterial chromosomes resemble the linear chromosomes of eukaryotes.Eukaryotes share many features of both archaebacteria (such as RNA syn-thesis mechanisms and chromosome structure) and eubacteria (such as DNAreplication and metabolic pathways).laws. Nonetheless, progress over the past ﬁfty years in understandingthe fundamental basis of life has proﬁted from one general idea: the setof genes (genotype) in an individual interacts with the environment ina well-deﬁned way to determine the phenotype (the set of observableproperties of the organism), and that evolution acts on the phenotype.We now understand that the phenotype is the result of numerous phys-ical interactions among molecules comprising the cell, which are mostlycontrolled or encoded for by genes. It is therefore natural that the mostsuccessful approach to understanding biology has been through the re-ductionist’s metho d of describing the parts list of the cell (see Box 1.2for a summary of the very basic molecular biological concepts). Theseparts are the genes, the proteins, and the metabolites. Insights intobiological processes must ultimately come from mechanistic models in-volving these molecules and their interactions. This is the view of amolecular biologist.It is becoming clear, however, that a detailed mechanistic descriptionof each interaction sometimes clouds understanding of the biologicalrelevance of that interaction. What is often more important is to placethat interaction within the context of other interactions. For example,consider the case of transmission of a pheromone signal (Box 1.3 andThe Living Interactome 3Archeal ancestorProteobacterialancestorPrimitivearchezoanProteobacterium Eukaryote (with mitochondria)SymbiosisSymbiosisSymbiosisFIGURE 1.1: A schematic diagram illustrating two hyp othetical routesfor the evolution of eukaryotic cells with mitochondria. The ﬁrst modelproposes that an ancestral archaebacterium engulfed an ancestral eubac-terium (proteobacterium); the genetic materials of the two contributed to theformation of the ﬁrst mitochondria-less eukaryote (a primitive archezoan),which later fused with another eubacterium (labeled in the ﬁgure as an α-proteobacterium), thus giving rise to the mitochondriated eukaryotic cell. Thesecond model proposes that the evolution of the eukaryotic cell o ccurred in onestep by the fusion of a hydrogen-requiring archaebacterium and a hydrogen-producing α-proteobacterium. These symbiotic relationships presumably re-quired the evolution of numerous novel interactions between genes, proteins,and other molecules pro duced by diﬀerent organisms. Adapted with permis-sion from Gray et al. (1999).4 Introduction to Biological NetworksBox 1.2 A few concepts in molecular biology.The central dogma of molecular biology states that information encoded in theDNA sequence determines the RNA sequence (this process is called transcrip-tion), which in turn determines the amino acid sequence of proteins (transla-tion) due to the correspondence between each triplet of RNA nucleotides anda single amino acid. This correspondence is the genetic code. In addition, how-ever, information can be transferred from DNA to DNA and RNA to RNA byreplication, and from RNA to DNA by reverse transcription. No mechanismof information transfer from protein to DNA or RNA is known. However, anRNA or protein molecule can modulate the amount of RNA or protein tran-scribed or translated from another gene. This amount is called the expressionlevel of the corresponding RNA or protein, and the RNA or protein moleculethat modulates the expression level is called a regulator. Regulators can bepositive or negative, depending on whether the expression level of their targetis increased or decreased, respectively. Proteins that regulate the expressionof a gene are called transcription factor proteins.RNA is transcribed from gene sequences. For example, RNA that is eventu-ally translated to protein is called messenger RNA, or simply mRNA. TheRNA from certain genes is never translated into protein. Examples of suchgenes are those encoding ribosomal RNA (rRNA), transfer RNA (tRNA),microRNA (miRNA), etc. The set of expression levels of RNA transcribedby many (or all) genes in cells, cell types, tissues, or organs is called theRNA expression proﬁle. Expression levels are determined by measuring theconcentration of RNA molecules prepared from a biological sample by oneof two means: (1) microarray hybridization, in which RNA concentration isinferred from the intensity of hybridization of the prepared samples on apatch of DNA complementary to the corresponding encoded RNA, or (2) by“deep” sequencing, in which RNA concentration is inferred by the number oftimes a stretch of sequence corresponding to an RNA molecule is detected.DNA, RNA, and protein molecules can be acted upon by enzymes that add orremove chemical groups and therefore change their chemical properties. Thisprocess is called enzymatic modiﬁcation of the molecule in question. Examplesof enzymatic modiﬁcation include methylation or demethylation of DNA orRNA bases, as well as phosphorylation, ubiquitylation, and glycosylation ofamino acids that comprise proteins.The Living Interactome 5Box 1.3 Hormones, steroids, and pheromones.Hormones are chemical signals synthesized by one cell type in an organismthat modulate the physiology of another cell type in the same organism.Hormones can be peptides or proteins, in which case the receptor moleculesfor the hormone are present on the surface of the responding cell. Hormonescan also be small molecules, in which case the receptor is intracellular. Oneexample of a small molecule hormone is a steroid, which is a small moleculederived from cholesterol. Steroid molecules from one cell usually enter thetarget cells nucleus directly, and can modulate mRNA expression levels of thetarget cell through interaction with their cognate steroid receptor proteinspresent in the target cell nucleus. Some steroids are also structural andfunctional components of the cell membrane.Pheromones are hormones that are synthesized by one organism but modulatethe physiology of another organism.Box 1.4) to the genome in the budding yeast. The speciﬁc pheromonewe are interested in, an alpha factor pheromone, is a small proteinthat is received by the cell, and the cell responds to the pheromoneby changing the expression levels of many genes. The pheromone doesnot actually enter the cell to cause its eﬀects on the expression pro-ﬁle of the genome. Rather, it binds to a protein receptor molecule onthe cell’s surface, like a key to a lock. This physical “docking” of thepheromone to the receptor triggers an enzymatic activity of the recep-tor molecule, which extends into the interior of the cell. The activatedreceptor molecule then chemically modiﬁes another protein, which inturn activates another protein and so on, until ﬁnally a protein thatis a regulator of gene transcription is activated. This latter protein,upon activation, is able to enter the nucleus (which, when inactive, itcannot do) and bind to certain DNA sequences to bring about alteredtranscription at those locations (Figure 1.2).Now each of these successive enzymatic modiﬁcations of the respec-tive enzymes in the pathway is an individual chemical reaction that canbe studied in great structural and chemical detail, which is importantfor understanding and thereby controlling individual steps (Box 1.4 in-troduces the concept of a signaling pathway). Figure 1.2 also showsthat there are other signals in addition to the pheromone, such as highosmotic pressure, which share some, but not all, of the same intermedi-


===== [6/72] chapter-06.html =====

6 Introduction to Biological NetworksSte5 ScaffoldMAPKKKMAPK SIGNALING PATHWAYMAPKK MAPKMATαMATaHypotonic shockWsc1,2,3Mid2Sho1 Ste20 Ste11Sho1 Cdc42 Ste20 Ste11 Ste7 Kss1 Ste12Dig1,2Tec1Ras2Sln1 Ypd1 Ssk1 Ssk2 Pbs2 Hog1 Msn2,4Mcm1Glo1Ctt1High osmolarityStarvationPheromoneSte3Ste2Gpal Cdc42Cdc24Bnil PolarityMsg5Ste20Bem1Ste11 Ste7 Fus3 Ste12 Fus1MatingFar1 Cell cycleCell cyclearrestCell wallremodelingOsmolytesynthesisFilamentationDig1,2Mcm1+p+p+p+p+p+p+p+p+p+p+p+p+p+p+p+p+p+p+p+p+p+p+pSte4Ste18Rho1 Pkc1 Bck1 Mkk1,2 Slt2 Rlm1 Fks2Swi4,6Mlp1Fks1GDP GTP GDP GTPGDP GTPFIGURE 1.2: Signaling pathways in budding yeast. Rectangular boxes denote proteins, arrows denote positive regulation,lines with bars denote negative regulation. The solid gray vertical lines represent the cell membrane, while the dashed verticalline represents the nuclear membrane. Thus, the portion of the ﬁgure to the left of the cell membrane corresponds to theextracellular region, the portion between the cell and nuclear membranes is the cytoplasm, and the portion to the rightof the nuclear membrane is the nucleus. Proteins embedded within the cell membrane are receptor proteins that bind andrespond to external signals. These signals can either be chemical (e.g., pheromone protein MATa or MATα expressed duringstarvation) or physical (e.g., hypotonic shock; high osmolarity). +p denotes a chemical reaction by which a phosphate groupis added and −p denotes one in which a phosphate group is removed. Reproduced with permission from Kyoto Encyclopediaof Genes and Genomes (KEGG; http://www.kegg.jp).The Living Interactome 7Box 1.4 Signal transduction or signaling.The mechanism by which a chemical or physical signal is perceived, ampli-ﬁed, and carried to responder molecules within the cell such that a biologicalresponse is actuated is called a signal transduction or signaling mechanism.Signals may be physical in nature, such as light, osmotic pressure, shear force,and so on. Signals may also be chemical, such as hormones, pheromones, orneurotransmitters (chemicals that transmit information at nerve endings).Signals may be extracellular, such as hormones, osmotic pressure, or an anti-body molecule or a virus that binds to the cell surface. They may be intracel-lular, such as an accidental DNA break in a chromosome within the nucleus,intracellular introduction of viral genetic material, or an abnormally foldedprotein within the cytoplasm. Signals are ﬁrst detected by specialized receptormolecules. The speciﬁc binding or change in conformation of the receptor usu-ally leads to a change in the enzymatic property of the receptor protein or oneof the proteins that tightly binds to the receptor protein. This change triggersmodulated expression of the product of the reaction catalyzed by the enzyme.Usually the receptor changes a property of one enzyme, which changes that ofanother enzyme, and so on, until the small eﬀect of the original signal-receptorinteraction event is ampliﬁed to a large change in the state (mo diﬁcation state)of some proteins or RNA or DNA in the cell. The pathway of successive en-zymatic modiﬁcation is called the signaling or signal transduction pathway.Because many of these pathway components interact, we increasingly speak ofthe networks formed by pathways and their interactions as signaling networks.ate protein components and signal transduction pathways, and similarreaction mechanisms, to alter the level of gene expression of a diﬀerentsubset of genes in the genome. Competition among the two signalingagents, the alpha factor pheromone and high osmotic pressure, wouldtherefore be expected to produce complex eﬀects on the expressionproﬁle of the genome. Thus it is important to model these pathways asinteracting networks, not just as independent reaction steps.The same basic mechanism of signal transduction from themembrane-bound receptor protein exposed to the outside of the cellto the genome is also operative in human cells when they receive cer-tain hormone signals, such as a hormone that signals to a cancer celland the latter responds by increased proliferation. It is important tounderstand in great molecular detail each individual reaction for thepurpose of developing chemical inhibitors of one or more of these reac-tions as an anti-cancer drug. However, the initial identiﬁcation of these8 Introduction to Biological Networkspathways, and later understanding of how these individual pathwaysinteract with additional such pathways of signal transduction, are im-portant on the one hand for identifying drug targets and on the otherfor predicting possible non-target eﬀects (i.e., side eﬀects) of a drugmolecule.We do not, of course, suggest that physico-chemical details of interac-tions are unimportant. In fact, such details are essential for testing hy-potheses or to discover new molecular mechanisms. In that sense, theylead to fundamental understanding of biology as well as to successfulapplications of biological knowledge to practical ends, such as the dis-covery of new drugs or understanding disease mechanisms. Nonetheless,the higher-level abstraction of an interaction in the context of myriadothers (at a low level of physico-chemical resolution) is essential in or-der to understand and appreciate the overall phenotypic consequencesof the interaction in question. One of the themes of this b ook is tohighlight our current ways of thinking about interactions in such acontextual manner.Placing interactions within a contextual background often alsohelps reveal biological function. For example, a protein known asMicrophthalmia-associated Transcription Factor (MITF) is importantfor converting certain skin cell precursors to the melanin pigment pro-ducing cells (called melanocytes) of the skin. The MITF protein is atranscription factor for a number of genes. Following the tradition ofwell-known transcription factor studies, it may be argued that it is im-portant to study in atomic detail the interaction of this transcriptionfactor protein with its cognate DNA binding site at each of the genes itregulates, and to explore the dynamics of its interaction at each of thesegenes. Ultimately this kind of study is extremely important, but it is im-mediately more relevant to determine the list of genes that it regulates,the list of additional proteins that might interact with MITF (whichat least in principle might regulate the activity of MITF itself), andthus to generate a network of interaction. If one knows the biochemicalfunction of some of its interaction partners, the relevance of the MITFprotein becomes clearer in the context of additional functions. We thusunderstand that because MITF activates transcription of a gene thatencodes a membrane channel protein called TRPM1, which is capableof sensing certain chemicals in the cell’s exterior, melanocytes couldhave the ability to sense these chemicals. Furthermore, MITF also reg-ulates genes that control cell division which are abnormally expressedThe Living Interactome 9in certain skin cancer cells. However, MITF is not produced at a highlevel in these cancer cells, suggesting that high levels of MITF controlthe rate of cell division. In sum, we infer from the interaction networkaround MITF that MITF regulates properties of normal melanocytes,including their ability to perform chemotaxis (movement in response toa chemical signal) as well as their propensity to participate in controlledcell division. This type of qualitative understanding is as important asunderstanding the atomic details of how MITF functions as a transcrip-tion factor. In the next section, we elaborate on speciﬁc examples ofhow the biological context inﬂuences our interpretation of the functionsof genes and proteins.1.1 Biological Function Depends on ContextProgress in the sequencing of genomes of a large number of organ-isms has made it possible to list with reasonable conﬁdence nearly allprotein-coding genes of these organisms. The next phase of progress ingenomics depends on discovering the functions of these genes, and todevelop models that should ultimately allow us to capture the pheno-type from a description of the genotype.In practice, the function of a gene is deﬁned at several diﬀerent levels.A geneticist describes the functional property of a gene in terms of thephenotypic variable that is lost or changed as a result of a mutationwithin that gene. For example, a rare mutant in fruit ﬂies leads to theﬂy dropping down on its back and shaking its legs in an uncontrolledtremor when anesthetized. The corresponding gene is therefore termedthe shaker gene, and its genetic property is deﬁned as a gene that en-codes a function required for normal maintenance of muscle tone andbody posture. The shaker mutant ﬂies are also defective in associa-tive learning and memory, thus providing a mechanistic link betweenmemory and behavior through the action of a single gene identiﬁedby a chance mutation. The shaker gene encodes a potassium channelprotein, which suggests that muscle tone and associative learning aretantalizingly linked to the activity of this potassium channel proteinthat resides on the cell membrane.It is often found that gene/protein properties are context depen-dent. In the previous example, the function of the shaker protein formaintaining muscle tone may be contextually irrelevant to its eﬀect on10 Introduction to Biological Networksassociative memory in the brain. Let us consider a second example.A particular bacterial gene recBCD, when mutated, causes the bac-terium to become hypersensitive to ultraviolet light and also unableto undergo sexual reproduction eﬃciently. These two properties of therecBCD gene’s product are mechanistically related because the samebiochemical activity of the gene product that allows repair of ultravio-let light-damaged DNA is utilized for incorporating DNA of the donorbacterium into the recipient bacterium following mating (Figure 1.3).The two properties are, however, revealed by totally diﬀerent and ap-parently unrelated biological tests. The fact that the same gene mu-tation causes defects in the two biological activities provides a clue tothe molecular mechanisms of both the repair of DNA damage and theability of the organism to incorporate DNA in mating. A biochemist’sdescription of a gene’s function may include the chemical activity per-formed by the protein encoded by that gene (e.g., “potassium channelprotein” for the shaker gene, or “DNA strand transfer” for the recBCDgene), but even that suﬀers from context dependence. For example,the function of the RecBCD protein can be described as the ability tounravel a DNA double helix into its two constituent single strands inone set of conditions as well as the ability to degrade the DNA intoits constituent small molecular units under another set of conditions.These two diﬀerent biochemical activities might superﬁcially appearto be two separate chemical properties. Therefore, a complete under-standing of the function of this gene must include not only the list ofproperties of the gene and its protein product from all relevant view-points, but also a list of the accompanying conditions that impose thecontext dependence.An added layer of complexity in attributing function to a gene orits protein product is present because genes seldom carry out their rolewithin a living cell as independent singletons. Rather, each gene or pro-tein interacts in myriad ways with other genes or proteins, and each ofthese interactions is in principle required for the role that the gene hasto play. Knowledge of the functional role of these other genes will there-fore enrich our knowledge of the functional role of the gene in question.This inference is akin to inference of a person’s role from the set ofsocial or professional interactions that the person has with others. It ispossible to infer personal attributes to a signiﬁcant extent by knowingthese interactions and, conversely, to infer putative interactions frompersonal attributes. In a similar vein, from a list of properties of genes


===== [7/72] chapter-07.html =====

The Living Interactome 11recBCD mutant E. coliXa b cBx x100 10 1 0.10.01wild typeRecombination Frequency (% control) recBCDrecBCD mutantrecipient cellWild typedonor cellDecreased recombinationabilityMating defectHypersensitivity to UV lightHomologous DNA recombination assay100 10 1 0.10.01wild typerecBCDUV doseSurvival (% control)Mating assayUV sensitivity assayCrystal structure of the RecBCD protein complex as assembled on the DNA endCondition 1Condition 2RecBCD protein complexDNADNAFIGURE 1.3: Context dependence of genes and phenotypes. Escherichiacoli mutants in the recBCD genes exhibit defects in at least three diﬀerentphenotypes: sensitivity to ultraviolet light (UV), the ability to transfer DNAby mating between a wild type donor strain and a mutant recipient strain,and in recombining two pieces of DNA sequences that are similar. These mu-tant phenotypes arise ultimately due to the loss of one or more biochemicalfunctions of the 3-subunit RecBCD protein, which binds to both double- andsingle-stranded DNA, and its subsequent action on the DNA. Its action onthe DNA is multifarious. In one speciﬁc physiological condition, RecBCD un-winds a double-stranded DNA into its constituent two single strands (this is aDNA helicase activity ). In another condition, it digests double-stranded DNAon both strands processively, attacking it at one end and progressively digest-ing to the other end, with somewhat diﬀerent speciﬁcities of chemical cleavage(shown here as small and large dashed strands). There are additional biochem-ical activities of this enzyme that are not shown here. However, many proteinswith a diversity of biochemical functions are known, and it is quite likely thatmany more have not been discovered. This concept of context-dependent func-tion is important to keep in mind when we consider the function of a gene orits encoded product. An interaction network containing the gene or protein inquestion could in principle provide a better perspective on function becauseit would reveal the interaction neighborhood: known functions of the networkneighbors often provide clues to additional functional possibilities.12 Introduction to Biological Networksor their encoded proteins (which we will sometimes call gene products)and their interaction partners (collectively called the interactome), wecan generate a richer view of functional description than possible byobserving one gene at a time. This is a theme to which we will returnat various points in this book.1.2 The Nature of InteractionsAt this point it is important to review what biologists mean by theword “interaction.” Because all biological function may be ultimatelytraced to physical binding of molecules, biologists speak of physicalinteraction as the ability of one biologically relevant molecule to bind toanother with reasonable thermodynamic stability. In practice, for suchan interaction to reveal itself, it is also necessary that the interactionis strong enough to be detectable by at least one biological or chemicaltechnique. Whether the interaction is biologically signiﬁcant or not isirrelevant at this stage, because no physical technique has the power toanswer the question of biological relevance. Ultimately, the biologicalrelevance of a particular physical interaction must be demonstratedby genetic or cell biological means: the most common metho d is toabrogate the particular interaction in question and then to study theeﬀect of this perturbation on cell physiology.1.2.1 Protein–Protein InteractionsThe existence of a protein-protein interaction implies that one proteinis able to bind to another protein to form a protein complex that isstable enough so that the pair of interacting partners can be detectedby some technique. There are several such techniques available for thedetection of protein-protein interactions. These are brieﬂy introducedhere, and elaborated upon in Chapter 2. One common method is thetwo-hybrid interaction, in which the binding interaction between a pairof proteins can be detected inside the environment of a living cell (i.e.,in vivo), albeit under somewhat artiﬁcial conditions (Figure 1.4a).Asecond method relies on the ability to pull down one protein by anagent (such as an antibody) that has high aﬃnity for that speciﬁc pro-tein from an aqueous solution, and then determining what other proteinbinds to the original protein and is therefore pulled down along with it.This is co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) (Figure 1.4b). The two-hybridThe Living Interactome 13PROTEIN ANOSIGNALPROTEIN BNOSIGNALA-B COMPLEXSIGNAL(a)PROTEIN A+ANTIBODY(b)Precipitateand IsolateFind allproteinspulled downwithprotein AFIGURE 1.4: Two ways of discovering protein-protein interaction. (a) Inthe two-hybrid method, the coding sequence corresponding to protein A isfused to another protein that has the ability to bind a speciﬁc DNA sequencethat is present adjacent to a signal gene (called a “reporter”), while the cod-ing sequence corresponding to protein B is fused to yet another protein thathas the ability to activate RNA synthesis. Neither of the two fused proteinsalone is able to activate the synthesis of RNA corresponding to the reporter.However, if the two proteins are simultaneously synthesized and if the proteinA physically binds to protein B, then the AB complex is able to bind thespeciﬁc DNA sequence and activate synthesis of reporter RNA, which is thendecoded into the reporter protein. The reporter protein is then detected by itscatalytic activity. (b) In the co-IP method, a reagent that has highly selectiveaﬃnity against protein A is added to a mixture of proteins containing proteinA and many other proteins, some of which may or may not physically bind toprotein A. The resulting precipitate is puriﬁed, and the mixture of proteins isanalyzed to determine the identity of all proteins present in the mixture.method only reports pair-wise interactions, although in reality someof the pair-wise interactions might be dependent on factors presentwithin the cell that are invisible to the technique employed. By con-trast, in co-IP more than two proteins are often simultaneously pulleddown, which hides ﬁne details of the direct interaction partners. Forseveral organisms, lists of protein-protein interaction partners revealedby one or both of these methods are publicly available. The organismmost comprehensively studied for these interactions is the baker’s yeastSaccharomyces cerevisiae, in which protein-protein interaction mapscovering nearly 6,000 encoded proteins are known.Protein-protein interactions may signify a variety of biological func-14 Introduction to Biological Networkstions. Two interacting proteins may do so merely to serve a tetheringfunction. The proteins together may constitute a biochemically activemolecule, such as an enzyme. Two proteins with distinct biochemi-cal activities may be part of a multi-protein complex with a speciﬁcbiochemical function. One protein might activate or inactivate the bio-chemical function of its partner by physical association.1.2.2 Protein–DNA InteractionsA second kind of physical interaction is that between proteins andDNA. As the name implies, this physical interaction describes thebinding of a protein to a speciﬁc DNA sequence motif. Examples in-clude activators and repressors of transcription that bind speciﬁc DNAsequences tightly. As mentioned earlier, these proteins are generallyknown as transcription factors, and the speciﬁc DNA sequences towhich they bind are termed binding sites.A protein-DNA interaction is represented as a directional interactionfrom the protein molecule to the gene that is regulated by it. Thedirection of the interaction represents the direction of signaling by theprotein to the expression state of the gene corresponding to the DNAin question. A protein-DNA interaction is identiﬁed by various typesof experimental techniques. One of these depends on the ability of aprotein to dock onto a DNA sequence and thus control a reporter geneactivity that is measured. Reporter gene activity is thus triggered bythe successful binding of the protein to the DNA sequence. Anothertechnique isolates a complex of the test protein and the test DNAsequence, and identiﬁes the complex (this method is called Chromatinimmunoprecipitation, or ChIP). These methods are discussed in somedetail in Chapter 2.Protein-DNA interactions may also imply diﬀerent kinds of biologicalfunction. For example, in some cases a protein may bind to a particularDNA sequence and thus activate or repress the synthesis of RNA froma nearby gene. In other cases a protein may bind to a speciﬁc DNAsequence and then cleave the DNA double helix.1.2.3 Genetic InteractionsIn addition to physical interactions, biologists admit another, moreabstract kind of interaction—the so called genetic interaction, whichmay or may not represent a physical interaction between the partnergenes or proteins.One important kind of genetic interaction is the synthetic lethal in-The Living Interactome 15Box 1.5 Essentiality.In genetics, essential genes are genes whose mutation causes complete lossof function of the gene product so that the organism cannot survive. Note,however, that some genes may be nonessential under laboratory conditions,but essential in the natural habitat, or vice versa. Therefore it is important tocarefully consider the physical conditions under which a gene might be consid-ered essential or nonessential. The deﬁnition of essentiality can become rathercomplex in multicellular organisms that have diﬀerent cell types. For example,some genes are essential because no cell can survive when they are mutated.This is usually the case for genes that control core biological functions, suchas DNA replication, RNA and protein synthesis, cell division, many aspects ofenergy utilization and metabolism, and transport of chemicals into or withinthe cells. However, there are other genes that can be essential only for aspecialized cell type. Many such genes, if mutated, might support growth anddevelopment of the embryo only up to a degree, but later the embryos becomedefective and ultimately die. Such mutations are called embryo lethal muta-tions, and deﬁne a diﬀerent type of genetic essentiality. Many inherited formsof human diseases are caused by mutations in genes whose normal functionsare essential in only certain cell types during speciﬁc stages of development,often after birth.teraction. Consider two mutations in two separate genes, such thatneither mutation separately kills the cell, and yet the cell dies if bothgenes are simultaneously mutated. In this case the two genes are saidto interact via a synthetic lethal interaction. Synthetic lethality of pairsof genes might represent diﬀerent functional relationships in diﬀerentsituations. In one case, the two genes might redundantly control an es-sential biological process such that their simultaneous elimination leadsto a loss of viability (see Box 1.5 for a discussion of essentiality). Alter-natively, the loss of one gene might allow readjustment of the internalﬂow of biological information transfer within the cell such that a sec-ond “conduit” is now recruited to perform an essential process. Herethe two gene functions are not redundant but are versatile. However, inthe absence of both genes, the essential function is no longer salvage-able and so the cell dies. Yet another example of genetic interactionis usually seen in the case where the mutation in the gene does notcause a complete loss of the encoded function but only partially desta-bilizes the aﬀected gene product. Imagine that these two gene productsare both needed for the same biological process. Here a single debili-


===== [8/72] chapter-08.html =====

16 Introduction to Biological Networkstating mutation might still allow just suﬃcient function for life, buttwo simultaneous mutations push the cell beyond recovery. Therefore,the interpretation of a particular synthetic lethal genetic interactionremains obscure in the absence of other information. Figure 1.5 showsvarious interpretations of synthetic lethal interactions that are possi-ble given protein-protein interaction data. Note that synthetic lethalinteractions, by deﬁnition, have no directionality. We revisit the ex-perimental identiﬁcation of genetic interactions, particularly syntheticlethal ones, in Chapter 2.A second kind of genetic interaction is the suppressor interaction. Anexample of this type of interaction is the disruptive eﬀect of a gene mu-tation that is compensated for by loss or gain of another gene’s activity(i.e., modulation of the second gene’s activity suppresses the disrup-tion caused by the ﬁrst gene). Consider two genes a and b whose en-coded products, the proteins A and B, respectively, interact via protein-protein interaction (Figure 1.6). One interpretation of a suppressor in-teraction occurs when a mutation in gene a causes expression of themisfolded protein A∗, which has a defective interaction with B. Imag-ine that the defective interaction causes disruption in some biochemicalprocess. Subsequently, a second mutation, this time in gene b, mightcause misfolding of B to B∗in such a way as to make B∗regain theability to interact with A∗, thus restoring biochemical activity. Thistype of genetic interaction is a direct proof of the existence of a phys-ical interaction in a physiological context, as we discuss in the nextchapter.Another kind of suppressor interaction occurs when an essential bi-ological process is eliminated by one mutation while its essentiality forlife is removed by a second mutation (Figure 1.7). For example, onemutation may cause the absence of synthesis of one metabolite, buta suppressor mutation might cause the shunting of another metabolicintermediate to replace the missing substance by an alternate pathway.A third case of suppressor interaction may occur when one mutationcauses the accumulation of a toxic substance and the second mutationremoves it (or does not cause its accumulation) (Figure 1.8). Such sup-pressor interactions are also called epistatic interactions. Unlike syn-thetic lethal interactions, suppressor interactions are directional.Clearly, genetic interactions are diﬃcult to interpret in the absenceof additional information on the nature of the genes and gene productsinvolved in the process. It is also easily seen that the interpretation ofThe Living Interactome 17(a) Essential functionA A’efghabc(b) Sub-units of an essentialmulti-protein complex(c) Essential linear pathway(d) Parallel pathways essentialfor survivalFIGURE 1.5: Mechanisms of synthetic genetic interactions as proposed byKaelin (2005). Each circle represents a set of mutually interacting proteins,that is, a multi-protein complex. Synthetic genetic interactions between cor-responding genes are represented by solid undirected lines. Arrows representsignaling pathways (see Box 1.4). (a) Synthetic genetic interaction arisingdue to redundancy in an essential function; possibly the complexes A and A’have duplicate genes (paralogs). (b) Synthetic genetic interaction between twosub-units of an essential complex. (c) Synthetic genetic interactions betweendiﬀerent components of a linear pathway—mutation in any one componentcauses partial loss of function, that is, reduced ﬂow through the pathway. (d)Synthetic genetic interactions across two non-redundant but compensatorypathways. Adapted with permission from LeMeur and Gentleman (2008).18 Introduction to Biological Networks(a)abA BA B(b)a * bA* BA* B(c)a* b*A* B*A* B*suppressormutationFIGURE 1.6: Mechanism of suppressor interaction by complementary mis-folding. Gene products A and B participate in protein-protein interaction.Mutation in gene a leads to gene a∗, which codes for misfolded protein A∗.This eﬀect can be suppressed by the mutated protein B∗, which is misfoldedin just the right way to restore the protein-protein interaction.genetic interaction could in principle be aided by knowledge of physi-cal interaction, and the existence of a physical interaction may attainfunctional relevance depending on whether or not a particular kindof genetic interaction also exists between the participants. These twotypes of interaction therefore yield complementary information.The Living Interactome 19AaBCYXZbessentialprocessnonessentialprocessminorpathwayFIGURE 1.7: Mechanism of suppressor interaction by restoration of an es-sential process. Mutation in a causes disruption of production of B and there-fore C. This eﬀect can be suppressed by a mutation in b that prevents theproduction of Y to Z, leading to accumulation of increased levels of Y, whichin turn leads to production of B by what is ordinarily a minor pathway. In-creased levels of B restore production of C and therefore activate the essentialprocess once again. Note that the process in which Z participates must benonessential for this mechanism to work.bABCasuppressormutation(Toxic)FIGURE 1.8: Mechanism of suppressor interaction by removal of toxic prod-ucts. Mutation in a disrupts the pathway that converts B to C, thus leadingto increased levels of B that are toxic to the cell. This eﬀect can be suppressedby a mutation in b that disrupts the pathway for conversion of A to B.20 Introduction to Biological Networks1.3 Network as a Metaphor in BiologyA metaphor for understanding the functional relationships of genesand proteins in terms of their interactions, physical and genetic, is tocompare individual proteins, genes, metabolites, and their functionalassociations with each other to the elementary building blocks andconnections of an electrical circuit, where the fundamental units areelectrical devices such as resistors, capacitors, inductors, and transis-tors.The physics of the individual electrical devices is important in orderto understand their characteristics and to engineer them. In a similarmanner, detailed understanding of a single gene and its interactionswith other biomolecules is important if we wish to re-engineer the reg-ulation of the gene for possible therapeutic or bioengineering applica-tions. The metaphor clearly illustrates, however, that in order to buildand understand large computing architectures capable of speciﬁc com-putational tasks, it is relatively less important to study the physicsof the individual electrical devices than it is to model the collectivebehavior of a system of many connected components.Similarly, the objective of a new kind of biology that is becomingpossible today, which is the focus of this book, is to understand the“functional architecture” of genes, proteins, and metabolites as theyinteract to produce a macroscopic phenotype. For this purpose, the de-tailed physics of the molecular architecture, the mechanisms by whichthe molecules interact and combine with one another, may be less im-portant than their connectivity relations.To achieve the goal of modeling and thus predicting the propertiesof a collection of genes and proteins, there are three separate overallneeds, each achievable to varying degrees of approximation. The ﬁrstis an exhaustive parts list, which is the list of genes, proteins, and theirdetailed biochemical, biophysical, and genetic properties. The secondis an exhaustive list of interactions among these parts. This latter listmay include purely qualitative information as well as quantitative infor-mation, such as binding constants, stoichiometry, concentrations, etc.These two kinds of information together allow one to draw a kind ofwiring diagram for the cell. The third is a mathematical framework forderiving meaningful information out of the circuits. It is the wiring dia-gram itself that we refer to as the network, with the individual entitiessuch as genes, proteins, or electrical devices playing the roles of nodes


===== [9/72] chapter-09.html =====

The Living Interactome 21or vertices, and the connections between the entities referred to as edgesor links. Thus, we speak of the protein-protein, the protein-DNA, or thesynthetic lethal network, for instance. It is also possible to constructmore detailed gene regulatory networks in which we can integrate theinformation obtained from individual interaction networks such thatthe integrated network represents more accurately the functional con-text of the network components. In the next chapter we discuss variousmethods, experimental and computational, for inferring networks frombiological data.1.4 Metab olic NetworksOne of the most familiar networks in biology is the metabolic network orthe network of metabolic pathways. Formally, this should be includedin the category of physical interaction networks, but the metabolicnetwork is signiﬁcantly more complex than the protein-protein andprotein-DNA interaction network so that it merits a separate discus-sion. Metabolic pathways denote the biochemical reaction routes bywhich chemical bonds are broken and/or synthesized for accomplishingthree main kinds of biological function: acquiring and/or storing energyfor accomplishing biological work, synthesizing or interconverting a va-riety of chemical compounds, and producing/transmitting biochemicalsignals.In metabolic networks, the explicit nodes are chemical compounds,while the edges depict the direction of chemical transformation (Fig-ure 1.9). In addition, there are implicit players in the metabolicnetwork—the enzymes (mostly proteins) that bind to separate chemi-cal entities (substrates) and transform them to other chemical entities(products). For (nearly) every chemical node, therefore, there is an en-zyme that physically interacts with the substrate as well as the prod-uct. The chemical entities could be small, relatively simple molecules,or they could be complex molecules such as proteins or RNA. Table 1.1lists some of the most common metabolites and the extent of theirparticipation in metabolic reactions in the cell.While formally every chemical reaction is reversible—this ensures theequilibrium balance between reactant and product concentrations—inpractice most of the edges in biochemical pathways can be approxi-mated as unidirectional directed edges. This is true because the series22 Introduction to Biological Networks(a)(b)ABCDA (+E1) (E1)+BB (+E2)(E2)+CB (+E3)(E3)+D(c)A + E1 [A-E1] [B-E1] B + E1FIGURE 1.9: (a) A simple metabolic network in which A, B, C, and D arefour metabolite nodes, connected by directional edges, shows the pathwaysof conversion of A to C and D. (b) The series of enzymes (E1, E2, E3) driveindividual reactions. (c) A simpliﬁed version of some of the typical physical in-teractions that occur at the ﬁrst edge (A→B), in which the enzyme E1, havinga high aﬃnity for its substrate A, binds to A. This is an oversimpliﬁcation,because in reality, A may have an unstable structural intermediate (calleda transition-state intermediate, to which E1 might have a high aﬃnity). Achemical transformation occurs in the complex A-E1 (or A’s transition-stateintermediate when complexed with E1) such that A is converted to B. E1 haslow binding aﬃnity for B, so the complex disassociates. Each binding reactionis governed by the equilibrium constant of that reaction.of coupled enzymatic reactions in metabolic pathways, in which theproduct of one reaction is used as the substrate of the next reaction,with the ﬁnal product being removed from the cell, usually maintainsmost of the reaction states far from equilibrium. Thus, one speaks ofa metabolic ﬂux that represents the ﬂow of metabolites through themetabolic network. In Chapter 4 we discuss a particularly importantanalytical technique derived from the concept of metab olic ﬂux.Organisms diﬀer somewhat with respect to the precise types of bio-chemical pathways that operate within their cells, although there aresome core pathways conserved across organisms (Kanehisa et al., 2008;The Living Interactome 23TABLE 1.1: What Participates inMetabolism?Metabolite Degree Metabolite DegreeProton 506 NAD+143Water 390 Carbon dioxide 139ATP 268 NADH 139Diphosphate4−181 AMP 128Phosphate3−178 Coenzyme A 119ADP 173 Dioxygen 116NADPH 166 Ammonium 92NADP+166The most connected nodes and their numbers of con-nections (degree) in a yeast metabolic network in whichnodes are metabolites and two metabolites are con-nected if they participate in a common reaction. Source:Herrgard et al. (2008).Kuntzer et al., 2007). In Figure 1.10, the metabolic network that trans-forms carbohydrates, such as starch and sugars, into simpler chemicalcompounds, such as pyruvate, lactate, propionate, acetate, acetalde-hyde, and ethanol, is summarized. The linear series of reactions start-ing from starch or sucrose at the top to pyruvate takes place in nearlyall organisms. By contrast, the conversion of pyruvate to lactate, or toethanol, may or may not occur in certain organisms, and when thesereactions do occur in a particular organism, they represent speciﬁc evo-lutionary adaptations.In general, biochemical pathways that accomplish synthetic tasks(making complex molecules from relatively simple ones) are termed an-abolic pathways, while those that perform mostly degradative functionsare called catabolic pathways, and the biochemical pathways that func-tion mostly for generating stored forms of chemical free energy (energythat is available for accomplishing chemical, electrical, or mechanicalwork within the cell) are generally classiﬁed as energy metabolism path-ways. Examples of catabolic pathways include the biochemical trans-formation routes for breaking down sugars and fat into carbon dioxide,water, and other small molecules such as acetate, lactate, or ethanol.Anabolic pathways include those that transform small molecules suchas carbon dioxide, water, ammonium ion, and simple organic molecules(e.g., amino acids) into complex molecules such as proteins, polysaccha-24 Introduction to Biological NetworksGLYCOLYSIS / GLUCONEOGENESISStarch and sucrosemetabolism2.7.1.41α-D-Glucose-1Pα-D-Glucoseβ-D-Glucoseβ-D-Glucose-6Pβ-D-Glucose-6PPentosephosphatepathwayGlyceraldehyde-3Pβ-D-Glucose-1,6P2α-D-Glucose-6PD-Glucose(extracellular)2.7.1.695.4.2.25.3.1.95.3.1.95.3.1.93.1.3.115.3.1.14.1.2.131.2.1.125.4.2.41.2.7.5 1.2.7.61.2.1.92.7.2.33.1.3.135.4.2.14.2.1.112.7.1.401.2.7.16.2.1.1 6.2.1.131.2.1.31.2.1.54.1.1.14.1.1.11.1.1.27L-LactateEthanolPropanoate metabolism1.2.4.11.1.1.11.1.2.71.1.2.81.1.1.2EutGAcetateDihydro-lipoamide-ELipoamide-EAcetaldehydeS-Acetyl-dihydrolipoamide-E4.1.1.324.1.1.49OxaloacetateCitratecycleAcetyl-CoAPyruvatemetabolismGlycerate-3P1.2.1.592.7.1.115.1.3.155.1.3.32.7.1.1 2.7.1.632.7.1.22.7.1.12.7.1.692.7.1.69 3.2.1.863.2.1.86Arbutin-6PArbutin(extracellular)Salacin(extracellular)Salicin-6PGlycerone-PGlycerate-1,3P2Glycerate-2,3P2Carbon ﬁxationin photosynthetic organismsGlycerate-2PPhosphoenol-pyruvate2.7.1.22.7.1.1472.7.1.632.7.1.1472.7.1.1463.1.3.103.1.3.91.2.4.1ThPP2-Hydroxy-ethyl-ThPPPyruvate1.8.1.42.3.1.12FIGURE 1.10: Metabolic pathways for breakdown of carbohydrates intosimpler molecules. Each substrate or product is shown as an open circle witha chemical name identiﬁer on its side. Each number within a box is an identiﬁer[called the Enzyme Classiﬁcation (EC) number] for the enzyme that catalyzesthe interconversion of the substrate to the product. Boxes with rounded cor-ners represent multiple reactions that are not shown in detail. Reproducedwith permission from Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG;http://www.kegg.jp).The Living Interactome 25rides (such as starch), and nucleic acids. Energy metabolism pathwaysinclude those of oxidative phosphorylation and electron transport chainin the mitochondria, oxidative pathways of fatty acid breakdown, andpathways that ferment sugar. It is important to understand that thisclassiﬁcation is somewhat artiﬁcial because the three types of path-ways are intricately intertwined. Thus, most if not all catabolic path-ways are coupled to anabolic pathways, and both are coupled to energymetabolism.A signaling network (see Box 1.4) is that subset of the metabolicand other physical interaction networks that has the special functionof generating and transducing biological signals encoding certain infor-mational states to which cells respond. One example is the pheromonesignaling pathway alluded to earlier. In response to a communicationbetween two cells (which might be mediated in a variety of ways, in-cluding the diﬀusive binding of an external protein molecule, the arrivalof an electrical signal, direct chemical transformation on the cell sur-face, or entry into the cell of small molecules such as nitrous oxidesand steroids), a series of chemical changes occurs within the cell. Thesechanges may include the chemical breaking of a bond, causing the re-lease of a small molecule from the cell membrane, a change in the three-dimensional structure or selective cleavage of an enzyme such that anew catalytic activity is induced, or the triggering of protein-proteinor protein-nucleic acid binding in response to a small molecule. Inthis fashion, signaling pathways directly couple to metabolic, protein-protein, and protein-DNA networks [Lee et al. (2008b); Figure 1.11].It is also important to appreciate that the metabolic and signal-ing networks are intrinsically part of the protein-protein and protein-DNA physical interaction pathways, because all enzymes are encodedby genes and most enzymes are proteins. Some (rare) enzymes areRNA molecules. Thus, genetic interaction networks are formally re-lated to all physical networks. In the examples given in Figure 1.11,steroid biosynthesis in one cell type (speciﬁcally, in the adrenal gland)leads to transport of the steroid hormone through the blood into othercell types, such as the liver cells. In these cells, the steroid hormoneenters the nucleus and binds to the cognate steroid receptor protein.The steroid-receptor complex then binds to certain speciﬁc DNA se-quence elements (called steroid response elements) on the genome toalter mRNA synthesis activities of genes located next to the steroidresponse elements. Because there are multiple parallel pathways of sig-


===== [10/72] chapter-10.html =====

26 Introduction to Biological NetworksFIGURE 1.11: Coupling between two types of networks. The large con-nected network of proteins on the left is a signaling network that transduces amechanical signal (osmotic stress due to high solute concentration inside thecell relative to the outside) from the cell membrane (the plasma membrane)to the genes located inside the nucleus. The mechanical signal (osmotic pres-sure) at the level of the membrane is ampliﬁed and transmitted through acascade of coupled activating and inactivating system of enzymes into thenucleus through the activated Hog1 protein. The active Hog1 protein (shownwith phosphate groups p) enters the nucleus, where it plays the role of atranscription factor: a protein that regulates transcription of its many tar-get genes. Some of these target genes are Stl1, Gpp2, and Gpd1. The proteinsencoded by these three genes catalyze the import of glucose (Glc) and the sub-sequent formation and eﬄux of glycerol (Glyc) (as shown in the unidirectionalmetabolic network on the right) from the cell cytoplasm into the extracellularspace. This leads to higher glycerol (an osmotically active solute) concen-tration in the extracellular medium, causing an eventual reduction of osmoticstress by balancing the osmotic pressure across the plasma membrane. Dottedarrows signify the coupling between the signaling and the metabolic network.Reproduced with permission from Lee et al. (2008b).The Living Interactome 27naling and metabolism of steroids, mutations in the component genesthat encode the metabolic enzymes and/or signaling pathways displaythe various genetic interaction types discussed above.A remarkable ﬁnding to emerge after the whole genome sequences ofa variety of organisms became available is the evolutionary asymme-try of gene family expansion by function. While the number of genesencoding the core biochemical and metabolic network components andthose involved in essential functions, such as DNA, RNA or proteinsynthesis, and cell cycle control, have remained largely invariant acrossthe evolutionary scale, genomes of diﬀerent sizes display large diﬀer-ences in the number of genes involved in signal transduction and cell-cell communication (van Nimwegen, 2003). This observation suggeststhat an increase in the complexity of interconnections of interactionnetworks may provide a higher degree of physiological adjustability orrobustness to the cell in response to a larger range of environmentalﬂuctuations (van Nimwegen, 2003).In other words, complex multicellular organisms appear to haveevolved the capacity to sense and respond to a larger range of envi-ronmental signals by increasing the complexity of their networks andby acquiring the ability to respond to a wide variety of signals. Thecore network, undoubtedly, must have the capacity to readjust the ﬂowof metabolites and energy in response to the larger range of signals.This might have been possible by ﬁne-tuning the ﬂow parameters aswell as by generating novel connection topologies in the core network.However, no evidence in favor of either mechanism is yet available.Alternatively, it has been suggested that symbiosis and/or mutualismamong phylogenetically diﬀerent organisms may have provided this ad-ditional capacity of metabolic core functions (Kitano and Oda, 2006).A loose association of populations of microbes, or microbial ﬂora, forexample, with multicellular organisms, may have given the host organ-isms a larger range of metabolic capacity without having to diversifytheir set of core genes. The important concept here is that an expansionof the host’s gene family encoding signal processing components, and acorrespondingly matched expansion of the symbiont’s gene family pro-ducing signals, allow a broader degree of robustness. This theory makessense of the observation that the bacterial microﬂora associated withan average human being consists of at least a thousand species, con-tributing approximately two million genes. The total amount of DNAcontributed by non-eukaryotic symbiotic organisms is typically 90% of28 Introduction to Biological Networksthe total DNA recoverable from an entire human being (Kitano andOda, 2006)!Indeed, the intestinal microﬂora of the host are thought to contributecritical components of their mammalian host’s immunity as well asphysiology. These considerations bring to fore mechanisms of evolu-tionary adaptation of eukaryotic organisms by either adopting prokary-otic organisms as integral components of their genomes (as with theendo-symbiotic mitochondria and chloroplasts of Figure 1.1), but alsoby external symbiosis with microﬂora as a communal association withthe host. Thus, networks of signaling between organisms connect thecore networks within diﬀerent organisms, which likely contribute to thephysiological robustness of the entire living community to environmen-tal ﬂuctuations.1.5 Robustness at the Network LevelA fundamental property of living systems is their ability to functionrobustly when faced with perturbations in their immediate environ-ment. At the same time, however, living systems must also be ﬂexi-ble enough to adapt to diﬀerent environmental conditions by changingtheir biological properties in a signiﬁcant manner. These two seeminglycontradictory features are, nevertheless, both essential for survival. Wemay therefore say that living organisms are “marginally robust,” thatis, they are only as robust as they need to be to survive in their imme-diate environment, but not so robust as to render them unﬁt to adaptto changing environments.Marginal robustness seems apparent at the level of whole organisms,and has also been tested to some extent at the molecular level. Forexample, most proteins are only marginally thermodynamically stable.This ensures enough stability in order for them to adopt the structuralconformations necessary for performing their functions, while at thesame time provides enough ﬂexibility so that a few mutations mayallow a protein to adopt a new conformation corresponding to a newfunction.The emergence of marginal stability over the course of evolution and,more generally, marginal robustness, can be understood as arising outof the alternating processes of mutation and selection: most mutationsare known to be destabilizing at the protein level, leading to decreasedThe Living Interactome 29organismal ﬁtness. At the same time, natural selection ensures that theﬁttest individuals eventually dominate the population. These compet-ing forces reach a delicate equilibrium at a marginally robust state.While it is thus clear that robustness represents some fundamentalproperty that is unaltered by perturbation and that, further, most bi-ological systems should be marginally robust, we are still faced witha great deal of uncertainty as to what kind of perturbations the sys-tem must be robust to and what speciﬁc property is left unaltered.To an evolutionary biologist, this property is probably the organism’sﬁtness as measured by its ability to reproduce. However, if we are toaddress robustness within the context of interaction networks, we facethe question of how ﬁtness can be measured as a property of the net-work itself. Because such questions do not, as yet, have a clear answer,diﬀerent scientists use diﬀerent overall properties as a proxy for ﬁtness,and analyze the sensitivity of this overall property to diﬀerent kinds ofperturbations.As one example, a classic perturbation experiment that can be carriedout at the whole-genome level involves performing single-gene “knock-outs” and consequently analyzing the organism’s behavior.A single-gene knockout is carried out by mutating or deleting partof a single gene in a manner so that it loses its function, either by adrastic decrease in its expression level, or by misfolding and subsequentrapid degradation of its protein product. The eﬀect of this knockoutperturbation can then be studied in terms of overall function. In theyeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae for example, approximately 20% of thegenes are essential, meaning that knocking out any one of these genesresults in cell death, while knocking out any one of the remaining 80%of genes does not appreciably alter cell growth. Does the fact that 80%of gene knockouts do not result in cell death imply that baker’s yeastis a robust organism? The answer is not obvious. Many knockouts thatdo not kill the cell may alter its function in subtle ways. A large subsetof these knockouts also slows down cell growth appreciably. At a higherlevel, however, the large proportion of genetic dispensability in yeastleads to the widespread notion that higher organisms are geneticallyrobust, with the robustness being attributed to either (1) gene or molec-ular function duplication, (2) buﬀering or masking of a gene’s functionby an alternative biochemical pathway, or (3) involvement of certaingenes in processes that are required only under extreme or untestedenvironmental conditions. The ﬁrst two notions of robustness are fa-30 Introduction to Biological Networksmiliar to the reader from the earlier discussion of synthetic lethality,and indeed it may be argued that an organism with a dense syntheticlethal network is more robust than one that has a sparse syntheticlethal network.One way to measure robustness at the network level is entirely com-putational. The method, however, relies on a somewhat artiﬁcial notionof robustness that does not have a direct experimental interpretation.A striking property of large biomolecular networks is that they possessa power-law degree distribution. As a case in point, the number of inter-actions of a protein in a protein-protein interaction network in baker’syeast is distributed as a power law, that is, the number of proteinsthat are connected to k other proteins is proportional to a p ower of k:N(k) ∝ k−γ(Figure 1.12), where γ is called the power-law exponent.This implies that there are very few proteins that have a large num-ber of interactions with other proteins (these are the so-called “hub”proteins), and that the majority of proteins have very few interactionswith other proteins.Imagine a computer experiment in which the hub proteins are sys-tematically removed from the network one by one and the numberof hub removals it takes for the network to fragment into disconnectedsub-networks is measured. Such computer experiments have shown thatprotein-protein interaction networks are fragile (i.e., fragment easily)when a few hub proteins are systematically removed from them, butdo not fragment easily when proteins are removed at random. This ob-servation has led to the idea that protein-protein interaction networks,and more generally, power-law networks, are robust to random attackbut very sensitive to directed attack on hubs. Note that the notionof “organismal ﬁtness” here is formulated as something that dependson the structural integrity of the network: organisms with large con-nected networks are deemed more ﬁt than those that have fragmentednetworks.The computer experiment makes more biological sense once we alsoindependently observe that hub proteins are highly enriched for essen-tial proteins (Figure 1.12). Removing a hub protein is then akin toexperimental knockout of an essential gene. Therefore, this computeranalysis of robustness, carried out at the network level, would appear tobe consistent with the results of the single-gene knockout experiment,at least insofar as the robustness idea is addressed.Single-gene kno ckout analyses can be extended in obvious ways to


===== [11/72] chapter-11.html =====

The Living Interactome 311 10 100Degree1101001000Number of proteins(a) (b) (c)0 5 10 15 20 25 Yeast Worm Fly Essential genes Nonessential genes Mean degree of proteinsFIGURE 1.12: (a) A protein-protein interaction network in yeast, con-structed using two-hybrid interaction data available as of November 2012.Each ﬁlled gray circle represents a protein, and edges represent protein-proteininteractions as revealed by the two-hybrid method (see Chapter 2 for detailsof this method). Data was obtained from the BioGRID database [Stark et al.(2012); http://thebiogrid.org]. (b) Connectivity or degree distribution of inter-acting yeast proteins calculated from this data, giving the number of proteins(y-axis) that have a certain degree (x-axis). The connectivity distribution ap-proximately obeys a power law with an exponent of about 2.25. (c) Proteinsencoded by essential genes of several organisms are on average signiﬁcantlymore highly connected than proteins encoded by nonessential genes. Eachﬁlled bar represents the mean degree, while error bars represent standarderrors. Data was obtained from Hahn and Kern (2005).the analysis of eﬀects of simultaneous knockout of multiple genes. Evenﬁner analyses of robustness can be carried out if one has access to thedetailed structure of biomolecular networks. For example, if the speciesconcentrations of various proteins and metabolites as well as binding32 Introduction to Biological Networksconstants are known, it is possible to computationally simulate the ef-fects of small changes in these concentrations and binding constants onthe overall function of the network. It is not at all clear that resultsfrom such an analysis would provide the same view of robustness asknockout analysis would. Robustness at the network level may also betested by studying the evolution of networks, that is, by comparing net-works in related organisms and trying to ascertain to what extent theconnectivities and network parameters are conserved. Again, it is notclear that robustness as revealed by conservation of these homologousnetworks would bear any resemblance to the other types of robustnessdiscussed above.Detailed accounts of experimental and computational methods to in-fer networks and test for their reliability are the subjects of Chapters2 through 5. In Chapters 6 and 7, we discuss concrete models of smalland large biological networks. In Chapter 8, we return to the theme ofrobustness, especially as it manifests itself in light of the modular struc-ture of biological networks. Finally, in Chapter 9, we cover the role ofnetworks, and more generally the “network paradigm,” in illuminatingdisease mechanisms.


===== [12/72] chapter-12.html =====

Chapter 2Experimental Inference ofInteractionsIn this chapter we examine in some detail the experimental methodsthat are used to derive interaction networks. An interaction betweentwo biological entities could be physical, for example an interaction be-tween two proteins, between a protein and a length of DNA, or betweena protein and a small molecule. An interaction could also be strictlyinformational, as in a genetic interaction. It is important to keep inmind that a physical interpretation of the latter is often diﬃcult: agenetic interaction may or may not be due to a direct physical inter-action, and often the basis of a genetic interaction remains abstract.Despite this diﬃculty, genetic interaction networks are considered vitalto many important biological and medical goals. On the other hand,a physical interaction between two biological molecules can be simpleto interpret but suﬀers from several uncertainties with respect to therelevance of the interaction for biological function. Thus, the two typesof interactions—physical and genetic—often reveal complementary as-pects of the biology of the organism.2.1 Direct versus Indirect Inference of InteractionsModels of molecular or genetic interaction are based on two generaltypes of experimental approaches: direct and indirect inference of inter-action. Direct inference of interaction depends on an empirical demon-stration of interaction between two entities without having to rely onan intervening model. All physical and genetic interaction data belongto this category. By contrast, indirect inference relies on a model or ahypothesis to infer interaction b etween a pair of biological entities.Indirect inference may be of diverse types. In the case of interac-tion between pairs of proteins, for example, it may entail a computa-tional search for the presence of protein sequence motifs among candi-3334 Introduction to Biological NetworksBox 2.1 Crystal structures of biopolymers.Biological polymers, such as proteins and nucleic acids, can be crystallizedunder certain conditions, and the positions of the atoms that make upthe molecule can be deduced from the diﬀraction pattern cast by thecrystal when it is exposed to x-ray radiation. The conditions under whichproteins crystallize can be rather artiﬁcial and drastic, often requiring highlyconcentrated solutions of protein in nonphysiological environments, such asabnormal salt concentrations and pH. Even so, it is remarkable that, by andlarge, crystal structures of biological macromolecules have been found to beconsistent with the in vivo functional states, with few exceptions.Just as a single macromolecule can be crystallized, it is possible to crystallizetwo interacting molecules, such as two proteins, or DNA bound to a protein,when the two molecules interact in a reasonably stable conformation. Struc-tures found from a crystal composed of multiple interacting molecules areco-crystal structures.date proteins. X-ray co-crystal structure determination of protein pairs(Box 2.1) have indicated that the interaction interfaces of most proteinshave some conserved properties, such as largely hydrophobic aminoacids (Box 2.2) buried into the core surrounded by partially accessi-ble hydrophobic rings spanning an area of approximately 1,600˚A2perbinding interface on average.The interaction surfaces are usually composed of evolutionarily con-served protein domains (Box 2.3). Some of these domains, character-ized by their amino acid sequences, have been shown by direct meth-ods to physically interact when they occur in some speciﬁc proteins;yet, whether the presence of such domains would inevitably lead toprotein-protein interaction is by no means certain, and a probabilityof interaction must be assigned in general. Theoretical and computa-tional models that assign probabilities to whether a pair of proteinsshould interact can be constructed, and constitute examples of indirectinference. Such models are extensively discussed in Chapter 3.A second common example of indirect inference is the prediction ofDNA-protein interactions (also discussed in detail in Chapter 3) givendetailed information on the tendency of the protein to bind to certainDNA sequences. One method is to examine a given DNA sequence forits similarity to experimentally observed DNA sequence(s) known toExperimental Inference of Interactions 35Box 2.2 Classiﬁcation of amino acids by their solubility inwater.The twenty naturally occurring amino acids that constitute proteins can beclassiﬁed according to their chemical properties in various ways. A useful,although somewhat ambiguous, classiﬁcation is based on hydrophobicity,or the extent to which an amino acid is soluble in water. Hydrophobicityis an important property because it plays a crucial role in shaping thethree-dimensional structure of a protein: amino acids with hydrophobicchemical groups tend to be buried in the protein interior, where they arenot exposed to the aqueous environment of the cell, while hydrophilic aminoacids tend to be located in the solvent-exposed portion of a protein.The extent of solubility of an amino acid in water depends on how stronglyit interacts with water. Because water is polar (i.e., positive and negativecharges in a water molecule are well separated), it tends to interact withother molecules that are charged or polar. On general grounds, therefore, onewould expect amino acids that are charged or strongly polar to be hydrophilic.Thus, the negatively charged amino acids Aspartate (abbreviated as Asp orD) and Glutamate (Glu or E), as well as the positively charged amino acidsLysine (Lys or K) and Arginine (Arg or R), are hydrophilic. Serine (Ser orS), Threonine (Thr or T), Asparagine (Asn or N), and Glutamine (Gln or Q)are polar amino acids and therefore also hydrophilic. Nonpolar amino acidsinclude Alanine (Ala or A), Valine (Val or V), Isoleucine (Ile or I), Leucine(Leu or L), Phenylalanine (Phe or F), Tryptophan (Trp or W), and Methionine(Met or M), which are hydrophobic. The polarity, and solubility in water, ofthe remaining ﬁve amino acids depend on their local environment within theprotein. Histidine (His or H) and Cysteine (Cys or C) can be charged in manyproteins in the cellular environment, and are hydrophilic in these situations,while when uncharged they are far less polar than many of the other polaramino acids. Tyrosine (Tyr or Y) has a hydroxyl group, suggesting it is watersoluble, but that is oﬀset by the presence of an aromatic ring which is typicallynonreactive with water. Inside proteins, tyrosine can be either hydrophilic orhydrophobic. Glycine (Gly or G) has no side chain and usually behaves likea nonpolar, hydrophobic amino acid in proteins. Finally, Proline (Pro or P)usually behaves like a polar, hydrophilic amino acid in proteins.bind to the protein in question. Here too, the inference of binding isindirect, and its accuracy depends on the validity of several simplifyingassumptions.Most methods of indirect inference are based on computational mod-els. An example we discuss in Chapter 3 is that of gene regulatory net-36 Introduction to Biological NetworksBox 2.3 Protein domains.A protein domain is a contiguous part of the protein that may be an inde-pendently structurally stable unit, an evolutionarily conserved subsequenceof the original protein sequence, or a single functional unit within a multi-functional protein. These three (rather loose) deﬁnitions have high overlap inpractice. Some proteins are single domains in their entirety while many aremulti-domain proteins. For example, all transcription factor proteins containa DNA-binding domain that is responsible for attachment to speciﬁc DNAsequences; in addition, they may contain other domains that serve as bindingsites for co-regulators and small molecules (ligands).works deduced from successive expression of genes along a time series.Brieﬂy, if a transcription factor gene TF is observed to be itself tran-scribed at time t0and a second gene A is observed to be transcribedat time t1, where t1follows t0, then TF is a candidate transcriptionfactor for A (provided there is other evidence for TF regulating A),and we model the interaction pair as TF → A. We see in Chapter 3that indirect inference models can often be strengthened by additionalinformation.2.2 Physical versus Genetic InteractionsA physical interaction is equivalent to the “binding” of a biomolecule(protein or DNA) with another under approximate in vivo conditions.When present together in a cellular compartment at a certain temper-ature, A and B are said to physically bind when a complex AB existsin equilibrium with free forms A and B. The equilibrium concentrationof the bound form relative to the free forms depends on the thermo-dynamic parameters of the binding reaction. Thus, all direct bindinginference is ultimately subjective and depends on accepting a certainthreshold concentration of the bound form AB as evidence of bind-ing. Nearly all entities may bind to one another if the components arepresent in the same compartment in suﬃcient concentrations. The pos-sible arbitrariness of this threshold concentration is the most importantsource of problems with physical interaction data: how strong must thebinding be to be accepted as biologically relevant?A “true” physical interaction implies the existence of at least someExperimental Inference of Interactions 37kind of genetic interaction, but the existence of a genetic interaction,depending on the type of genetic interaction under consideration, mayor may not imply a physical interaction. We will see now that the exis-tence of a particular type of genetic interaction can provide very strongsupport for the existence of a biologically relevant physical interactionin a manner that does not depend on a binding threshold.Suppose that the equilibrium concentration of the bound form ABof two proteins is 1,000 times more than the product of the concentra-tions of the free proteins A and B, suggesting that indeed A physicallyinteracts with B. Usually these parameters are measured in vitro, thatis, under laboratory conditions rather than directly in the cellular envi-ronment. Therefore, the veracity of this interaction inside the cell undervery diﬀerent conditions is doubtful, because individual concentrationsof A, B, and AB are uncertain in the cell and diﬃcult to measure.Suppose, further, that there exists a mutation that happens to replaceone or more amino acids of a protein A with some other amino acid(s)and that, as a result of this mutation, the mutated protein A* has adefective function. The defective function is usually expressed as a phe-notype of the mutant gene a. Now imagine that there exists a secondmutation in the gene encoding the protein B, also producing a diﬀerent(unrelated) amino acid substitution. The mutated protein B* is itselfdefective, as shown by a mutant phenotype. Now, one of the followingoutcomes applies:Compared to individuals with two normal (wild type) alleles (seeBox 2.4 for a description of alleles) of the two genes (Table 2.1, case I),individuals carrying mutant alleles in either of the two genes are defec-tive (Table 2.1, cases II and III). When individuals carry a mutant allelein each of the two genes, the most frequent outcome is that the individ-ual will be defective (Table 2.1, case IV). However, in rare cases, suchdouble mutant individuals will be normal rather than defective (Ta-ble 2.1, case V). When case V holds, we say that the mutational allelesin genes a and b suppress each other. However, it is possible that thereare other alleles of the same genes a and/or b for which case IV, andnot case V, applies. This type of genetic interaction, exhibited by caseV, is known as allele-speciﬁc suppression—only speciﬁc combinationsof mutational alleles in genes a and b show a genetic interaction (in thiscase, suppression of the defective phenotype). We have encountered thiseﬀect in Chapter 1 (Figure 1.6c). As discussed there, the only reason-able interpretation of allele-speciﬁc suppression is that proteins A and


===== [13/72] chapter-13.html =====

38 Introduction to Biological NetworksBox 2.4 Alleles.An allele is one mutant form of a gene. A gene can have many diﬀerent alleles;for example, the DNA that encodes the gene might suﬀer mutations relativeto the “normal” or “wild-type” allele of the gene. Alleles may correspond tovaried phenotypes relative to the wild-type. They may be “silent” alleles, inwhich case there are no phenotypic consequences of the underlying mutation.Two diﬀerent alleles may have identical or similar phenotypes. Alleles mayrepresent a change in the amino acid sequence of the protein that the genecodes for—these are called missense mutant alleles. They may lead to a trun-cated protein because the underlying mutation leads to a stop codon in themiddle of the original gene sequence. Alleles may correspond to complete dele-tion of the gene because of mutation in the transcription initiation region orthe translation initiation region of the gene sequence. If the mutation occursin the regulatory region, alleles may also entail production of more wild-typeprotein than normal.TABLE 2.1: Allele Speciﬁc SuppressionCase Gene A Allele Gene B Allele PhenotypeI Normal Normal NormalII Mutant-1 Normal DefectiveIII Normal Mutant-2 DefectiveIV Mutant-1 Mutant-2 DefectiveV Mutant-1 Mutant-2 NormalB interact physically under normal (wild-type) conditions. The reason-ing behind this interpretation is the following. Missense mutations ingenes a and b cause misfolding of proteins A* and B*, respectively, bycausing amino acid substitutions in the proteins. If proteins A and Bmust physically bind to each other for normal function, the misfoldedprotein A* may not bind properly to B, or misfolded B* may not bindto A, thus producing the defective complexes A*B or AB*, respectively.However, certain misfolded versions of A* and B* may have the prop-erty that the defects are exactly compensatory, and the two defectiveproteins are now able to bind to each other (A*B*), thus restoring bio-logical function of the dimeric (or, more generally, multimeric) protein.The basic point is that it is very diﬃcult to conceive of allele-speciﬁcsuppression taking place without physical interaction between A and B.The existence of allele-speciﬁc suppression is classically considered themost rigorous demonstration of the existence of protein-protein inter-Experimental Inference of Interactions 39action. This may appear surprising because one might argue that thereis no better demonstration of protein-protein interaction than the co-crystallization of two proteins revealed at atomic resolution. However,the issue is that biologists are mostly concerned not with whether twoproteins can interact under in vitro conditions (such as the conditionof co-crystallization), but whether they do so under normal biologicalconditions and whether their interaction has biological relevance.As a case in point, despite the fact that two proteins will co-crystallizein a test tube, they might actually be conﬁned to two diﬀerent cellularcompartments (e.g., one in the nucleus and another in the mitochon-dria) such that in a particular organism, the two proteins never havethe opportunity to bind to each other. The fact that they can in factbind might simply be an evolutionary relic: the binding might have hada functional signiﬁcance in an ancestral organism but has none in thepresent organism. The existence of allele-speciﬁc suppression, on theother hand, guarantees the functional relevance of the particular inter-action because biological function is expressed as a mutant phenotypeor its suppression.Genetic interaction can be of many diﬀerent kinds, and each couldhave several diﬀerent interpretations, some indicating direct physicalinteraction and others indicating the nonexistence of a physical inter-action. We discuss some of these issues in a later section. We ﬁrstexamine a series of common methods for identifying direct physicalinteraction between pairs of proteins, which generates the major por-tion of existing data for interaction network analysis. While co-crystalstructures of interacting proteins provide extremely reliable data onthe possibility of two proteins interacting, such information is rare dueto the diﬃculties in co-crystallization and structure determination. Nu-clear magnetic resonance (NMR) structure determination also providesreliable data for the demonstration of protein-protein interaction, butlike x-ray diﬀraction, this method cannot be rapidly scaled to producelarge interaction datasets. Therefore, a number of fast methods for thedetermination of protein-protein interaction have been developed, andthese techniques have revolutionized network-level studies in biology.The most common method for determining protein-protein interactionis the two-hybrid interaction conducted in a common experimental or-ganism, baker’s yeast.40 Introduction to Biological Networks2.3 The Two-Hybrid InteractionThe yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) method outputs a binary relationship be-tween two proteins. One begins with the construction of two gene fu-sions. In one, the gene for one protein (X), also called a bait, is fused tothe gene for a known DNA binding domain (DBD) that has the prop-erty to tightly bind a DNA sequence called the Upstream ActivatingSequence (UAS) (Figure 2.1). This fused gene leads to the synthesis ofa fused protein, denoted by DBD:X.In the second gene fusion, the gene for a second protein (Y), alsocalled a prey, is fused to the gene for another domain, called the ac-tivation domain (AD), which allows the synthesis of the second fusionprotein, Y:AD. The two genes are then introduced into the nucleusof yeast cells. DBD and AD fusions are so designed that the genes canbe transcribed into mRNA at a very high level in the yeast nuclei, andthe corresponding mRNAs are translated in the cytoplasm, followingwhich the two fused proteins, DBD:X and Y:AD, are re-transportedback into the nucleus.A third gene, called a reporter gene, is also present in the nucleus.The protein product of the reporter gene is an enzyme whose presencecan be determined by an appropriate chemical reaction or a phenotypic(e.g., growth) assay. The reporter gene has a few copies of UAS locatedclose to the beginning of the gene. The AD present in the fused bait hasthe property to bind to an essential protein called a mediator whosefunction is to promote transcription of the reporter gene. However, theAD-mediator contact is quite unstable and, under experimental condi-tions, AD-mediator contact alone is insuﬃcient to allow the mediatorto promote transcription of the reporter gene. For transcription of thereporter gene to occur at a level that is suﬃcient to detect the enzy-matic activity of its product, the AD-mediator complex must be sta-bilized in the vicinity of the reporter gene. The DBD:X fusion proteinnormally occupies UAS, but unless the bound protein interacts withY:AD, the mediator is not activated. The reporter enzyme is synthe-sized and activated only when there is a suﬃciently strong interactionbetween DBD:X and Y:AD (caused by the interaction between X andY) such that the AD-mediator complex is stabilized. This is the signalaccepted as indicative of a protein-protein interaction between X andY.The two gene fusions can be applied to many pairs of protein-codingExperimental Inference of Interactions 41UASReporter geneDBDXYADMediatorUASReporter geneADZADZXYOFFONADMediatora)b)First MatrixIgGProtein ACBPBaitSecond MatrixCBPBaitCAM12312DBDFIGURE 2.1: Two techniques for deciphering protein-protein interaction.(a) Two-hybrid interaction. The top box shows the relevant proteins not yetbound to the DNA. The arrow in the reporter gene corresponds to the di-rection of the reading frame. UAS is the upstream activator sequence for thereporter gene, AD is the activation domain, and DBD the DNA binding do-main; proteins Z and Y are candidate interactors with X. Genes correspondingto the candidate interactors are constructed such that each gene is fused inframe to the gene encoding AD (examples are Y:AD and Z:AD). These fusedgenes are introduced into cells that also harbor a gene encoding a fusion be-tween DBD and the bait protein X (DBD:X). For successful expression ofthe reporter gene to occur, the mediator protein must bind to the left of thereporter gene. In the top panel, the reporter gene is in the OFF state becausethe proteins are shown unbound to the DNA. In the lower panel, proteins Xand Y are shown to be interacting, thus bringing AD in juxtaposition withthe reporter gene and causing the mediator to bind upstream of the reportergene. Reporter gene transcription can now occur, so that it is in the ON state.Thus, successful binding of X and Y is signaled by reporter gene expression.Once the cell that exhibits reporter gene expression has been detected, theidentity of the gene that encodes Y is found by sequencing the DNA of thefused construct. (b) TAP tagging. CBP is a calmodulin binding protein andIgG is immunoglobulin G, an antibody; proteins 1, 2, and 3 are potential inter-actors with the bait protein. The left box shows the TAP tagged bait proteinbound to the aﬃnity matrix on which the IgG protein is immobilized. ProteinA is subsequently released from the matrix by cleavage with an enzyme ata speciﬁc site indicated by a squiggly line. The mixture is then applied on asecond matrix on which calmodulin (CAM) is immobilized (right panel). Afterwashing the protein-matrix complex so as to remove proteins that bind to thebait protein with low aﬃnity (in this case, protein 3), calcium ions are addedto release the proteins from the second matrix. Subsequently, the proteins 1and 2 that bind to the bait are identiﬁed by mass spectroscopy.42 Introduction to Biological NetworksBox 2.5 Open reading frames.The translation of a sequence of DNA or RNA nucleotides to a sequence ofamino acids that make up a protein is carried out in the cell by translatingeach triplet of nucleotides, or codon, to the corresponding amino acid. Areading frame is a way of “reading” a DNA or RNA sequence in groups ofthree nucleotides at a time. There are thus three possible reading frames in anmRNA strand, each one starting at a diﬀerent position in the sequence. Anopen reading frame (ORF) is a reading frame that begins with and contains thestart codon ATG (in DNA) or AUG (in mRNA), and a subsequent stretch ofsequence whose length is a multiple of three nucleotides but does not contain astop codon (i.e., one of the codons TAA, TAG, and TGA in the DNA sequence,or UAA, UAG, and UGA in the mRNA sequence). An ORF therefore endsjust before the ﬁrst in-frame stop codon is encountered.genes at a time, and pairs of interactions can be rapidly studied byrobotically controlled introduction of the fused genes into yeast cells fol-lowed by automated detection of reporter gene activity. This method ishighly suited to rapidly scan large genomes systematically. For example,open reading frames (ORFs, Box 2.5) corresponding to every gene in anorganism can be synthesized and fused to DBD and AD, and all pairsscanned for reporter gene activity in yeast. In this fashion, nearly entiresets of the protein coding genes of yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae),fruit ﬂy (Drosophila melanogaster), a nematode worm (Caenorhabditiselegans), and human have been scanned for the existence of protein-protein interaction (PPI). The ﬁrst experimentally derived human PPInetwork was announced in 2005 by scanning for pair-wise interactionsamong 1,705 human proteins in yeast two-hybrid assays (Stelzl et al.,2005). Over 3,000 interaction pairs were identiﬁed in that work. Sub-sequent works using essentially similar techniques have, at the timeof writing, ampliﬁed the human protein-protein interaction network toover 41,000 interactions involving over 10,000 proteins.The normal human PPI network can be compared with the inter-action network of proteins already linked to diseased states, such ascancers, as discussed further in Chapter 9. It was found that the con-nectivity properties of the PPI network of cancer-related proteins (cor-responding to genes that are frequently mutated in cancer cells) is sub-stantially diﬀerent from the network of proteins hitherto not reportedto be associated with cancers (Rambaldi et al., 2008). In particular, the


===== [14/72] chapter-14.html =====

Experimental Inference of Interactions 43cancer-related proteins have, on average, a large number of interactionsas compared to other proteins in the human PPI (i.e., they have highdegree in the human PPI). The diﬀerences are unlikely due to bias inthe data (e.g., because cancer-related proteins are more exhaustivelystudied and therefore more of their interaction partners are known).This is because in comparing the cancer-related PPI network with PPInetworks in several other organisms (yeast, ﬂy or worm) where thereis no cancer-related bias, the cancer-related proteins have on averagesigniﬁcantly higher degree, more shortest paths connecting them, andhigher betweenness centrality (Box 2.6) than non-cancer disease pro-teins, essential proteins, and proteins known to be important for con-trolling cellular events (Xia et al., 2011). The cancer PPI network issigniﬁcantly more fragile than non-cancer or normal networks. Mightthese results suggest that cancer networks are more fragile because theyhave not been selected by evolution to robust properties?Y2H data suﬀer from several sources of false positive and false neg-ative errors. False positive errors may result from X and Y being pro-duced in artiﬁcially high amounts, leading to high concentrations oftheir bound state, whereas in vivo they might not be present in highenough concentrations for the bound form to have signiﬁcant concen-tration at equilibrium. Moreover, they are now forced to be present inthe yeast nucleus whereas normally they may not both be expressed inthe same intracellular compartment. Alternatively, the structure of atleast one of the two fused proteins could be altered in the fused statein such a way that the interaction might be an artifact of the fusionitself.False negative errors may arise from the possibility that the fusedprotein(s) cannot fold properly in yeast cells, cannot enter the nucleus,or are degraded rapidly in the nucleus.Evidence indicates that most Y2H datasets have high false positiverates, while false negative errors are usually more frequent within cer-tain classes of proteins such as membrane proteins. A manifestation offalse positive errors in Y2H data is displayed by the only ∼20% overlapbetween two independent genome-wide scans of the yeast genome, eachof which discovered approximately similar numbers of interactions (692and 841 interactions, respectively). Some techniques that rely on a verysimilar approach to Y2H, that is, by using protein fusions, but detectthe physical interaction by directly monitoring close juxtaposition ofthe two fused proteins by optical techniques, such as ﬂuorescence reso-44 Introduction to Biological NetworksBox 2.6 Network centrality measures.The positions and connectivities of nodes in a network can be mathematicallydescribed by various types of centrality measures. We have already encoun-tered the simplest such measure, namely the degree of a node, which is simplythe number of nodes that link directly to the node in question. Nodes may,however, o ccupy important, “central” positions in a network without havinghigh degree. Imagine, for example, a node that is connected only to two othernodes (i.e., has degree 2), each having very high degree. In such a case, the“central” node is special not because it has high degree, but because all thepaths that connect nodes lying at either side of the central node must passthrough the central node. This example illustrates the importance of pathswhen trying to describe the centrality of a node. Of particular importanceare shortest paths in a network: a shortest path between two nodes is a setof connected edges that links the two nodes in such a way as to traverse thesmallest possible number of intermediate nodes. Many notions of node cen-trality rely on the concept of shortest paths. For example, consider a node vwhose centrality we are interested in computing. Let nst(v) be the numberof shortest paths that link distinct nodes s and t and pass through v. Letnstbe the total number of shortest paths that link nodes s and t. Then thebetweenness centrality of v is deﬁned in terms of the proportions of shortestpaths between pairs of nodes that pass through v:BC(v)=!s"=t("=v)nst(v)nst,where the sum is over distinct nodes s and t, neither of which is identical tov. Other centrality measures are also based on shortest paths: the closenesscentrality measure of a node is related to the arithmetic mean of the lengthsof the shortest paths between the node in question and all other nodes, andthe information centrality measure is related to the harmonic mean of thesame lengths.nance energy transfer (FRET), also suﬀer from nearly identical sourcesof false positive and false negative errors. This occurs because bothof these techniques involve forced expression of fused proteins in theyeast nucleus. Despite these errors, Y2H interaction datasets form themost useful binary protein-protein interaction data available today. Aswe see in Chapters 3 and 5, by combining diﬀerent sources of interac-tion data in meaningful ways, one can enhance the power of networkanalysis.Experimental Inference of Interactions 452.4 Aﬃnity Co-puriﬁcationWhile the Y2H method provides information on binary interactions,aﬃnity co-puriﬁcation provides information on protein complexes. Thisis useful for the following reason: in an interaction matrix of threeproteins A, B, and C, even if the Y2H method were to report all possiblebinary interactions, it is not certain that the ternary complex ABCexists. This could be due to the fact that one of the three proteinsmay not coexist in the same intracellular compartment simultaneouslywith the other two. Another possibility is that protein B interacts withA and C via the same surface patch and can therefore not interactwith both simultaneously because of occlusion of A by C or vice versa.Conversely, in the absence of one of the three proteins, it is possible thatany or all three binary interactions might be too unstable to produce aY2H signal. In such a case, the Y2H data will have no information onthe complex. To reveal information on higher-order interactions amongproteins, several methods have been developed that can be groupedtogether as aﬃnity co-puriﬁcation methods.The basic task in these methods is to purify a particular protein fromcells and to detect the other proteins that are physically associated withit. This experiment is carried out under a set of stringent conditionssuch that most proteins that are unbound and weakly bound to theprotein in question are eliminated from the mixture. There are twocommon ways to purify the proteins: co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP)and tandem aﬃnity puriﬁcation (TAP) by tagging.In the co-IP technique, an antibody (Box 2.7) speciﬁc for one pro-tein (the so-called “bait” or query protein) is used to aﬃnity-purify it,and other proteins that are co-puriﬁed along with the bait are identi-ﬁed. Under these experimental conditions, it is customary to list theco-puriﬁed proteins as those that interact with the bait protein. Thisprinciple was discussed brieﬂy in Chapter 1 (see also Figure 1.4a). Theantibody may be speciﬁc to the whole protein, but in the more com-mon scenario the protein itself is engineered to contain a domain thatis recognized by an antibody (this process is called epitope tagging).The method is more reliable when the protein is engineered to containtwo separate epitope tags and two successive immunoprecipitations areperformed on the sample with the antibodies, thus reducing the num-ber of accidental contaminants. This modiﬁed method is called TAP (orTandem Aﬃnity Puriﬁcation) tagging. The method usually involves en-46 Introduction to Biological NetworksBox 2.7 Antibodies.When a foreign protein is injected into a mammal, the organism generallyproduces a typ e of protein that can bind with high speciﬁcity and selectiv-ity to the injected foreign protein (called an antigen). This speciﬁc proteinproduced by the mammal as a response to the foreign protein is called an an-tibody protein. By virtue of their speciﬁcity and selectivity, antibodies can beuseful “reagents” for the detection of the presence or absence of the antigen.Antibody molecules form the basis of the so-called humoral immunity—thedefense mechanism of the host against invading organisms.gineering the binding sites for two diﬀerent proteins in tandem (proteinA and CBP in Figure 2.1b). All proteins present in the ﬁnal precipitateare then identiﬁed by mass spectrometry, which is a technique by whichmolecules are identiﬁed by their mass-to-charge ratios.Protein A and calmodulin binding protein (CBP) shown in Fig-ure 2.1b, whose binding sites are fused to the bait protein, have theproperty of tight (i.e., high-aﬃnity) binding to their cognate bindingsites. Protein A also binds tightly to a segment of the mammalian an-tibody protein IgG; this segment is called the “protein A binding site.”The protein Calmodulin similarly binds with high aﬃnity, in the ab-sence of calcium ions, to CBP. In the presence of calcium ions, theaﬃnity of Calmodulin to CBP is reduced. The fusion of the CBP andprotein A binding sites to the bait protein is conveniently mediatedby hooking up the DNA sequences encoding each of the two bindingsites in tandem, in frame to the reading frame of the bait protein’sDNA. Once the modiﬁed bait protein gene is constructed in this fash-ion, the fused bait protein can be pro duced in large quantities. Nowthis modiﬁed bait protein gene is introduced into a cell and the baitprotein is expressed. Any protein (or any other molecule) that normallybinds to the native bait protein is also expected to bind to the mod-iﬁed bait. It now remains to break open these cells and capture thebait protein on a matrix of beads or gel that has been pre-coated withIgG. IgG will bind to its cognate binding site on the modiﬁed bait, andthe bait-interacting proteins will secondarily also stick to such beads.The beads are then gently washed to remove low-aﬃnity binding pro-teins, and the bait is subsequently released from the beads by addingan enzyme that speciﬁcally cleaves the IgG protein oﬀ the beads. Theeﬄuents of the beads are collected and subsequently applied, in the ab-Experimental Inference of Interactions 47sence of calcium ions, to another matrix that has been pre-coated withCalmodulin. The resulting complex mixture is again washed to removelow-aﬃnity binding molecules. Subsequently, calcium ions are addedto the mixture such that the bait protein, along with any high-aﬃnityinteracting protein that still remains attached to the bait, is released.These proteins are then identiﬁed by a variety of chemical techniques,such as mass spectroscopy.Both types of aﬃnity co-puriﬁcation suﬀer from many sources offalse positive and false negative errors. Accidental contaminants arethe most common false positives, and accidental removal of genuineinteractors lead to false negatives. Both methods rely on breaking opencells and thus mixing their internal content, which introduces anothersource of error due to disruption of the compartmentalization or local-ization of the constituent proteins. Additionally, the epitope or TAPtagged proteins are usually intro duced into yeast or other cells by engi-neering their genes, and thus are usually expressed at artiﬁcially highlevels, leading to the same sources of errors as in some Y2H experi-ments. Both Y2H and aﬃnity co-puriﬁcation suﬀer from the fact thatpost-translational modiﬁcation in yeast is diﬀerent from that in someother organisms: if the existence of interaction is dependent on a spe-ciﬁc type of post-translational modiﬁcation, then there will be errorsin the detection of such interactions. Despite these limitations, aﬃn-ity puriﬁcation provides most of the protein complex data currentlyavailable for analysis. Combining Y2H and aﬃnity co-puriﬁcation dataallows important insights into the network. For example, as we discussin Chapter 5, intersections of multiple datasets can in principle providehigh-conﬁdence protein-protein interaction data, and help generate in-formation about protein complexes.We include in the class of aﬃnity puriﬁcation methods another typeof analytical method, namely protein microarrays. Protein microarraysgenerate binary interaction data. In this method, proteins are sepa-rately printed in arrays on a coated surface such that the spatial loca-tion of each protein is well deﬁned. Subsequently, a ﬂuorescently taggedprotein is applied over the entire microarray, and bound ﬂuorescenceat each location is monitored by a laser beam and recorded. Whilethis method is extremely sensitive and very rapid, once all proteins areﬂuorescently tagged, it is dependent on the availability of pure pro-teins, which is an expensive and time-consuming step. The method isalso sensitive to the physical conditions of binding, which is artiﬁcially


===== [15/72] chapter-15.html =====

48 Introduction to Biological Networksproduced on the arrays.There is, however, an important ambiguity in the interpretation ofaﬃnity puriﬁcation data: a protein that precipitates with the bait pro-tein could do so either because it directly interacts with the bait proteinor because it directly interacts with another protein that is precipitatedwith the bait protein. Thus we cannot unambiguously infer direct in-teractions between the bait protein and the individual proteins that areprecipitated with it. There are, therefore, two extreme models for in-terpreting the results of aﬃnity puriﬁcation data: (1) the spoke model,which assumes that each protein that precipitates with the bait pro-tein directly interacts with it but not with any other precipitated pro-tein (leading to a “spoke-like” network structure); and (2) the matrixmodel, which assumes that all proteins that are precipitated (includingthe bait protein) directly interact with each other (leading to a dense,“matrix-like” network structure). The reality is usually somewhere be-tween these two extreme assumptions but is impossible to tease apartusing aﬃnity puriﬁcation data alone. Using yeast protein-protein in-teraction data culled from diﬀerent types of experiments, Bader andHogue (2002) found that the spoke model assumption is usually farmore accurate than the matrix model assumption.Because no single method for identifying physical interaction betweenproteins is reliable, it is imperative that network analysis is based oninteraction data generated by at least two independent methods. A sec-ond consideration is that of the context of the reported interaction. IfY2H interactions are reported from small-scale experiments in which asingle investigator applies a series of criteria to minimize experimentalerrors in a small dataset, then the resulting dataset is usually consid-ered more reliable than Y2H data covering large numbers of proteinpairs using “high-throughput” techniques (Box 2.8). Datasets presentin a collective repository of protein interaction data (e.g., in BIOGRID;http://thebiogrid.org) are usually distinguished by the experimentalcontext. Thus, a single report of Y2H interaction in a small-scale ex-periment is sometimes accepted as deﬁnitive proof for the existence ornonexistence of an interaction, whereas multiple reports from indepen-dent high-throughput experiments are necessary to reach the same levelof conﬁdence. Nonetheless, many of the same sources of false positiveand negative errors speciﬁc to the techniques, not inﬂuenced by theexperimental scale, may remain for small-scale experimental reports aswell.Experimental Inference of Interactions 49Box 2.8 High-throughput data in biology.In biology, high-throughput data refer to data that are generated by a largenumber of experiments carried out simultaneously in an automated fashion.The experiments typically use robotic techniques and entail automated syn-thesis and analysis of the data using appropriate software. The classic stapleof high-throughput biological experiments is a microtiter plate containing 96“wells” arranged in a 8 × 12 rectangular grid. Each well is the site of an in-dependent biological or chemical experiment. A typical high-throughput ex-periment involves many such plates and a robotic system to add and mixchemicals in each well, organize the plates, and read out the results. Modernmicrotiter plates contain larger multiples of 96 wells. At the time of writing,the “well” technology appears poised to be replaced by microﬂuidic tech-nologies. For example, in a drop-based microﬂuidic technology, drops of ﬂuidseparated by oil replace the wells. Drop-based microﬂuidics oﬀers the promiseof faster screening using far less chemical reagent amounts. Because of theirlarge scale and automated nature, high-throughput experiments are generallyconsidered more error-prone than the same experiment carried out manuallyat a much smaller scale.2.5 DNA-Protein InteractionsThe second important kind of direct physical interaction is that be-tween a protein and DNA. This information is essential for construct-ing models of gene regulatory networks. As mentioned in Chapter 1,a DNA-protein interaction network is a directed network in which anedge leads from a protein node to a gene node.A number of small-scale experimental techniques can provide strongevidence for a protein binding to DNA. One such technique is an in vivofootprinting experiment coupled with a mutant study. In this method,cells are treated with a chemical that modiﬁes DNA bases but is unableto modify a base if a protein physically occludes it (thus, the patch ofunmodiﬁed DNA sequence constitutes a “footprint” of the protein onthe DNA). The modiﬁed bases are identiﬁed following chemical treat-ment in normal cells and compared to those in mutant cells lacking theprotein, thus leading to an identiﬁcation of the footprint or binding siteof the protein on the DNA.One possible source of error here is that the protein may not itselfbind the DNA but may indirectly control the binding of a second pro-tein that actually o ccupies the DNA site. To eliminate this source of50 Introduction to Biological Networkserror, it is necessary to replace the amino acids of the candidate DNAbinding protein and show that the footprints change in some regularmanner.Again, one of the best sources of evidence of DNA-protein interactionis a DNA-protein co-crystal structure, the determination of which isa time-consuming and diﬃcult endeavor. As a result, high-throughputmethods have been devised that are able to rapidly provide informationon protein occupancy of the DNA, of which chromatin immunoprecip-itation (ChIP) has been traditionally the most widely used technique.In the ChIP method, one begins by making an antibody againstthe candidate protein or by tagging the protein with an epitope tagand expressing the protein in the nucleus of the organism in whichthe relevant interaction is interrogated. Cells in which the protein isexpressed are treated with formaldehyde, a chemical that cross-linksmost proteins bound to the DNA to one another and also to the DNAbases. The cells are crushed, the protein-DNA complex (also called thechromatin) is puriﬁed away from the rest of the cellular material, andthe chromatin is sheared into small fragments of approximately 200to 500 nucleotides in size. These fragments are then applied to theantibody bound to a matrix, and the speciﬁc protein-DNA complexis separated from the unbound material. Subsequently, the chemicallinkage between the protein and DNA is reversed, and the sequenceidentity of the DNA bound to the protein is revealed. This latter processis usually accomplished by lab eling with a ﬂuorescent molecule andhybridizing to known DNA sequences on a DNA microarray, or bydirect sequencing. DNA microarray signal intensity, after being ﬁlteredfor noise by averaging multiple measurements and, after subtraction ofthe background signal, serves as a good measure of the actual strengthof the protein-DNA binding interaction.Using the ChIP technique, all recognizable transcription factor bind-ing sites over the entire genome have been determined for yeast. Ge-nomic binding sites of a few chosen transcription factors have beendetermined for several other organisms, including ﬂy, worm, and hu-man.Note that in the ChIP method, weak binding sites may remainundetected, and the resolution of the binding site (number of nu-cleotides bound) is determined by the average DNA fragment size atthe immuno-aﬃnity puriﬁcation step. The latter factor is importantfor recognizing which gene corresponds to the DNA that is bound byExperimental Inference of Interactions 51the protein. In some cases, the distance between two genes might berelatively small compared with the resolution of the experiment in sep-arating the boundaries between two adjacent protein-bound sites. Insuch cases, especially if the two genes are transcribed in opposite di-rections so that their respective regulatory regions both lie betweenthe two genes, the exact identity of the gene that is actually controlledby the DNA binding protein may remain unresolved. The problem isparticularly diﬃcult in higher eukaryotes where a regulatory regioncontrolling a particular gene can lie thousands or millions of base-pairsaway from that gene.A solution to the resolution problem is at least partially providedby the ChIP-SEQ method. As in the ChIP method, one also beginsby immunoprecipitating the protein that is bound to the DNA (i.e.,chemically cross-linked to the DNA at the binding sites). The immuno-precipitated or captured DNA samples are then sequenced. Obviouslythe sequencing must be carried out on the many thousands to millionsof DNA molecules that are present in the sample. The sequencing tech-nique provides single-molecule DNA sequences arising from clones ofthe sample DNA. The frequency with which a speciﬁc stretch of DNAnucleotides is found among the captured molecules relative to the fre-quency of that stretch in uncaptured DNA from the same sample (i.e.,from un-cross-linked DNA) provides a measure of the extent to whichthe DNA target sequence is bound to the protein.2.6 Classiﬁcation and Interpretation of Genetic Interac-tionsUnlike physical interactions, genetic interactions are abstract, and eachtype of genetic interaction may be consistent with multiple alternativephysical interactions. Given such lack of clarity, why do we study ge-netic interactions? The chief reason is that a genetic interaction, by thevery fact that it is signaled by a phenotype, is of immediate biologicalrelevance. Genetic interactions also enable us to organize biological in-formation ﬂow along deﬁned, genetically controlled, pathways, to probeevolutionary processes, and to predict functions of unknown genes andproteins.Studies of genetic interaction between two genes begin with mutatedversions of each gene. Depending on its phenotype, a mutation could52 Introduction to Biological NetworksTABLE 2.2: Classiﬁcation of Mutant Alleles of a Gene1Allele Deciding Phenotype of ClassiﬁcationConﬁguration Deciding ConﬁgurationA A/A Normal (φA) Wild-Typea1a1/A Normal (φa1/A= φA) Recessivea2a2/A Abnormal (φa2/A&= φA) Dominantbe a reduction-of-function mutation, a complete-loss-of-function (null)mutation, or a gain-of-function mutation. Each such phenotypic classcould be recessive or dominant relative to the normal (or wild-type)allele (Table 2.2).We recognize two main classes of genetic interaction: epistatic andsynthetic. Epistasis occurs when the double mutant ab in genes A andB have the same phenotype as that of one of the two single mutants(the logical or Boolean relationship between the phenotype of the dou-ble mutant and those of the single mutants is therefore φab= φaORφb, where φ generically denotes the phenotype). Synthesis occurs whenthe phenotype of the double mutant is diﬀerent from the phenotypesof either of the two single mutants. Synthetic lethality, a frequentlyused genetic interaction type, belongs to the second class. A ﬁner clas-siﬁcation of genetic interactions is given in Table 2.3 and illustrated inFigure 2.2. Note that some genetic interactions are undirected, whereasothers are directed. On the other hand, in Figure 2.2 all interactionsare directed (either positive or negative regulatory interactions). Thisis because while formally some interactions as deduced from geneticinteraction data cannot be assigned a direction, in molecular terms ge-netic inﬂuence is always modeled as having some direction, such as theﬂow of a signal through a signaling network or the ﬂow of metabolitesthrough a metabolic network.Let us consider the molecular interpretations of the genetic inter-actions listed in Table 2.3. It is most convenient for this discussion toexamine interactions between genes whose phenotypes can be describedquantitatively, such as the average height of individuals belonging to agenotypic class or the average activity of an enzyme for these individu-als. For the “noninteractive” type of genetic interaction, the phenotype1There exist other classes of gene mutations (null, semi-dominant, dominant neg-ative, and haplo-insuﬃcient) that require diﬀerent gene conﬁgurations for testing.These are not relevant to the present discussion.


===== [16/72] chapter-16.html =====

Experimental Inference of Interactions 53TABLE 2.3: Classiﬁcation of Genetic Interactions2Phenotypic Inequality Classiﬁcation InteractionRepresentationφAB= φa<φb= φabNoninteractive A Bφab<φAB= φa= φbSynthetic A – BφAB<φa= φb= φabAsynthetic A – Bφa= φab<φAB>φbEpistatic A → BφAB= φa= φab>φbSuppressive A → Bφab<φa<φb<φABAdditive A – BSee also Carter et al. (2009).of Process II (Figure 2.2) is not aﬀected by mutation in gene A, but isaﬀected by mutation in gene b to the same extent regardless of whethergene A exists in wild-type form (as in Ab) or is mutated (as in ab). Al-though there could be a separate process (Process I in the ﬁgure) thatis aﬀected by mutation in gene A, the assignment of noninteractive isonly based on the Process II phenotype.In synthetic genetic interactions, the phenotype, which is jointly gov-erned by the genes A and B, is not aﬀected by either of the two singlemutants (aB or Ab), but is aﬀected by the double mutant (ab). Oneinterpretation of the synthetic interaction is that the signaling processcan travel through two separate pathways that ultimately converge togovern the process (see Figure 2.2). Thus, in the mutant aB, the sig-nal ﬁnds the pathway through the node B; whereas in the mutant Ab,the signal is propagated through the node A. In the double mutantab, the transmission of the signal is completely blocked, generating asynergistic phenotype.In asynthetic interactions, the phenotype of the process governed bythe genes A and B is aﬀected to the same extent whether the mutantalleles are present singly or in combination. One interpretation of thisphenomenon is that there is a third (unknown) gene (shown as anempty circle aligned with nodes A and B in the Asynthetic panel ofFigure 2.2) that nonredundantly governs the same process.In epistatic interactions, the phenotype of the double mutant ab isidentical to that of one of the two single mutants (in Figure 2.2, thephenotype of ab is identical to that of aB). Note that an epistatic in-2Additional classiﬁcation based on phenotypic inequalities of the mutants and thewild-type is possible but will not be discussed here.54 Introduction to Biological NetworksProcess IProcess IIABProcess II PhenotypeAB aB Ab abProcess IABProcess I PhenotypeAB aB Ab abGenotypesGenotypesProcess IABProcess I PhenotypeAB aB Ab abGenotypesProcess IABProcess I PhenotypeAB aB Ab abGenotypesNoninteractive SyntheticAsynthetic EpistaticProcess I PhenotypeAB aB Ab abGenotypesProcess IABProcess I PhenotypeAB aB Ab abGenotypesABProcess ISuppressive AdditiveFIGURE 2.2: Illustration and interpretation of the genetic interaction typesin Table 2.3. The magnitude of phenotypes corresponding to various genotypesare represented on an arbitrary scale. Genes or alleles labeled by italicized cap-ital letters denote their wild-type versions (their protein products are repre-sented by circles); those labeled by italicized lower-case letters denote mutantsthat do not express functional protein pro ducts. Thus, in a mutant Ab, theprotein A is present but protein B is absent. Arrows represent the directionof signaling in a signaling pathway that is controlled by the genes.Experimental Inference of Interactions 55teraction allows one to order the genes with respect to one another aswell as provide a direction to the ﬂow of signal in a signaling path-way. Such ordering by epistatic genetic interaction is also possible in ametabolic pathway (not shown here; see Figure 4.5) that, for example,is controlled by two enzymes A and B.A suppressive genetic interaction occurs when the phenotype of onemutant allele (in Figure 2.2, that of b) is reversed (suppressed) by asecond mutation (in this case, a). One interpretation of a suppressiveinteraction is that one of the two proteins that govern the signalingprocess (and thus control the phenotype) is an inhibitor of the other.In Figure 2.2, B inhibits A, such that under normal circumstances (asin the wild-type), the signal produces an absence of activity of proteinA. In the mutant aB, the absence of the protein A is identical to thewild-type situation in the presence of the signal. In the mutant Ab,the signal is unable to activate B and thus activates A. As a resulta mutant phenotype is exhibited. In the double mutant ab , however,the absence of the A function returns the system to a state that iseﬀectively identical to that of AB or aB.In the case of the additive genetic interaction, the eﬀect of the signalis bifurcated into two separate processes, each contributing partiallyto the process. Here, mutations in genes A or B cause diﬀerent de-grees of phenotypic change; and in the double mutant, the eﬀect of thesimultaneous loss is additive.An important point to note for all examples given in Figure 2.2 is thatwe assume that the signal is always present. More complex interpreta-tions are needed when the phenotyp es are measured under two diﬀerentconditions of the signal state (ON or OFF). Moreover, there are sev-eral alternative interpretations and these also depend on whether theunderlying process is a signaling or metabolic process [see the reviewby Avery and Wasserman (1992)].It is interesting to note how genetic interactions can allow the con-struction of pathways of information ﬂow through genes and their prod-ucts. Take the case of two genes, A and B. The phenotypes of nullmutations in either or both genes can help order the information ﬂowthrough the two genes and determine network topology with respectto two other genes, C and D, that are already ordered (Figure 2.3). Itis important to note here that such ordering of genes cannot be doneunless the mutations in the genes are complete loss-of-function or nullmutations.56 Introduction to Biological NetworksACBDACBDφab = φbφab < φb = φaFIGURE 2.3: Genetic interactions in signal transduction. Arrows denotethe direction of signaling. In the left panel, mutation in gene B is epistaticto A because if there is a mutation in gene B the normal ﬂow of informationis blocked whether or not gene A is normal or mutated. In the right panel,the phenotype of the double mutant is more severe than either single mutantalone. In the context of signal transduction, proteins A and C may be twodiﬀerent receptor molecules that respond to the same type of signal, while Band D may be downstream proteins that amplify and transmit receptor acti-vation further down the pathway. Similar arguments can be constructed forthe genetic control of more complex biological processes, such as metabolicpathways. If we did not have knowledge of the true signal transduction path-way in the example above except for the fact that C is upstream of D, thepathway could be reconstructed using knowledge of φa, φb, and φab.2.7 Inference of Genetic InteractionsThe essentiality of gene function for an organism’s life under a particu-lar environmental condition is indicative of the importance of the gene.Out of approximately 6,000 genes in baker’s yeast (Saccharomyces cere-visiae), approximately 20% are essential, suggesting that in yeast eachof the remaining approximately 80% genes is dispensable at least underlaboratory conditions. Note that synthetic lethality is, in a sense, an ex-tension of essentiality: it measures the dispensability of a pair of genestaken jointly, assuming that no single memb er of the pair is essential.It is therefore interesting to ﬁnd the proportion of pairs of nonessentialExperimental Inference of Interactions 57genes that is synthetically lethal. The density of the synthetic lethal ge-netic network, being related to the average dispensability of gene pairs,gives a ﬁner picture of organismal robustness than that presented byessentiality data alone. To determine this network among nearly 12 mil-lion nonessential gene pairs in yeast, a technique has been developedin which arrays of single gene deletion mutant yeast cells are matedwith all other single gene mutants and the resulting diploid cells areallowed to form haploid double mutants. The technique is termed theSynthetic Genetic Array (SGA) method (Tong et al., 2004).The SGA technique is made possible by the biology of this organism.This particular species of yeast exists in three diﬀerent cell types, calleda, alpha, and a/alpha. The a and alpha cell types are haploid, whichmeans that they have only one set of seventeen chromosomes (thisconﬁguration is denoted as 1n). The a cells can mate only with alphacells and vice versa. Upon mating, they produce diploid (2n) a/alphacells. The diploid a/alpha cells cannot normally mate with any othercell type, but can undergo a special type of cell division called meiosis,in which each diploid a/alpha cell can produce four haploid cells, twoof which are of type a and two of type alpha. In this process, the twosets of seventeen chromosomes (which double in number because of oneround of DNA replication) are equipartitioned into the four haploidcells, each of which gets one complement of the entire set of seventeenchromosomes.If the a cell before mating had a mutation (denoted by a − sign)in a nonessential gene 1, and the alpha cell had a mutation in thenonessential gene 2, then the a/alpha diploid cell produced by theirmating would have one mutant and one wild-type copy of each of genes1 and 2 (i.e., 1−2+/1+2−). The four cells that will be produced uponmeiosis would have a distribution of mutant and wild-type versions ofthe two genes (as expected from Mendel’s law), and each cell wouldinherit exactly one copy of both genes 1 and 2. In other words, the fourcells could be (1−2+), (1−2−), (1+2−), or (1+2+)3. If the two mutationswere synthetically lethal, then the second genotyp e (1−2−) would bedead. If there is a way to select for the speciﬁc double mutant (e.g.,by ensuring that each deletion mutation in the two query genes 1 and2 is linked to a separate selectable marker gene, and by selecting for3However, the relative frequencies of the four cell types need not be equal; the readershould convince herself why this is the case, and think about the conditions underwhich two of these cell types could be rather rare.


===== [17/72] chapter-17.html =====

58 Introduction to Biological Networksthe presence of both marker genes in the cells after meiosis), then thedouble mutant would not be able to grow on the growth medium onwhich the double mutant should ordinarily grow. This failure of thedouble mutant combination to grow signals the presence of a syntheticlethal genetic interaction between genes 1 and 2. The ability to forma viable double mutant colony with growth rates that are similar tothose of the parent single mutant strains shows the lack of syntheticgenetic interaction. This technique is usually carried out in parallel onhundreds or thousands of deletion mutant pairs using robotic handlingof cell cultures. In this manner, it is estimated that over 15% of thesynthetic lethal interaction space has now been scanned, and the hope isthat soon the entire list of synthetic lethal gene pairs will be determinedfor yeast.The SGA technique outputs a binary value, corresponding to an un-weighted synthetic lethal network, although the ability of the doublemutant to grow poorly on a range of conditions is also captured, lead-ing to an additional list of synthetic “sick” interactions (correspondingto doubly mutated cells that grow poorly rather than not at all) thatis available from the BIOGRID database. Nonetheless, the output isstill binary because no measure of the phenotypic intensity is directlyprovided. To obtain a measure of the phenotypic intensity (i.e., rateof cell growth) as a continuous value, a separate technique known asthe Epistatic Miniarray Proﬁles (EMAP) technique is used. In EMAP,phenotypes (as measured, for example, by the rate of growth under aparticular condition) of the single and double mutants are measured,recorded, and compared by image analysis (Schuldiner et al., 2005). Inother words, the phenotypes are now quantiﬁed as a range of numbers,allowing full classiﬁcation of the interactions as describ ed in Table 2.3.This information produces a weighted network with directed edges.Networks derived from EMAP and similar eﬀorts, where weighted ge-netic interactions can be produced, are likely to provide richer infor-mation than other currently available genetic interaction networks. InChapter 4 (Section 4.3.1), we discuss a simple measure for interpretingthe extent of genetic interaction quantitatively.2.7.1 Finding Genetic Interactions with Inhibitory RNAThe elucidation of synthetic genetic interaction networks is a laborioustask that has been possible on a large scale across the whole genomeonly in yeast, and recently in the bacterium Escherichia coli, due toExperimental Inference of Interactions 59Box 2.9 Homozygous versus heterozygous organisms.A diploid organism in which both copies of a gene have identical alleles is anorganism that is said to be homozygous for the allele in question. If the twocopies of the gene have diﬀerent alleles, the organism is said to be heterozygousat the gene locus.the existence of powerful genetic manipulation techniques for these or-ganisms, as we have discussed. However, essentially the same principlescan be applied to human cells for determining synthetic genetic inter-actions. The techniques, however, are somewhat modiﬁed in this case.In a recent study (Krastev et al., 2011), over 15,000 human genes weretested for synthetic genetic interaction with a gene called TP53. TP53encodes an important transcription factor protein that is required fortriggering programmed cell death when cellular DNA is damaged. Thebiological functions of TP53 (whose protein product is called p53) areaccomplished in a number of diﬀerent ways, chieﬂy through the mod-ulation of the activities of several of its target genes, which encodeproteins important for triggering cell death (see also Figure 5.1 andSection 5.2). The protein p53 is also important for activating the tran-scription of certain genes that are important for the repair of damagedDNA. In nearly 80% of all human cancers, the TP53 gene is mutated,suggesting that mutations in this gene predispose human cells for can-cer. However, deletion of TP53 is nonlethal in mouse; furthermore,the homozygous deletion mutant cells in mice are not cancerous bythemselves (see Box 2.9 for the distinction between organisms that arehomozygous versus heterozygous for a certain allele). However, the ho-mozygous TP53 deletion mutant mice are exceedingly prone to cancers.This suggests that mutations in other genes, which might accumulatein TP53 mutant cells, in conjunction with the loss of function mutationin TP53, might lead to cancer. Therefore it was thought important toquery other genes for possible synthetic genetic interactions against acell line derived from a homozygous TP53 mutant cell line.A problem that arises in testing for synthetic genetic interactionsin mammalian cells is that, unlike in yeast, mammalian cells cannotbe coerced to mate or undergo meiosis in culture. As we discussedearlier, meiosis is necessary to generate the double mutant alleles inhaploid cells, so that recessive alleles can exert their phenotypic ef-60 Introduction to Biological Networksfects. An indirect approach comes to the rescue. In the late 1990s, itwas discovered that there exists a class of small RNA molecules, 22to 24 nucleotides long, collectively called microRNA (miRNA), whichhave regulatory functions. These miRNA molecules are encoded bythe genomes of nearly all eukaryotes (although not by Saccharomycescerevisiae), including humans. The miRNA molecules do not encodeproteins. Some miRNA molecules have sequences that are largely com-plementary to the protein-coding messenger RNA (mRNA) of othergenes, especially to the sequences near the 3#end region of the mRNAmolecules. miRNA molecules can bind to their cognate target mRNAand thereby prevent the synthesis of proteins encoded by the targetmRNA.In certain organisms such as plants, miRNA molecules through com-plementary interaction can lead to the selective degradation of theirtarget mRNAs, and also to selective blocking of further transcriptionof their corresponding genes. Whatever be the mechanism, the net ef-fect of the miRNA molecule is the down-regulation of the expression ofits target mRNA (or its corresponding gene). This eﬀect of the miRNAmolecule is often not very selective, because the sequence complemen-tarity between the miRNA and the target mRNA molecules could beonly approximate or because one miRNA might target multiple mRNAs(from separate genes) due to the fact that small stretches of complemen-tary sequences could be present in multiple gene products. Nonetheless,miRNAs can be artiﬁcially synthesized and targeted against any gene(a technique that is termed RNA inhibition or RNAi), and can be usedto shut oﬀ the expression of the targeted gene. The synthetic miRNAanalogues are often termed silencing RNA or siRNA.Returning to the TP53 story, synthetic genetic interactions with theTP53 gene were queried by challenging homozygous TP53 mutant hu-man cells (derived from colorectal cancer cells) with artiﬁcial miRNAmolecules raised against each of over 15,000 query genes. These ho-mozygous TP53 mutant cells, each possessing one other down-regulatedgene targeted by a miRNA molecule, were monitored in cell culturesthrough automated high-content time-lapse video microscopy to recordcell phenotyp es, such as division rate, growth rate, cell size, and cellshape. The phenotypes were compared with those of the parental celllines (either the homozygous mutant cells without miRNA, or corre-sponding wild-type cells with the miRNA). This strategy allowed theidentiﬁcation of genes that need the function of wild-typ e TP53 for sup-Experimental Inference of Interactions 61porting normal growth as well as the identiﬁcation of genes whose si-multaneous loss with that of TP53 loss is important for normal growth.Out of over 15,000 genes so tested, 78 genes appeared to need the func-tion of normal TP53, while the knockdown of the expression of onlythree genes in TP53 mutant cells caused drastic cell growth defects.Genes that need the function of wild-type TP53 gene appeared to beinvolved in the maturation and chemical modiﬁcation of a number ofdiﬀerent classes of RNA molecules, which appears to reveal an unan-ticipated role of p53. Synthetic genetic interaction approaches such asthese are now increasingly engaged to unravel the molecular networksof interaction of genes important for human diseases (see Chapter 9).2.7.2 Genetic Interactions in Organisms with Multiple CellTypesSo far we have only discussed genetic interaction networks throughtheir combined phenotypic eﬀects on single cells. Perhaps obviously,it is relatively straightforward to pose phenotypic questions on singlecells—questions about cell division rates, cell size, or other physiologicalproperties. However, understanding genetic interactions at the single-cell level does not necessarily advance our understanding of the impactof genetic interactions on phenotypes of complex organisms. The ques-tion of robustness of complex organisms having many diﬀerent cell andtissue types and with complex developmental programs of cell speciﬁ-cation is diﬃcult if not impossible to frame in the context of geneticinteractions. Yet these are important questions that must be addressedto fully understand the basis of biological evolution and function.One of the earliest attempts to explore the importance of geneticinteractions at the large scale (i.e., genome-wide systematic geneticinteraction networks) for determining multicellular phenotypes used anematode worm, Caenorhabditis elegans. This organism is tiny, withonly 959 body cells and approximately 1,000 reproductive cells thatundergo gametogenesis. It has a relatively streamlined genome withapproximately 20,000 protein-coding genes and a short life cycle thatrenders the worm amenable to relatively rapid genetic manipulations.Approximately 2,500 genes in Caenorhabditis elegans are essential forsurvival, and so far 554 genes are known to be essential for fertility. C.elegans is a transparent organism, and speciﬁc cell types in its gonadcan be engineered to emit ﬂuorescent light of diﬀerent colors throughgenetic manipulation. These features make C. elegans a particularly62 Introduction to Biological NetworksBox 2.10 The Pearson correlation coeﬃcient.Suppose we are given two lists of numbers, or two vectors, v and w, withn entries in each list. The extent of correlation between v and w can bequantiﬁed using diﬀerent types of correlation coeﬃcients. A very commonlyused coeﬃcient is the linear correlation coeﬃcient, also called the Pearsoncorrelation coeﬃcient. To compute this coeﬃcient, one ﬁrst computes theaverage or sample mean of the vectors v and w. We denote these averages by¯v and ¯w, respectively. The formula for the Pearson coeﬃcient isr ="ni=1(vi− ¯v)(wi− ¯w)#"ni=1(vi− ¯v)2#"ni=1(wi− ¯w)2.where viand widenote individual entries in each vector. The Pearsoncorrelation coeﬃcient always takes a value between −1 and 1, with positivevalues signifying positive correlation and negative values signifying negativecorrelation or anti-correlation.The Pearson correlation coeﬃcient is called the linear correlation coeﬃcientbecause of an interesting connection of this coeﬃcient with linear regressionanalysis, which is the methodology for ﬁtting data to a straight line. Thesquare of the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient is the proportion of variance in vthat is explained by w (or equivalently, the proportion of variance in w thatis explained by v) as estimated by a straight-line ﬁt of the graph of v versus w.It often occurs that two variables are found to be correlated because eachvariable is independently correlated with a third intermediate variable. In suchcases, it is possible that the two variables in question would be uncorrelatedif their correlation with the third variable could somehow be removed. Theresidual correlation between two variables when the controlling eﬀect of a thirdvariable is removed is called the partial correlation coeﬃcient. Concretely, thepartial correlation between X and Y after removal of the controlling eﬀect ofa third variable Z is given by the formularXY ·Z=rXY− rXZrYZ$1 − r2XZ$1 − r2YZ,where rXY, rXZ, and rYZare the Pearson correlation coeﬃcients between Xand Y , X and Z, and Y and Z, respectively.


===== [18/72] chapter-18.html =====

Experimental Inference of Interactions 63special organism where the eﬀects of gene pair knockouts on gonadstructure and function can be relatively easily assessed.Pairs of query genes from the set of 554 genes that are essentialfor fertility were systematically knocked down in a study by Greenet al. (2011). The knockdown was eﬀected by the addition of a pairof synthetic miRNAs, following which nearly ninety diﬀerent cell bi-ological parameters were measured by high-content, time-lapse videomicroscopy of the gonads. Such measurements conducted on the si-multaneous knockdowns of nearly all gene pairs taken from 554 genesallowed the distinction of 102 separate phenotypic eﬀect classes. Pairsof gene knockdowns that aﬀected one or more of each of the 102 pheno-types were then determined. For each gene knockdown, therefore, onecan mathematically construct a list with 102 entries, where each entryis a score that measures the inﬂuence of the knockdown on the pheno-type. Similar lists can be constructed for each pair of knockdowns.If the knockdown properties of a pair cannot be explained by theindividual knockdown properties of the two genes separately, a geneticinteraction between the two members of the pair is inferred, leading tothe construction of a weighted gene interaction network. Furthermore,similarities among the phenotypic proﬁles of genes (as measured by,say, the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient between the two knockdownlists, or vectors; see Box 2.10 for a deﬁnition of Pearson correlation)are indicative of functional similarity between the genes as evincedby the role they play in determining the structure and function of acomplex organ in a multicellular organism. We anticipate that thesetypes of approaches will increasingly provide a richer understanding ofhow gene networks determine complex phenotypes.


===== [19/72] chapter-19.html =====

Chapter 3Prediction of Physical InteractionsTheoretical and computational methodologies are indispensable ap-proaches for the indirect inference of interactions, not just becausethey are more eﬃcient and simpler to implement than experiments,but also because they often reveal the underlying principles of networkconnectivity and enable the prediction of new interactions in a system-atic manner. Insights gained from successful computational models ofnetworks can, in principle, be used to design new experiments that testthese insights in a broad context.It is very diﬃcult to formulate a successful computational modelfor a biological network. In most cases, these models are based on as-sumptions that are too simple and therefore inaccurate. The relativelyrare biological models that have few parameters and are based on gen-eral principles are called unsupervised models because their construc-tion does not require detailed experimental data. Inaccuracies in thesemodels are compensated by high-level insights into the processes beingmodeled. We will see examples of unsupervised models of large net-works in Chapter 7. In many cases, however, it is important for modelsto be accurate in their details, and therefore to constantly confrontthem with results from experiments and tweak them to better capturethese results. These biological models must have a more direct rela-tionship with experiment than is prevalent in idealized models: theyare constructed via a well-deﬁned procedure that takes experimentaldata as input and outputs a set of model parameters. Such models arecalled supervised models because the numerical values of the parame-ters in them depend on the input data. The input data are called thetraining set for the supervised model. The training set changes as moredata become available, leading to reﬁnement in model parameters. Themodel parameters can in turn be used to predict new networks.Supervised approaches that use properties of known network inter-actions to infer new network interactions fall under the category ofmachine learning approaches for network inference. While reasonably6566 Introduction to Biological Networkssuccessful in terms of reproducing known interactions and predictingnew ones, these mo dels contain large numbers of parameters and are of-ten too complex to grasp intuitively. The reason is a well-known themein biology: simple models based on clear, general principles are ofteninaccurate because they do not capture the complexity of the details,while detailed models with large numbers of parameters fail to revealgeneral unifying principles. The challenge of ﬁnding simple yet accu-rate mathematical/computational models for large, complex biologicalsystems remains largely insurmountable.In this chapter, we begin our foray into computational methods forbiological network inference. We start with a primer on entropy andinformation, because a basic understanding of these concepts is essen-tial to understanding the computational inference of regulatory inter-actions. The primer is followed by a discussion of regulatory networkinference, followed by a description of methodologies to infer protein-protein interactions.3.1 Entropy and InformationLet us suppose that a gene X can be in one of several expression states,depending upon the external conditions. For the moment, we assumefor simplicity that gene expression is Boolean; as discussed earlier, thegenes in question can then be either ON or OFF, and we representthese two states by the letters O and F, respectively.The concept of entropy (or, more correctly, Shannon entropy) aims toquantify the uncertainty in the expression state. Thus, for a gene thatis always in state O or always in state F, the state is completely certain,and we would expect the entropy ascribed to the gene’s expression levelto be zero. On the other hand, if the state can be either O or F, wewould expect the entropy to be non-zero because the state is uncertain.How can one quantify the extent of this uncertainty?To be concrete, let us suppose that the gene in question is in stateO with probability p and in state F with probability 1 − p, and thatwe make a large number, say N, of independent observations of thisstate. We would then exp ect that, of these N observations, m = Npﬁnd the gene in state O and N − m = N(1 − p) ﬁnd the gene in stateF. The uncertainty in the expression state of the gene can then bequantiﬁed in terms of the number N (m, N) of diﬀerent ways in whichPrediction of Physical Interactions 67m observations can be in state O, and N − m observations can be instate F among a total of N observations [note that, if the gene wereto always be in state O (or always in state F), the number of ways ofwriting a sequence of N Os (or N Fs) is just one]:N (m, N)=N!m!(N − m)!. (3.1)The Shannon entropy of the expression level of the gene can be ex-pressed asH =log N (m, N)N(3.2)when N is a large number of observations. The reason for the logarithmin the above deﬁnition is that it enables entropies of two independentexpression states to be added to get the total entropy and also ensuresthat the entropy of a completely certain state is zero. The reason thatthe entropy is normalized by division by N, as will be clear in thesimpliﬁcation below, is to ensure that the resulting expression doesnot, in fact, depend on N . This is in line with the expectation that theuncertainty in expression level is an intrinsic property of the gene andshould not depend on the number of observations of the state.Let us now simplify Equation (3.2) to transform the entropy deﬁ-nition to a more familiar form. To do this, we make use of Stirling’sformula, which states that log N!=N log N − N for large N. Thus,the entropy formula can be simpliﬁed as follows:H =1N(log N! − log m! − log(N − m)!) ,=1N(N log N − N − m log m + m− (N − m) log (N − m)+N − m) . (3.3)Substituting m = Np in the above leads to log m = log N + log p andlog(N − m) = log N + log(1 − p), thus yielding the entropy function fora Boolean, or two-state, system:H = −p log p − (1 − p) log(1 − p). (3.4)Note that the base of the logarithms in the above expression has notbeen speciﬁed. The choice of base is a matter of convenience; changingthe base has the eﬀect of multiplying the entropy by a constant factor.68 Introduction to Biological NetworksWhen the logarithms are evaluated in base 2, we say we are measuringentropy in bits, or “binary digits.”Figure 3.1 gives a plot of the entropy of a two-state system, as mea-sured in bits, as a function of p. As expected from a measure of uncer-tainty, the entropy is zero when p = 0 or p = 1 because the expressionstate is certain at these two extremes; furthermore, the entropy is max-imal when the state is equally likely to be ON or OFF (p =1/2).How do we deﬁne entropy for a system with more than two states?Let the number of expression states be s. Further suppose that X is instate i with probability pi, where i =1, . . . , s. Thus, we can speak ofthe expression level probability distribution (or, simply, distribution)of a gene, which is the probability with which the gene is found ineach expression state, across diﬀerent time points in the cell cycle andacross diﬀerent experimental conditions. If the gene is always found inthe same expression state (say, the high expression state) with highprobability, then its expression level has low uncertainty; while if it isfound with roughly equal probabilities in diﬀerent expression states,then its expression level has high uncertainty.The Shannon entropy of the expression level distribution of the geneis a simple generalization of the two-state entropy [for a complete ex-position, see Shannon and Weaver (1963)] and is given by the formulaH(X)=−s!i=1pilog pi. (3.5)As is evident from the formula above, if the gene is always found in asingle expression state j with probability pj= 1 (and all other proba-bilities zero), the Shannon entropy is zero, indicating that there is nouncertainty in the expression level of the gene. Furthermore, becausethe Shannon entropy formula depends only on probabilities of variousoccurrences, and not on the occurrences themselves, it is applicable notjust to gene expression levels, but to any probability distribution.Now let us suppose that we are interested in two genes, labeled Xand Y . Because each gene is a 2-state system, the two-gene set is a2 × 2 = 4-state system (in general, n genes would form a 2n-statesystem), and the probabilities of occurrence for the four possible statesare conveniently denoted as pi,j, which represents the probability thatgene X is in state i and gene Y is simultaneously in state j.If the expression of genes X and Y were independent, then pi,j= pipj,but in general the two genes would not have independent expressionPrediction of Physical Interactions 690 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 100.10.20.30.40.50.6pHFIGURE 3.1: Shannon entropy of a 2-state gene expression model as afunction of the probability p that the gene is OFF. The entropy is maximizedat p =1/2 and is zero when p = 0 or p = 1.levels. We may then deﬁne the joint entropy of X and Y asH(X, Y )=−!i,jpi,jlog pi,j. (3.6)When X and Y are independent, the joint entropy can be expressed asthe sum of the individual entropies: H(X, Y )=H(X)+H(Y ), because,in this case, H(X, Y )=−"i,jpipj[log pi+ log pj]=−"ipilog pi−"jpjlog pj= H(X)+H(Y ).1More generally, it is common to deﬁnethe conditional entropiesH(X | Y )=H(X, Y ) − H(Y ),H(Y | X)=H(X, Y ) − H(X). (3.7)These conditional entropies represent the amount of uncertainty in onevariable that is not shared with the other. For example, H(X | Y )represents the uncertainty in X given knowledge of Y , or in other words,the residual uncertainty in X if Y were completely certain. When X andY are independent, H(X | Y )=H(X) and H(Y | X)=H(Y ), thatis, the uncertainty in one variable does not change even if the otherone is known with certainty—this is to be expected for independentvariables. On the other hand, if X were completely determined by Y ,1In fact, it can be shown that H(X, Y )=H(X)+H(Y ) only when X and Y areindep endent.


===== [20/72] chapter-20.html =====

70 Introduction to Biological Networksthe conditional entropy H(X | Y ) would be zero. As we shall see, thesesimple concepts play an important role when one tries to determinewhich genes regulate which other genes.We now consider the shared or mutual information between X andY , M (X , Y ), which is the amount of uncertainty in X if we removethe uncertainty associated with knowledge of Y (or equivalently, theamount of uncertainty in Y if we remove the uncertainty associatedwith knowledge of X):M(X, Y )=H(X) − H(X | Y )=H(Y ) − H(Y | X). (3.8)Note that the mutual information is complementary to conditional en-tropy: it is zero if X and Y are independent, because, in this case,H(X)=H(X | Y ) and H(Y )=H(Y | X). Alternatively, if Y com-pletely determines X, the mutual information is the uncertainty in X.In general, the mutual information is always positive or zero and mea-sures the extent of dependence between X and Y .3.1.1 Interpretations of Mutual InformationThe mutual information is a very important measure of the extent ofdependence or correlation between two variables because of its statis-tical properties. Two of these properties that we now discuss—namely,the relationship between mutual information and the χ2probabilitydistribution, and the meaning of mutual information as a likelihoodfunction—are specially relevant to the inference of regulatory networks.First, we note that the mutual information can be expressed as fol-lows:M(X, Y )=H(X) − H(X | Y )=H(X)+H(Y ) − H(X, Y )=!i,jpi,jlog%pi,jpipj&. (3.9)Returning to the gene expression example, the sum"i,jruns over theexpression states of the two genes X and Y . Let us imagine that wemake a large number N of simultaneous observations of the expressionstates of the two genes. In each observation, we record the expressionstate of each of the two genes. Let the number of times we ﬁnd gene Xin state i be Ni, the number of times we ﬁnd gene Y in state j be Nj,and the number of times we ﬁnd gene X in state i and gene Y in statej be Nij. Clearly, N ="iNi="jNj="i,jNij.Prediction of Physical Interactions 71When calculating the mutual information, we estimate the probabil-ities in terms of the number of counts, as pi,j= Nij/N , pi= Ni/N andpj= Nj/N . We now show that the corresponding estimate of mutualinformation can be expressed as a ratio of likelihoods. First, we de-ﬁne qi,jto be the true, unknown joint distribution of expression levels.Consider the following two hypotheses about qi,j.Hypothesis H0: The expression levels of genes X and Y are indepen-dent; thus, qi,j= qiqj.Hypothesis H1: The expression levels of genes X and Y are arbitrary.In the language of statistics, the two hypotheses above are nestedhypotheses because H0is a subset of H1. The likelihood of the observedexpression states under hypothesis H0, which is the probability of theobserved expression states calculated under the assumption that H0istrue, is given byL0='i,j[qiqj]Nij, (3.10)while the likelihood under hypothesis H1isL1='i,j[qi,j]Nij. (3.11)It can be shown that the above likelihoods reach their maximum valuewhen qi, qj, and qi,jare equal to their values as estimated from thecounts Ni, Nj, and Nij, that is, when qi= Ni/N = pi, qj= Nj/N = pj,and qi,j= Nij/N = pi,j. This yieldsLmax0='i,j[pipj]Nij,Lmax1='i,j[pi,j]Nij, (3.12)and thereforelog%Lmax1Lmax0&=!i,jNi,jlog%pi,jpipj&= NM(X, Y ). (3.13)This shows that the mutual information is proportional to the log-arithm of a ratio of likelihoods of nested hypotheses: the higher themutual information, the less does the data support the hypothesis ofindependence H0and the more does it support a general, correlatedhypothesis H1.An important consequence of the meaning of mutual information interms of a likelihood ratio occurs because of a standard theorem in72 Introduction to Biological Networksstatistics [see, for example, Miller (1955); Wilks (1962)], which states(under conditions that are satisﬁed for this example) that the probabil-ity distribution of minus 2 times the logarithm of a ratio of maximumlikelihoods is the so-called χ2distribution when N is large (see Box 3.2).This is a particularly attractive mathematical property because it read-ily enables the computation of probabilities of occurrence of any rangeof values of the mutual information.The two properties we have brieﬂy outlined suggest why mutual in-formation is a useful statistic for quantifying the extent of correlationbetween variables. We now turn to the question of inferring regulatoryrelationships among genes by using the mutual information betweentheir expression levels.3.2 Bo olean Networks REVEAL Regulatory Interac-tionsIn a regulatory interaction, one way that gene a can regulate the ex-pression level of gene b is by coding for a transcription factor proteinA that binds to the promoter region of gene b. The expression level ofthe transcription factor protein is in turn regulated by other transcrip-tion factor proteins. Such regulatory mechanisms are of fundamentalimportance because they dictate changes in gene expression level in thecell under diﬀerent physiological conditions and across diﬀerent tissues.Microarray technologies enable the expression levels of a large num-ber of genes to be simultaneously measured under diﬀerent conditions.These conditions may also include diﬀerent temporal stages in the lifecycle of the cell, thus yielding the measurement of expression levels as afunction of time. One of the foremost problems that could naturally beconsidered in the light of microarray experiments was that of inferringthe gene regulatory network from time-course expression data.A simple coarse-grained representation of expression level of a gene isto assume, as we did earlier, that the expression is binary or Boolean innature, that is, a gene is either ON (has high expression) or OFF (haslow expression). With this approximation, the expression states of anentire set of genes at a given time can be represented as a binary stringof 0s and 1s, with genes that are OFF represented by 0 and genes thatare ON represented by 1. By analyzing these binary strings at diﬀerenttime points and under diﬀerent conditions, one can imagine trying toPrediction of Physical Interactions 73deduce what other genes completely “explain” the Boolean state of agiven gene. For example, if a gene a is turned ON prior to anothergene b being turned ON, gene a becomes a candidate explanatory genefor the expression state of gene b . As we shall see, things are naturallymore complicated than that, but the relevant question here is: WhatBoolean expression states carry suﬃcient information to encapsulatethe Boolean expression state of a given gene? And conversely, whatBoolean expression states really do not add any relevant informationto the problem? The answer hinges crucially on the concept of infor-mation, which we introduce below. If we can successfully identify thecausative or explanatory genes for a given gene, these causative genescan be viewed as regulators of the gene in question, and so the Booleannetwork deduced from Boolean expression data may be interpreted asa regulatory network. Such Boolean regulatory networks are attractivefrom the point of view of biological interpretation, as they readily admitthe representation of regulatory relationships as logical rules. A rela-tively simple example of these rules is provided by a small regulatorynetwork that governs development of the mammalian cerebral cortex,which is a part of the brain that is highly developed in mammals and isrequired for information processing of higher cognitive function and vo-litional response. The regulatory network shown in Figure 3.2 involvesﬁve genes and is, to good approximation, a Boolean network with clearlogical relationships between expression states.We are now going to describe a relatively simple, information-basedapproach to the computational inference of Boolean regulatory net-works from gene expression data that forms a basis for more complextechniques for reverse-engineering of the regulatory network. It was ﬁrstimplemented in the REVEAL (REVerse Engineering ALgorithm) algo-rithm proposed by Liang et al. (1998), building upon work by Fuhrmanand Somogyi (1997) and Sawhill (1995).3.2.1 The REVEAL AlgorithmThe REVEAL method for identifying potential regulators of a gene Guses the concept of mutual information and proceeds iteratively. It ﬁrstchecks if any other single gene can completely explain the expressionof G, that is, if another gene has the maximum possible mutual infor-mation with G. If no such gene can be found, it checks if there is apair of genes such that the pair exhibits maximal mutual informationwith G, and so on. As this iteration proceeds, there is a combinato-74 Introduction to Biological NetworksFIGURE 3.2: Five transcription factor-encoding genes implicated in devel-opment of the mammalian cerebral cortex. It is generally thought that thespatially restricted expression pattern of these transcription factors directsdiﬀerent patterns of target gene expression in the brain cells. As a result,these cells display heterogenous characteristics speciﬁed by their location inthe brain. Expression of the Fgf8 gene at the anterior pole of the cortex maybe suﬃcient to drive the correct spatial patterning (shown in shades of gray) ofexpression of the transcription factors Emx2, Pax6, Coup-tﬁ, and Sp8. Arrows(→) indicate activating interactions, while ﬂat bars indicate repressive inter-actions. Boolean logic rules corresponding to the regulatory interactions arealso shown, with F, E, P, C, S (in italics) representing the genes Fgf8, Emx2,Pax6, Coup-tﬁ, Sp8, respectively, and F,E,P,C,S (without italics) representingthe respective proteins. For a gene to be ON at a certain time, its activatorsmust be ON and repressors must b e OFF at the previous time. Adapted withpermission from Giacomantonio and Goodhill (2010).rial explosion because of the need to exhaustively check all gene pairs,triplets, quadruplets, and so on. However, this combinatorial explosionis somewhat alleviated by the expectation that the expression levels ofmost genes will be “explained” by a small number of other genes. Thisis usually true for a large proportion of genes in an organism. Methodsto alleviate the potential combinatorial explosion are discussed below,as are other generalizations of the REVEAL method. We ﬁrst discusssome details of the basic method.Consider the problem of ﬁnding potential regulators of G. We assumethat we have access to expression data under diﬀerent conditions so thatthere are multiple instances when G is OFF and ON. These multipledatasets are used to estimate the mutual information M(G, X) betweenG and every other gene X. M(G, X) is then compared to the entropyof the expression states of G, H(G). If M(G, X)=H(G), then Xcompletely determines G, because the conditional entropy H(G | X)


===== [21/72] chapter-21.html =====

Prediction of Physical Interactions 75is zero in this case, implying that the value of X has no variabilityonce G is ﬁxed. Thus the ﬁrst iteration consists of ﬁnding the ratiosM(G, X)/H(G) and therefore identifying every gene G whose expres-sion level is completely determined by some other gene X acting singly.Now consider a gene G#whose regulator has not been found in theﬁrst step. That is, there is no gene acting singly that can explain theexpression level distribution of G#. In the next step, the aim is to ﬁndpotential regulators of genes like G#that have not been eliminated inthe ﬁrst step, that is, their expression levels cannot be determined byany other gene acting singly. We now consider all other genes actingin pairs and determine ratios of the form M (G#, [X, Y ])/H(G#), whereM(G#, [X, Y ]) = H(G#) − H(G#| X, Y ), and H(G#| X, Y ) is the condi-tional entropy of G#when X and Y are both completely certain. If theratio is 1 for some pair X, Y , then this pair completely determines theexpression level of G. In this manner, all genes that are explained bypairs of other genes are identiﬁed. The next step is to similarly identifygenes whose expression is explicable by triplets of other genes, and soon. Note that in the transition from singlets to pairs to triplets andso on, the size of the search space is greatly increased; on the otherhand, the number of genes whose regulators have not yet been iden-tiﬁed decreases as the expression states of more and more genes are“explained.” Also, because the mutual information to entropy ratiosthat need to be computed are all independent, the entire procedure iscomputationally parallelizable.The REVEAL method thus infers, for every gene G, a set S of geneswhose mutual information with G equals the uncertainty or entropy ofG. These inferences can then be used to construct a directed Booleannetwork with edges directed from all members of S to G. This Booleannetwork may be interpreted as a regulatory network. Furthermore, themechanism by which S regulates G is inferred by arranging the datain the form of a rule table that contains all possible states of S andthe corresponding state of G that they explain (Figure 3.3). Lianget al. (1998) successfully tested the REVEAL algorithm on a set of150 artiﬁcially constructed networks containing 50 genes each. In orderto keep the problem computationally tractable, these networks wereconstructed so that each gene had at most three input edges (i.e., theexpression level of each gene could be explained by the states of at mostthree other genes).The REVEAL algorithm forms a core point of departure for various76 Introduction to Biological Networksother related methods for inferring regulatory networks, some of whichwe describe below.3.3 Variants of the REVEAL MethodThe methodology described above for inferring Boolean networks canbe trivially extended to multi-state situations, in which gene expressionis taken to be in one of more than two states. This has the eﬀect ofmaking the problem more computationally expensive.One limitation of the standard Boolean network methodology is itsinability to infer self-feedback or auto-regulatory loops, which consistof genes that regulate their own expression. The reverse-engineeringmethod always looks for other genes that explain the gene of interest,because within the framework of the method, the self-mutual informa-tion between a gene and itself is always maximal. If self-feedback wereto be allowed within the methodology, REVEAL would always ﬁndthat each gene is most capable of explaining itself, and therefore triv-ially (and incorrectly!) infer a regulatory network composed entirely ofself-feedback loops. This property of REVEAL therefore appears to bea real problem unless one has access to dynamic gene expression data:expression levels of all genes in the set at diﬀerent time points. Givensuch data, one can ﬁnd the mutual information between a gene ex-pression state at a particular time point and expression states of othergenes at a previous time point. These other genes could include thegene of interest itself, and there is no reason why the mutual informa-tion between expression states of the same gene at diﬀerent time pointsshould be maximal (Figure 3.3). Thus, with dynamic expression datait is possible for the REVEAL method to infer self-feedback loops inregulatory systems in a nontrivial manner.Another limitation of the standard REVEAL method is that it onlyinfers deterministic regulatory mechanisms, because it looks for genesets S such that the mutual information M(G, S)/H(G) = 1, or inother words, it looks for sets S that completely explain the variationin the expression of G. For example, the REVEAL method could inferthat genes A and B in Table 3.1 regulate gene G via a mechanism basedon the logical OR relationship. However, biological regulatory mecha-nisms are often subject to various sources of noise: intrinsic noise inthe form of copy number ﬂuctuations of regulatory protein molecules,Prediction of Physical Interactions 77 H(A)=1.00H(A,A)=2.00H(A,B)=1.00H(A,C)=2.00 M(A,A)=0.00M(A,B)=1.00M(A,C)=0.00 M(A,A)/H(A)=0.00M(A,B)/H(A)=1.00 M(A,C)/H(A)=0.00B A0 11 1Rule Table for gene A(a) H(B)=0.81 H(B,A)=1.50 H(B,B)=1.81 H(B,C)=1.50H(B,{A,B})=2.50H(B,{B,C})=2.50H(B,{A,C})=2.00 M(B,A)=0.31 M(B,B)=0.00 M(B,C)=0.31M(B,{A,B})=0.31M(B,{B,C})=0.31M(B,{A,C})=0.81A C B0 0 00 1 11 0 11 1 1Rule Table for gene B(b) M(B,A)/H(B)=0.38 M(B,B)/H(B)=0.00 M(B,C)/H(B)=0.38 M(B,{A,B})/H(B)=0.38 M(B,{B,C})/H(B)=0.38M(B,{A,C})/H(B)=1.00 H(C)=1.00 H(C,A)=1.81 H(C,B)=1.81 H(C,C)=1.81 H(C,{A,B})=2.50 H(C,{B,C})=2.50 H(C,{A,C})=2.50H(C,{A,B,C})=3.00 M(C,A)=0.19 M(C,B)=0.19 M(C,C)=0.19 M(C,{A,B})=0.50 M(C,{B,C})=0.50 M(C,{A,C})=0.50M(C,{A,B,C})=1.00A B C C0 0 0 00 0 1 00 1 0 00 1 1 11 0 0 01 0 1 11 1 0 11 1 1 1Rule Table for gene C(c) M(C,A)/H(C)=0.19 M(C,B)/H(C)=0.19 M(C,C)/H(C)=0.19 M(C,{A,B})/H(C)=0.50 M(C,{B,C})/H(C)=0.50 M(C,{A,C})/H(C)=0.50M(C,{A,B,C})/H(C)=1.00FIGURE 3.3: An example of the application of the REVEAL method (Lianget al., 1998). (a) A single gene B is suﬃcient to explain the expression level ofgene A and is therefore predicted to be a regulator of gene A. (b) GenesA and C jointly regulate gene B. (c) All three genes—A, B, and C—arepredicted to be regulators of C. In each calculation, mutual information isalways computed between the expression levels of the gene under considerationand the expression level of every gene (including itself) at the previous timepoint. For all three cases, the expression data of the regulator gene(s) and theregulated gene are used to construct the rule tables.78 Introduction to Biological NetworksTABLE 3.1: OR and NoisyOR BooleanRelationshipsA B C = A OR BC= A noisyOR BPr(C = 0) Pr(C = 1)0 0 0 1.00.00 1 1 %11 − %11 0 1 %21 − %21 1 1 %1%21 − %1%2extrinsic noise arising out of interactions with other molecules in the in-tracellular/nuclear environment, and ﬁnally, artiﬁcial noise arising outof modeling approximations, such as the 2-state approximation madein characterizing gene expression. It is therefore entirely plausible thatregulators of a given gene do not deterministically explain the expres-sion state of that gene but only do so in a stochastic or noisy manner.This type of relationship is exempliﬁed by the noisyOR relationship inTable 3.1, where A and B together nearly determine the state of Gvia an OR relationship, but do not quite do so because of the presenceof noise. Stochastic regulatory mechanisms are best described math-ematically by conditional probability distributions that represent, forinstance, the probability P (G | A, B) that a gene G is in a certain ex-pression state given the expression states of putative regulators A andB.A fast variant of the REVEAL method, called ARACNE [Algorithmfor the Reconstruction of Accurate Cellular Networks; Margolin et al.(2006)] is based on an extension of the concept of relevance networks.It involves computing mutual information values between all transcrip-tion factor (TF)-gene pairs, followed by a ﬁltering step in which onlypairs that have mutual information higher than some threshold valueare retained. This threshold value is determined based on the prob-ability distribution of mutual information scores of all TF-gene pairspooled together. Following this, ARACNE implements a method tofurther ﬁlter out correlations that occur due to intermediate correla-tion with a third gene. This method uses the so-called Data ProcessingInequality (DPI), which, in this context, states that if genes x and yinteract only through a third gene z, then the pairwise mutual infor-mation satisﬁes the inequality M(x, z) ≤ min [M(x, y),M(y , z)]. Thus,interactions that pass through the ﬁrst ﬁlter are collected into genetriplets. For each triplet, the edge with the smallest mutual informa-Prediction of Physical Interactions 79tion value is removed. The resultant network is then predicted to bethe regulatory network. The method is fast because it only involvescomputation of pairwise mutual information, and there is no combina-torial explosion. It can therefore be readily applied at the genome scale.ARACNE has been successfully used to predict regulatory networks inhuman B cells (Basso et al., 2005).Another method that is similar to ARACNE is the so-called Con-text Likelihood of Relatedness (CLR) method (Faith et al., 2007). Themain diﬀerence between CLR and ARACNE is that CLR eﬀectivelyuses diﬀerent mutual information thresholds for each TF-gene pair topredict if interaction, and the thresholds are determined in a statisticalmanner. For each TF-gene pair, CLR pools together mutual informa-tion values of all pairs that contain either the TF or the target geneof interest. We call the probability distribution of these mutual infor-mation values the background distribution, which is used to assign anempirical P-value for interaction between the TF and the target geneof interest, as follows. Suppose that the mutual information of the TF-gene pair of interest is m∗. Using the background distribution, we cancompute the probability that TF-gene pairs containing either the TFof interest or the target gene of interest will have mutual informationexceeding m∗. This probability is the empirical P-value. TF-target genepairs that have high P-values are considered similar to the backgroundand are therefore not signiﬁcant; low probability pairs have a signiﬁ-cantly higher mutual information score than the background and arepredicted to be regulatory interactions. This context-based approachhas the advantage that it automatically ﬁlters out putative regulatoryinteractions by using data that is relevant to the TF and the target geneof interest. When applied to Escherichia coli genome-wide expressiondata, the method recovers known regulatory interactions at a betterrate than other methods that are also fast (including ARACNE). Themethod also predicted a number of novel regulatory pathways that weresubsequently veriﬁed experimentally.Finally, the REVEAL methodology can be extended to optimizemathematical functions other than mutual information. In other words,a general mathematical function for the assignment of a speciﬁc set ofregulators to a gene can be used in lieu of the mutual information. Sucha function is called a scoring function because it assigns a “score” toeach pair of genes; pairs that have a high score are predicted to interact,while pairs that have a low score are predicted to be noninteracting. The


===== [22/72] chapter-22.html =====

80 Introduction to Biological Networksneed for a scoring function other than mutual information is discussedin the next section. First, we point out that all of the variants andgeneralizations of the Boolean network methodology—multiple expres-sion states, inference based on dynamic data, incorporation of noise,and general scoring schemes—can be addressed within the frameworkof dynamic Bayesian networks, which represent a powerful and ﬂexi-ble framework for the inference and representation of gene regulatorysystems.3.4 Dynamic Bayesian NetworksA Bayesian network is a directed network in which nodes representarbitrary random variables (such as gene expression states) and edgesrepresent conditional probability relationships between nodes and theirparents.2In a Bayesian network, every node is independent of all othernodes given its parent nodes. Another way of thinking about this is thatthe probability distribution of the random variable representing a nodein a Bayesian network depends only on values taken by the randomvariables representing the parent nodes. In the Bayesian network ofFigure 3.4, Y1has the single parent X1, and therefore the probabilitydistribution of Y1is independent of the distributions of other randomvariables given the value of X1. We thus have, for example, the followingrelationships: P (Y1,Z1| X1)=P (Y1| X1)P (Z1| X1) and P (Y1|X1,X2)=P (Y1| X1).A dynamic Bayesian network (DBN) is a special type of Bayesiannetwork that represents the time evolution of a random variable or aset of correlated random variables, such as the time series of gene ex-pression for a set of genes. Node labels in a DBN are typically indexedby the corresponding time point. In Figure 3.4, X1,X2,X3representthe random variable X at times t =1, 2, 3, resp ectively. Here, becauseXt+1is conditionally independent of Xt−1given Xt, the dynamicalprocess is said to satisfy the ﬁrst-order Markov property (Box 3.1). Aconcrete example of a DBN like the one in Figure 3.4 is a gene regu-latory network, in which one can imagine X1,X2,X3,..., Y1,Y2,Y3,...and Z1,Z2,Z3,... as representing the expression levels of genes X, Y ,2Parent nodes of a node v are nodes connected to v via edges that are directedtoward v.Prediction of Physical Interactions 81X1Y1Z1X3Y3Z3X2Y2Z2FIGURE 3.4: A dynamic Bayesian network representing three arbitraryrandom variables, X, Y, Z, either discrete or continuous, whose joint proba-bility distribution changes with time. The network shows that Y and Z areconditionally dependent on the value of X at the same time point, whereasthe distribution of X at a particular time point is conditionally dependenton its value at the previous time point. However, the distribution of Y ata particular time point is independent of its distribution at previous timepoints given the value of X at the same time point. Thus, for example, theﬁgure implies that the joint distribution of X1,Y1,Z1,X2,Y2,Z2is given byP (X1,Y1,Z1,X2,Y2,Z2)=P (Y1,Z1|X1)P (Y2,Z2|X2)P (X2|X1)P (X1).and Z at diﬀerent time points, and in which X regulates both Y andZ.A DBN is completely speciﬁed by its architecture, that is, its connec-tivity diagram, and by the conditional probability distribution of eachnode given its parents. DBNs are capable of incorporating all the gen-eralizations of Boolean networks that we have considered so far; theyincorporate temporal data (by deﬁnition), noise in the form of condi-tional probabilities, and multiple expression states in the form of theset of values each node can take. There are also a number of choices forthe scoring function in a DBN that aﬀect the way network structureis inferred from gene expression data. Two of these choices are brieﬂydiscussed below.3.4.1 Scoring and Network Inference with DBNsTo infer a DBN from expression data, one may imagine proceeding ina manner similar to that of the REVEAL method: ﬁnd all singlets thatexplain the expression state of a gene G of interest, then ﬁnd all dou-blets, triplets, and so on. These explanatory genes would then be theparents or inferred regulators of G. An important point of departurefrom the Boolean network is that the inferred explanatory relationshipneed not be a deterministic one. It is therefore not necessary to de-mand that the mutual information between G and its parent(s) in the82 Introduction to Biological NetworksBox 3.1 Markov processes.A stochastic process is a random process; that is, it is the time evolution of oneor more random variables. A special type of stochastic process is the Markovprocess or Markov chain, in which the probability distribution of the randomvariable(s) under consideration at any given time point depends only on theprobability distribution of the same random variable(s) at a ﬁnite numberof previous time points. For simplicity, let the stochastic process consist ofa single random variable Xtthat is a function of time. Let us also assumethat time progresses in discrete steps. We say that Xtis a ﬁrst-order Markovprocess if the distribution of Xtdepends only on the distribution of Xt−1andis conditionally independent of Xt−2,Xt−3,... given Xt−1. That is,P (Xt| Xt−1,Xt−2,Xt−3,...)=P (Xt| Xt−1).Similarly, Xtis a second-order Markov process if its distribution depends onlyon the joint distribution of Xt−1and Xt−2but not on Xt−3,Xt−4,.... In theBayesian network picture, the process X1,X2,X3... shown in Figure 3.4 is aﬁrst-order Markov process because each Xtis conditionally dependent only onthe previous Xt−1. If the Markov property is a good approximation for somerandom process, this constitutes a substantial simpliﬁcation of the dynamics,as Markov processes are eﬀectively memoryless beyond the previous time step.Many models of the dynamics of gene expression assume that the expressionproﬁle of a set of genes at any given time only depends on the expressionproﬁle at the previous time.DBN be maximal, only that it be “large enough.” How large is “largeenough”? To ﬁgure this out, the signiﬁcance of the magnitude of mutualinformation should be assessed using methods of statistical hypothesistesting. As discussed earlier in this chapter, the mutual information asestimated from ﬁnite data samples follows a χ2distribution when thevariables in question are independent. Thus, a χ2test can be used todecide whether a certain amount of mutual information is statisticallysigniﬁcant (Box 3.2).It is customary to penalize the score S that is proportional to mu-tual information when the number of parameters inferred is large. Thispenalty is conceptually a consequence of the Occam’s razor principlethat favors simpler models over more complex ones. This principle isrealized naturally in Bayesian statistics (a full discussion of this matteris beyond the scope of this book). The relevant score function that im-plements such a penalty is the BIC (Bayesian Information Criterion)Prediction of Physical Interactions 83Box 3.2 The χ2statistical test.Hypothesis testing in statistics is commonly carried out by assuming thatthe data are either in agreement with a null or an alternative hypothesis,in which the null hypothesis posits that the data are distributed accordingto some standard probability distribution. If the data have low probabilityunder this standard distribution, we say that the null hypothesis has beenrejected. In the conventional framework of hypothesis testing, one evaluatessome function of the data (this function is called the test statistic), andgives the beneﬁt of doubt to the null hypothesis by computing (assuming thenull hypothesis) the probability of values more extreme in the direction ofthe alternative hyp othesis than the observed value of the test statistic. Thisprobability is the so-called P-value, and we reject the null hypothesis if theP-value is lower than some accepted threshold.An example is provided by the χ2test for mutual information. As discussedin the text, the mutual information (which is the test statistic of interest) asestimated from data follows a χ2distribution when the underlying variablesare independent. The probability density function of the χ2distribution isgiven byf(x)=xν/2−1e−x/22ν/2Γ(ν/2),x≥ 0,where ν is an arbitrary parameter, called the number of degrees of freedom ofthe χ2distribution. Under the null hypothesis of independence, the mutualinformation is therefore distributed according to the above distribution. Underthe alternative hypothesis of lack of independence, the mutual informationwould be expected to be higher. Thus, if the numerical value of the mutualinformation as estimated from data is S, the corresponding P-value is givenbyPr[x ≥ S]=(∞Sdx f(x) = 1 − F(S),where F (x) is the cumulative distribution function of the χ2distribution.The statistical test consists of rejecting the null hypothesis of independenceif the P-value is very low, as a low P-value means that the estimated mutualinformation has low probability under the null hypothesis.The χ2test is not just used for testing the statistical signiﬁcance of mutualinformation. More generally, it is a standard test for assessing the indepen-dence of two variables and appropriate in a large class of situations where thetest statistic can be represented as a likelihood ratio. In its most basic form,it is a standard test of the variance of a normally distributed population.84 Introduction to Biological Networksscore,SBIC= S −K2log N, (3.14)where K is the number of free parameters in the model and N is thenumber of data samples used to estimate the mutual information. Thebasic REVEAL method can be applied to ﬁnd statistically signiﬁcantvalues of SBICas one considers every set of putative parents of G. Thesestatistically signiﬁcant assignments can then be collected together toconstruct an inferred DBN that represents the regulatory network forthe set of genes being studied (Friedman et al., 1998; Murphy and Mian,1999).An important issue with learning DBN models—one that also arisesin simpler Boolean network models—is that of ﬁnding ways to limitthe size of the search space of parent explanatory genes for a gene ofinterest. Many methods to do this are heuristic methods; that is, suchmethods do not guarantee that all explanatory genes can be found.One possibility is to examine only singlets and pairs of potentially ex-planatory genes for a gene of interest. All singlets and pairs that havestatistically signiﬁcant mutual information with the gene of interest canthen be combined to yield the full set of parents of the gene of interest.Another heuristic method consists of starting with an initial guess forthe regulatory network structure and then randomly carrying out localmoves such as edge deletion, edge addition, or edge reversal that changethe network. After each local move, the BIC score is recomputed andthe move is accepted if the recomputed BIC score is higher than theprevious one. This procedure leads to a network corresponding to alocal maximum of the BIC score. Multiple initial guesses can then becombined to infer a global optimum.3.4.2 Extensions, Variants, and Applications of DBNsWe now discuss further issues related to the application of the DBNmethodology for accurate inference of regulatory networks. One of theproblems with using expression data to infer regulation is that expres-sion datasets are often incomplete; expression levels of important regu-latory genes are sometimes missing because of exp erimental limitations.The situation is confounded by the fact that genes that are importantare not known in advance. Hence, it appears that the standard DBNmethodology would require knowledge of the expression levels of allgenes that may play a role in the regulatory pathway under consid-eration. Fortunately, however, this knowledge is not always necessary;


===== [23/72] chapter-23.html =====

Prediction of Physical Interactions 85the set of genes whose expression levels are missing may often be col-lectively characterized in terms of a small number of hidden variablesor hidden factors that may, in principle, aﬀect the expression states ofgenes whose expression levels are known. The problem of DBN infer-ence then extends to simultaneously inferring both network structureand the states of these hidden variables.The classic method of incorporating hidden variables in DBNsand inferring the underlying probabilities involves the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm (Dempster et al., 1977; Lauritzen, 1995;Friedman, 1997; Friedman et al., 1998; Murphy and Mian, 1999), whichis brieﬂy summarized in Box 3.3. Using general results for EM algo-rithms, it can be shown that this iterative method for updating theparameters of a DBN always leads to an increase in the BIC score. Themethod is therefore guaranteed to converge to a DBN correspondingto a local maximum of the BIC score.An EM-based approach was systematically used to model the generegulatory networks that play an important role in T-cell activation(see Box 3.4 for a brief description of T-cells and the related B-cells)using expression data for about 100 human genes across ten timepoints (Rangel et al., 2004; Beal et al., 2005). The structure of theDBN model was constrained by assuming the following linear statespace model for the dynamics of expression levels [see also Perrin et al.(2003)]:gt= Cht+ Dgt−1+ vt,ht= Aht−1+ Bgt−1+ wt, (3.15)where gtis a vector of expression levels of all observed genes at timet, htrepresents a vector of hidden variables at time t, the compo-nents of vtand wtrepresent independent noise variables modeled asindependent zero mean Gaussian (or Normally distributed) processesuncorrelated across time (this type of noise is termed white Gaussiannoise), and A, B, C, and D are matrices that characterize the linearrelationships between the variables. These matrices are the parametersto be inferred. Note that within the DBN framework, all conditionalprobabilities are Normally distributed (because the noise variables areNormally distributed) and the means are linearly related according tothe above equations. Furthermore, by substituting the second equationinto the ﬁrst, it is found that the eﬀective matrix that captures theinﬂuence of gt−1on gtis CB + D. Based on an entry in this matrix86 Introduction to Biological NetworksBox 3.3 The Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm.The Expectation-Maximization, or EM, algorithm (Dempster et al., 1977;Lauritzen, 1995; Friedman, 1997) is one of the most widely used methods toﬁnd parameters that maximize the likelihood function. In a typical approachto the problem, one must infer unknown parameters θ that describe thedata in some way. The data themselves consist of observed variables xand “hidden” variables y. For concreteness, the reader can imagine θ assignifying unknown regulatory relationships among genes, x as observedexpression levels, and y as unobserved expression levels. The method iter-atively improves upon an initial guess θ(0)for the parameter values, as follows.The likelihood function is given by L(θ)=P (x, y | θ). It is not possibleto directly maximize L(θ) (and thus estimate θ) because the values of thehidden variables y are unknown. Instead, let us suppose that the currentbest guess for θ is θ(i). Using this, one can compute the expected, or mean,values of the hidden variables given the values of the observed variables andthe parameters θ(i). This is the “E” step in the EM algorithm; it results inan estimate of the values of the hidden variables. Let us call this estimatey(i). The next, “M” step, consists of maximizing the likelihood function usingthe observed values x and the estimated values y(i). The parameter value(s)at which this maximum is attained is the new estimate for θ, which we callθ(i+1). The same procedure is then repeated until reasonable convergence ofthe parameter values is attained.It can be shown that the EM procedure always increases the likelihood func-tion. Also, even in cases where no hidden variables exist, it can be mathe-matically convenient to describe some of the unknown parameters as hiddenvariables if that redeﬁnition leads to a likelihood function that can be maxi-mized in a straightforward manner.being signiﬁcantly positive or signiﬁcantly negative, that entry can beinterpreted as up- or down-regulation, respectively.Figure 3.5 shows one of the inferred sub-networks implicated in T-cell activation, as found by Rangel et al. (2004). The gene fyb turnsout to be the central gene in the T-cell activation network predicted byRangel et al., as it is predicted to regulate the largest number of genes.The genes shown in the sub-network are all directly related to the im-mune response. The fyb gene is known to play an important role in thesignaling mechanism associated with the T-cell receptor molecule onthe surface of the T-cell. The three interleukin receptor genes IL2Rγ,Prediction of Physical Interactions 87fybCyclinA2CD69IL2 R γIL3 R αGATA3ClusterinIL4 R αCX3CR1FIGURE 3.5: One of the inferred sub-networks implicated in T-cell activa-tion (Rangel et al., 2004). This network contains genes that are downstreamof gene fyb. Positive regulations are represented by arrowheads; negative reg-ulations are represented by bars.IL3Rα, and IL4Rα encode for the IL-4 receptor protein whose lev-els are known to be suppressed when fyb expression is diminished, inagreement with the predicted sub-network. The prediction that thechemokine receptor CXC3R1 is up-regulated by IL-2 receptor gammais also consistent with data from other cell types. Further details onthe plausibility of some of the other predictions and on the biologicalhypotheses suggested by them are given in the work of Rangel et al.(2004).One of the problems with the DBN methodology is that it can besigniﬁcantly expensive computationally and does not scale well withthe number of nodes (here, genes) in the DBN. It is therefore oftennecessary, when trying to infer networks from large expression datasets,to reduce the eﬀective number of genes in the problem. This can bedone in a number of ways, the simplest among them involving pre-processing the data to remove genes that have very low expressionlevels throughout the time course of the experiment, or genes thathave very low variation in expression level across the time course, or88 Introduction to Biological NetworksBox 3.4 T-cells and B-cells.T- and B-cells are special types of white blood cells that play an important rolein the immune response system. T-cells derive their name from their origin inthe thymus gland. Depending on their type, they have a number of functions,including that of aiding in the maturation of B-cells and the destruction ofvirally infected cells and tumor cells. Their activation involves a large numberof external signals and the expression of many genes in temporal sequence. TheB-cells, produced in the bone marrow of most mammals, mature in responseto signals from T-cells and principally become plasma cells or memory B-cells.Plasma cells are responsible for the production of antibodies against bacterialproteins or viruses (antigens). Memory B-cells retain genetic rearrangementsthat allow for the production of speciﬁc antibodies against speciﬁc antigens(i.e., they retain “memory” of a previously encountered antigen).by clustering together genes that have similar expression proﬁles into asingle “meta-gene”—this last operation tacitly assumes that all genesrepresented by the meta-gene will serve as common regulators of othergenes and/or be simultaneously regulated by other genes.A novel approach to reduce the number of putative regulators aswell as estimate transcriptional time lags in regulation more accuratelywas suggested by Zou and Conzen (2005). Their metho d consists of ﬁrstidentifying all potential regulators of a gene G of interest as those geneswhose expression level ﬁrst changes before or concurrently with theexpression level of G. Next, potential regulators are clustered accordingto the diﬀerence in time of ﬁrst change in expression level between theregulator and G. This time diﬀerence is taken to be the transcriptionaltime lag between the regulator and G. Subsets of genes belonging to acommon cluster of potential regulators (i.e., potential regulators thathave the same transcriptional time lag with respect to G) are thenexamined for high BIC scores, with the best subsets from every clusterpooled together and inferred as true regulators of G. The process isrepeated for every gene G.The method of Zou and Conzen (2005) implicitly has a pre-processingstep (i.e., ﬁltering by transcriptional time lag) that reduces the num-ber of potential regulators of G. Furthermore, only subsets within clus-ters are examined for the magnitude of their BIC score with G, thusgreatly increasing the eﬃciency of the method. Zou and Conzen testedthis method on a yeast cell-cycle time course expression dataset thatPrediction of Physical Interactions 89included many previously established regulatory genes. They reportedsubstantial increases in accuracy and substantially lower computationaltime using their method relative to the standard DBN approach.Other than the applications mentioned above, the reader should beaware that there is a vast literature on the use of DBNs for the inferenceof regulatory networks. This includes a systematic analysis of the accu-racy of DBNs when applied to microarray gene expression data (Hus-meier, 2003), an adaptation of the DBN methodology for addressingdata from p erturbation experiments (Dojer et al., 2006), and an appli-cation to nonlinear, nonparametric models (Kim et al., 2004).3.5 Predicting Protein-Protein InteractionsAs we have discussed, no single high-throughput experimental methodfor discovering protein-protein interactions is currently reliable. Also,while high-throughput experiments often do not agree with each other,the interactions that are consistently reported by diﬀerent experimentsare usually correct. This emphasizes the need for various ways of com-bining high-throughput results in order to make sense of interactiondata, a topic we examine in greater detail in Chapter 5. The ineﬃ-ciency and lack of reliability of experimental approaches also opens thedoor for computational approaches that can realistically aim to pre-dict protein-protein interactions at least as reliably as high-throughputexperiments.A number of factors inﬂuence the propensity of two proteins to par-take in a physical interaction. In keeping with convention, we call thesefactors features that correlate with the presence of physical interaction.Many of these features are derived from the sequence, structure, andevolutionary history of proteins. Some of them are derived based on thespatio-temporal context in which proteins occur in the cell. For exam-ple, interaction between two proteins is possible only if they are bothpresent in the cell in comparable quantities in the same cellular com-partment at the same time (i.e., they are co-localized and co-expressed).Interacting proteins are also likely to have correlated patterns of mu-tation at the interaction site, as any point mutation in one protein islikely to be accompanied by a compensatory mutation in the partnerprotein in order to stabilize the interaction.Here, we summarize (by no means exhaustively!) some of the features


===== [24/72] chapter-24.html =====

90 Introduction to Biological Networksthat have been used to predict protein-protein interactions in silico.Detailed reviews on this subject include those of Skrabanek et al.(2008) and Liu et al. (2008). We later describe how these and othersimpler and weakly predictive features may be integrated to improveprediction performance and render the prediction task more robust toerrors in individual feature sets.3.5.1 Structural FeaturesThe earliest methods for predicting protein-protein interaction utilizedthe tertiary structure of the proteins involved, and hence could be ap-plied only to the small proportion of proteins whose three-dimensionalstructure is known. There are two aspects to structure-based predic-tion of protein-protein interaction: prediction of interaction sites withinindividual proteins, and prediction of the propensity for two given pro-teins to actually interact. The ﬁrst aspect is nonspeciﬁc, as it refersonly to single proteins.As a case in point, it has been found that sites of interaction tendto be predominantly populated by hydrophobic residues that lie on theprotein surface and are therefore exposed to solvent. The occurrenceof hydrophobic residues on part of the surface creates a tendency forthat part of the surface to exclude water and thus partake in a bindinginteraction with a similar surface on another protein. The excludedwater molecules form a cage-like structure surrounding the interactionsurface, thus contributing to the overall stability of the bound proteincomplex. This nonspeciﬁc tendency for interaction can, in fact, be usedto predict interaction networks whose statistical properties appear toagree well with those obtained from high-throughput experiments. Thisaspect is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 7.Other parameters that are used to distinguish residues at interac-tion sites from other residues include geometrical features such as pla-narity and protrusion of a “surface patch” around the residue in ques-tion (Jones and Thornton, 1997a). These geometrical features can becombined with hydrophobicity, solvation potential, accessible surfacearea, and residue interface propensity (computed from the statisticsof residues that are known to lie along protein interaction interfaces)to enable reasonably accurate prediction of interaction sites (Jones andThornton, 1997b). Figure 3.6 gives an example of the assessment ofinteraction propensity for surface patches on the tryrosyl-tRNA syn-thetase protein, an important enzyme involved in the addition of tyro-Prediction of Physical Interactions 91FIGURE 3.6: “Patch proﬁles” of tyrosyl tRNA synthetase (Protein DataBank ID: 2ts1) using six parameters that distinguish interacting surfacepatches from noninteracting ones. In each proﬁle (a)–(f), residue numbersare indicated on the x-axis and the value of the parameter on the y-axis. Thesix proﬁles are integrated into a Combined Score proﬁle (g) that yields pre-dictions for residues involved in protein-protein interaction (h). Residues onthe known interface are marked by an asterisk (∗) above the vertical bars inpanel (h). Reproduced with permission from Jones and Thornton (1997a).sine to the protein chain during protein synthesis.While the features mentioned above are useful for determining thegeneric propensity of a part of a protein to be involved in protein-protein interactions, it is often of interest to predict the propensityof two speciﬁc proteins to interact. Structural methods to predict thepropensity of interaction between two speciﬁc proteins are often basedon complementarity between the surfaces in question. For example,92 Introduction to Biological NetworksBox 3.5 Molecular docking.Molecular docking is a computational method that predicts the relative ori-entation of one molecule when bound to another molecule to form a complex.Docking is most commonly carried out in the initial stages of rational drugdesign, where a candidate small-molecule (i.e., a ligand) drug is “docked” ona target protein molecule. It is also used in the elucidation of protein-proteininteractions, where one protein is docked to another. One of the most im-portant outcomes of a docking analysis is a measure of the binding aﬃnitybetween the two molecules studied. This aﬃnity is called the docking score.While docking scores often do not approximate the free energy of bindingvery well, one of the principal advantages of a docking simulation is that itis computationally fast and can b e used to quickly screen large numbers ofcandidate ligands or proteins and therefore generate a short list of moleculesthat are expected to bind stably with the protein of interest.shape complementarity is used in docking studies (Box 3.5) that ﬁndthe best ﬁt of two interacting proteins (Lawrence and Colman, 2003). Apublic resource that combines the features used to predict interactionsites with shape complementarity analysis in order to predict protein-protein interactions is the Protein-Protein Interface Analysis Server(http://www.bioinformatics.sussex.ac.uk/protorp/).At the time of writing, it appears that structural properties are poisedto play a central role in the prediction of protein-protein interactions.While this development may seem obvious given that protein-proteininteractions in vivo are almost entirely determined by structural fea-tures, progress in this area has to date proved diﬃcult because of thelack of availability of high-resolution structures as well as the lack ofaccurate algorithms and computational power to determine whethertwo proteins of known (high-resolution) structure will actually inter-act. However, the growth of structural databases such as the ProteinData Bank (PDB, http://www.rcsb.org), in concert with the growth ofstructural genomics initiatives that aim to infer the structures of pro-teins of unknown structure by homology to proteins of known struc-ture, and the attendant rise in computational capabilities for studiesof protein-protein docking, has made the prospect of protein-proteininteraction prediction using structural information very attractive.As a ﬁrst step in this direction, Wass et al. (2011) carried out a high-throughput docking study in which 56 proteins known to participate inPrediction of Physical Interactions 93complexes were docked against a nonredundant set of 922 monomericproteins, some of which are known to interact with the proteins in theﬁrst set, but most of which do not do so. The aim of the study was toassess whether docking scores can reliably discriminate between trueand false interactors. The three-dimensional structure of all proteins inthe study was known to high resolution. The study required tremen-dous computing power because the docking score in each case dependson the “pose” (relative orientation in three-dimensional space) of thetwo proteins being docked. A large number of poses had to be generatedfor each protein pair, leading to a score distribution for each proteinpair. Their results were encouraging in that they showed that the scoredistribution of known interactors is often distinguishable from that ofthe background, and furthermore the score distribution of known in-teractors was also distinguishable from other proteins of very similarstructure (Figure 3.7).3.5.2 Gene Neighborhood AnalysisThe central hypothesis behind prediction of protein interaction fromgene neighborhood is that genes corresponding to proteins which phys-ically interact will be in close proximity to each other on the genome.Indeed, operons in bacteria, which are simultaneously transcribed setsof genes located in a single cluster on the genome, code for proteinsthat are functionally associated and therefore likely to interact. Al-though operons are rare in eukaryotes, genes that are repeatedly ob-served in close proximity (within about 500 base-pairs of each other)are potential candidates for functional association or protein-proteininteraction.The disadvantage of this method of inferring interactions is that itdoes not distinguish between functionally associated proteins and inter-acting proteins. Furthermore, the method is generally more successfulon prokaryotic than eukaryotic proteins, because co-regulation in eu-karyotes is more complex and less inﬂuenced by gene proximity. Inbacteria and archaea, the method has been successfully used to iden-tify new members of metabolic pathways (Dandekar et al., 1998). Themethod becomes more powerful as larger numbers of genomes are avail-able for neighborhood analysis, because interacting proteins in one or-ganism can be predicted by their gene proximity in combination withevidence of interactions among homologous proteins in other organisms(see the discussion on interologs below).94 Introduction to Biological NetworksFIGURE 3.7: Docking score distribution of the acetylcholinesterase-fasciculin2 complex [curve indicated in panel (a); the leftmost curve inpanel (b)] compared with docking score distributions of (a) a backgroundset of putative complexes, and (b) putative complexes of fasciculin2 dockedwith members of the α/β-hydrolases structural superfamily, to which acetyl-cholinesterase belongs. In (a), two additional selected background models areshown. In (b), the docking score distributions for the three most structurallysimilar proteins to acetylcholinesterase are shown with their structures. Whilethe type of separation of scores between true and putative complexes is nottypical, this example conveys the potential of high-throughput docking todiscover protein-protein interactions. Reproduced with permission from Wasset al. (2011)..The STRING (Search Tool for the Retrieval of INteractingGenes/proteins) database, available at http://string.embl.de, combinesneighborhood analysis with other sources to predict protein-protein in-teractions.3.5.3 Phylogenetic ProﬁlesLike gene neighborhood analysis, similarity of phylogenetic proﬁles(Box 3.6 and Figure 3.8) is primarily indicative of functional simi-larity or association. Similarity b etween two phylogenetic proﬁles, alsotermed co-evolution, indicates functional association or physical inter-action between the proteins in question. However, this simple approach


===== [25/72] chapter-25.html =====

Prediction of Physical Interactions 95Box 3.6 Orthology and phylogenetic proﬁling.Genes in diﬀerent organisms are said to be orthologous if they can beevolutionarily traced back to the same ancestral gene. This ancestral genemust predate the time of speciation (i.e., separation of one species into two)between the two organisms in question. Following speciation, identical genesin the two organisms are subject to independent mutation events over thecourse of evolution, thus leading to divergence between their DNA sequences.Because we cannot directly observe ancestral genomes, orthologous relation-ships among genes are inferred by the similarity of their DNA or proteinsequences. Thus, when we refer to the same gene in diﬀerent organisms, wereally mean orthologous genes, or orthologs. Sometimes orthologs are alsoreferred to as homologs, although strictly speaking, homology encompassesany form of similarity, not just that arising from evolutionarily commonancestry.The study of evolutionary relationships between organisms is called phylogeny.In its simplest form, a phylogenetic proﬁle of a gene across a set of organismsis mathematically a binary vector of 0s and 1s that signiﬁes the occurrence(1) or lack of occurrence (0) of the (orthologous) gene in each organism ofinterest. A similarity score between the phylogenetic proﬁles of two genes canbe deﬁned as the proportion of entries in the two vectors that have the samevalue.is sensitive to the number and distribution of genomes used to buildthe proﬁle. Genes that co-occur in a small number of closely relatedspecies are less likely to code for interacting proteins than genes thatco-occur in a large number of distantly related species.The co-evolution method for inferring interactions is also sensitive tothe manner in which orthologous sequences are detected in the diﬀerentorganisms, and is problematic in principle because co-evolution couldsimply occur in a nonspeciﬁc manner. For example, any two proteinsin the same organism will share a background level of co-evolution thatthey inherit from the speciation of the whole organism itself. Thus,co-evolution need not be speciﬁcally associated with protein-proteininteraction.An elegant and powerful way of removing false positives associatedwith nonspeciﬁc co-evolution was suggested by Juan et al. (2008), andis depicted in Figure 3.8. Brieﬂy, after computing the similarity scorebetween phylogenetic proﬁles of two proteins A and B, the extent of96 Introduction to Biological Networkscorrelation (as computed using, say, the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient)between the similarity scores of A with all other proteins in the or-ganism and the similarity scores of B with all other proteins in theorganism is found. This correlation measures the extent of similaritybetween the co-evolutionary networks of A and B. If such a correlationis high, that strongly suggests an association between A and B overand above their isolated co-evolution. As a further ﬁltering step, Juanet al. (2008) proposed to eliminate nonspeciﬁc correlations between theco-evolutionary networks by asking whether an observed correlation be-tween A and B can be explained by their mutual correlations with theco-evolutionary network of a third protein. This last step in the anal-ysis is carried out using partial correlation coeﬃcients (see Box 2.10).Only protein pairs whose similarity of co-evolutionary networks cannotbe explained by other intermediate correlations are considered candi-date interacting proteins. This method impressively provides a degreeof accuracy and coverage of protein-protein interactions comparable tothat of experimental techniques.3.5.4 Gene FusionGene fusion is a common evolutionary event whereby two separateparent genes in an ancestral organism are fused in an extant organ-ism into a single multifunctional gene that typically codes for a multi-domain protein. Two separate proteins in a query organism that showsigniﬁcant similarity to diﬀerent regions of a single, fused protein ina reference organism are likely candidates for functional or physicalassociation in the query organism, as they occur in fused form in thereference organism. In a gene fusion analysis, it is, however, crucial thatthe two proteins in the query organism are not signiﬁcantly similar toeach other. If they are, they will naturally show signiﬁcant similarityto the same protein in the reference organism even if no gene fusionoccurred in the reference protein. Thus, if the two proteins in the queryorganism are signiﬁcantly similar to each other, they are very likely tocorrespond to paralogs, or duplicate genes/proteins, rather than inter-acting proteins.A possible source of error in the prediction of interacting proteinsfrom gene fusion events has to do with fusion by recombination. Thereare situations where two functionally unrelated protein domains be-come fused by chance in the reference organism due to a recombinationevent (leading to a two-domain protein of novel function), in which casePrediction of Physical Interactions 97FIGURE 3.8: Inference of protein-protein interaction by co-evolutionaryanalysis. Correlations between phylogenetic proﬁles of all genes in a genomeare collected to generate a co-evolution proﬁle for each gene. Next, correlationsbetween co-evolution proﬁles of genes are found. These indicate the extent towhich two genes share similarity of evolutionary histories with other genes.Finally, partial correlations are used to examine the extent to which correlatedco-evolution can be explained by a third other gene. Gene pairs whose cor-relation in co-evolution is not signiﬁcantly explicable by the co-evolutionaryproﬁle of a third gene are considered candidates for protein-protein interac-tion. Adapted with permission from Juan et al. (2008).there is no reason why the homologous domains in the query organismshould function in tandem or interact with each other.The gene fusion method has been successfully applied to re-veal a number of novel protein-protein interactions in the fruit ﬂyDrosophila melanogaster (Iliopoulos et al., 2003). The FusionDBdatabase (http://www.igs.cnrs-mrs.fr/FusionDB/) contains, at thetime of writing, the results of all annotated genes in 51 query genomeschecked for fusion events in 89 fully sequenced bacterial and archaeangenomes.3.5.5 History of Correlated MutationsIt has been observed that a mutation in the sequence of one proteinin a pair of interacting proteins is often accompanied by a compen-satory mutation in its interacting partner protein. This phenomenon of98 Introduction to Biological Networksoccurrence of correlated mutations at interaction sites is also observedin single-stranded RNA, where correlated mutations occurring along asingle RNA sequence may be used to successfully predict base-pairednucleotides, and hence the RNA secondary structure.The correlated mutation method as applied to a pair of pro-teins (Jothi et al., 2006) identiﬁes an aligned family of homologousproteins for each member of the pair. If there are positions in eachalignment that show signiﬁcant correlation across aligned residues, thetwo proteins are considered candidates for interaction. Moreover, thepositions of the aligned residues identify the interaction surface. Typi-cally, the method is quite sensitive to the quality and number of align-ments. This approach has been termed the in silico two-hybrid methodfor ﬁnding protein-protein interactions (Pazos and Valencia, 2002).Figure 3.9 gives a schematic overview of some of the methods de-scribed above. Note that these methods are, in a sense, ab initio meth-ods for deciphering protein-protein interactions, as they do not rely onthe knowledge of other protein-protein interactions.3.5.6 Existence of “Interologs”One of the strongest predictors of protein-protein interactions in oneorganism is the existence of a pair of orthologous proteins that is knownto interact in another organism. Such conserved pairs of interactingproteins (Figure 3.10) are termed “interologs” (Walhout et al., 2000;Matthews et al., 2001).Matthews et al. (2001) carried out a systematic study of the extent towhich searches for interologs may be used to identify protein interactionnetworks in the organism of interest. They used two two-hybrid Sac-charomyces cerevisiae protein interaction maps to predict interactionsin the nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans, and validated these pre-dictions via two-hybrid experiments. In general, the interolog methodcan be used to reliably infer a protein-protein interaction between pro-teins A and B based on a known interaction between proteins A’ andB’ in a diﬀerent organism when the geometric mean of the sequenceidentities of A-A’ and B-B’ is at least 80% (Yu et al., 2004).Prediction of Physical Interactions 99FIGURE 3.9: Ab initio approaches to prediction of protein-protein interac-tion based on genomic information. (a) A pair of genes (shown in dark grayand white) in close physical proximity in eight diﬀerent genomes is suggestiveof association or interaction between the proteins. Gene fusion between twogenes in genomes 4 and 5 is similarly suggestive of association between the cor-responding proteins in genome 3. (b) Phylogenetic proﬁles of six genes, withthree interacting protein pairs (A-B, C-D, E-F) inferred because of similarityin these proﬁles. (c) Two protein families with conserved regions highlightedin light gray. Correlated mutations (highlighted in dark gray) indicate regionsof mediating interactions between proteins from each family. Reproduced withpermission from Skrabanek et al. (2008).3.6 Data Integration to Improve Prediction Perfor-manceThe features discussed above carry relatively strong signals for protein-protein interaction, and have been used individually to predict interac-tions. However, there are a number of weak signals or weak “correlates”of protein-protein interaction that could perhaps be combined to yield


===== [26/72] chapter-26.html =====

100 Introduction to Biological NetworksProteinAProteinBPutativeInteractionS. cerevisiaeProteinA’ProteinB’KnownInteractionOrthologs OrthologsC. elegansFIGURE 3.10: An illustration of the interolog concept. Proteins A’ and B’ inthe worm Caenorhabditis elegans are known to interact. Proteins A and B inthe yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae are orthologs of A’ and B’, respectively. Aninteraction between A and B can be inferred based on the known interactionbetween A’ and B’. The A’-B’ pair is called an interolog of the A-B pair.a combined predictor that is powerful. These signals are typically pos-itive for interacting protein pairs but do not by themselves provideconvincing evidence that the two proteins in question actually interact.Examples of such weak signals include subcellular co-localization andco-expression (as mentioned earlier); essentiality (proteins in an inter-acting pair are typically both essential or both nonessential, as a dele-tion mutant of either one of the two should produce roughly the samephenotype); biological function (interacting proteins often participatein the same biological process); and mutual clustering (interacting pro-teins often tend to share their interacting partners; see Section 4.4).These weak correlates are individually far more useful for validatingexperimentally derived protein-protein interactions rather than for ac-tually predicting protein-protein interactions. Here we focus on howsuch a set of weak correlates may be intelligently integrated to producea powerful predictor for protein-protein interactions.A host of increasingly sophisticated methods for data integration cur-rently exist, and continue to be a fruitful topic of current research. Allof these methods involve two procedures: a procedure for quantitativelyPrediction of Physical Interactions 101representing or encoding each correlate, and a procedure for combiningthe numerical representations into a predictive measure. Co-expression,for example, could be encoded in terms of a number of diﬀerent cor-relation or expression proﬁle similarity measures. Similarly, some dataintegration methods work best with discrete representations of the un-derlying data. In these cases, continuous variables must be discretizedor “binned” before they are fed into the appropriate data integrationmethod.3.6.1 Bayesian Networks and Feature IntegrationOne of the seminal examples of an integrated method to predict protein-protein interactions consists of a Bayesian network method devised byJansen et al. (2003). We have already seen how dynamic Bayesian net-works may be used to predict regulatory interactions from gene ex-pression data. The method of Jansen and co-workers is signiﬁcantlysimpler yet powerful, and essentially uses a Bayesian representation forthe probability of a protein-protein interaction given multiple sourcesof weak evidence.Consider N features, f1,f2, . . . , fN, each of which by itself is weaklypredictive for protein-protein interaction. If the numerical value of eachfeature is known for a pair of proteins, the Bayesian network methodinvolves calculation of the likelihood ratio L(f1, . . . , fN), deﬁned asL(f1, . . . , fN)=P (f1, . . . , fN| pos)P (f1, . . . , fN| neg), (3.16)where P (f1, . . . , fN| pos) is the probability of the observed featurevalues if the protein pair were interacting, or “positive,” and similarlyP (f1, . . . , fN| neg) is the probability of the observed features if theprotein pair were noninteracting, or “negative.” A large likelihood ratiomeans that the evidence is more consistent with the presence of aninteraction rather than the absence of it; conversely, small values of thelikelihood ratio indicate that the data are consistent with the absenceof interaction.How do we compute the likelihood ratio, and how large should itbe for a pair of proteins to be predicted as interacting? To answerthe ﬁrst part of the question, we consider a set of known, or “gold-standard” positive and negative (i.e., interacting and noninteracting)protein pairs, compute numerical values of the features for each pair,and then bin these numerical values separately for positive and negativepairs to generate, for each feature “bin”, the two probabilities required102 Introduction to Biological Networksto compute the likelihood ratio for that feature bin. This procedureyields a table of likelihood ratio values for each feature value bin. Allthat is required to then ﬁnd the likelihood ratio for a pair of proteins isto compute the feature values for that pair, identify the correct bin itbelongs to, and read oﬀ the likelihood ratio from the table constructedusing gold-standard pairs.The procedure for constructing likelihood ratios for gold-standardpairs is greatly simpliﬁed if each feature is conditionally independent ofthe others. Conditional independence means that information in eachof the N features of a protein pair is independent of any other feature,given that the protein pair is either positive or negative. Mathemati-cally, the assumption of conditional independence leads to factorizationof the two probabilities in Equation (3.16), thus yielding P (f1, . . . , fN|pos) =)Ni=1P (fi| pos) and P (f1, . . . , fN| neg) =)Ni=1P (fi| neg).If the assumption of conditional independence is reasonable, then theBayesian network is called a “naive” network, the method is called thenaive Bayes method, and the likelihood ratio can be simpliﬁed toL(f1, . . . , fN)=N'i=1L(fi)=N'i=1P (fi| pos)P (fi| neg), (3.17)that is, the full likelihood ratio is a product of the likelihood ratioscorresponding to each feature considered individually.Jansen and co-workers used a “gold-standard” dataset of interact-ing and noninteracting proteins in conjunction with conditionally in-dependent features such as essentiality, correlation of mRNA expres-sion proﬁles, functional similarity according to the Munich Informationcenter for Protein Sequences (MIPS), and similarity of biological pro-cess according to the Gene Ontology database. In addition, they alsoconsidered features that were not conditionally independent (the incor-poration of these features mathematically leads to a slightly diﬀerentreformulation of the problem): for example, evidence of protein-proteininteraction from diﬀerent high-throughput experiments. For construct-ing the gold-standard dataset, a protein pair was considered positiveif it was part of the same protein complex according to MIPS (strictlyspeaking, the method of Jansen and co-workers only predicts if twoproteins will be part of the same complex), and a protein pair wasconsidered negative if the two members of the pair were found in twodiﬀerent subcellular compartments. A sample calculation of the like-lihood ratio using just three features is illustrated in Box 3.7. ThisPrediction of Physical Interactions 103type of calculation can be extended to arbitrary numbers of features,and likelihood ratio values for a large number of feature values can bepre-computed.For the protein pair on which prediction is to be carried out, thenumerical values of each feature are computed, and the correspond-ing individual likelihood ratios are read from the pre-computed table.These ratios are then multiplied to yield the full likelihood ratio. If thisfull likelihood ratio exceeds a certain threshold, the pair is predicted tobe interacting (or more precisely, part of the same protein complex),otherwise not.This brings us to the second part of our original question, namelyhow to decide the value of the likelihood ratio threshold. To addressthis, we turn to the Bayesian interpretation of the likelihood ratio. Firstone deﬁnes the prior odds ratio,Oprior=P (pos)P (neg)=P (pos)1 − P (pos), (3.18)where P (pos) is the prior probability that a protein pair is interacting,or positive. This is found from estimates of the sparseness of the proteininteraction network in the organism of interest. In the case of yeast, itis thought that there are roughly 30,000 pairs of proteins in the samecomplex out of 18 million total pairs, leading to Oprior* 1/600.Next, we deﬁne the posterior odds ratio,Opost=P (pos | f1, . . . , fN)P (neg | f1, . . . , fN). (3.19)Using Bayes’ rule, we therefore ﬁnd that the likelihood ratio can beexpressed asL(f1, . . . , fN)=OpostOprior. (3.20)Now, in order for a protein pair to be classiﬁed as positive given valuesof the features for that pair, it must be that Opost> 1. Using ourestimate of Oprior, this translates to L>600. Thus, a yeast proteinpair is considered positive if its full likelihood ratio exceeds about 600.Figure 3.11 shows three protein complexes predicted by the methodthat were partially veriﬁed by TAP-tagging.In addition to the Bayesian network data integration method outlinedabove, a number of other sophisticated methods exist, most of whichare beyond the scope of this book. Logistic regression models to predict104 Introduction to Biological NetworksBox 3.7 Application of likelihood ratio calculations to the pre-diction of protein-protein interactions: An example.Consider the feature corresponding to the essentiality of two proteinsand let us examine its predictive value for protein-protein interaction.There are three possible combinations: either both members of a proteinpair are essential (corresponding to feature value EE), only one of themis essential (feature value EN), or both are nonessential (feature valueNN). In the “gold-standard” interaction dataset constructed by Jansenand co-workers, there are 2,150 interactions in which both members areclearly annotated for essentiality, that is, each of the 2,150 interactionscan be labeled as one of EE, EN , or NN. Similarly, there are 573,724noninteractions that are clearly annotated for essentiality. Of the 2,150annotated “positives,” 1,114 are EE, 624 are EN , and 412 are NN. Thus,P (EE | pos) = 1,114/2,150 = 0.518, P (EN | pos) = 624/2,150 = 0.290and P (NN | pos) = 0.192. Similarly, of the 573,724 annotated “nega-tives,” 81,924 are EE, 285, 487 are EN , and 206,313 are NN, yieldingP (EE | neg) = 0.143, P (EN | neg) = 0.498, and P (NN | neg) = 0.360.The likelihood ratio for two essential proteins is therefore given according toEquation (3.17) by L(EE)=P (EE | pos)/P (EE | neg) = 0.518/0.143 = 3.6.Similarly L(NE) = 0.6 and L(NN) = 0.5. Although the likelihood ratio fortwo essential proteins is larger than 1, the discussion below Equation (3.20)shows that we cannot predict a pair of yeast proteins to be interacting basedon their essentiality alone because the likelihood ratio computed using justthe essentiality feature does not exceed 600.Now let us consider a second feature, namely the correlation r of mRNAexpression levels between two proteins, and let us say that the two proteinshave highly correlated expression if r>0.8. Using expression data for proteinsin the gold-standard interaction dataset, it is found that the proportion ofinteracting protein pairs having highly correlated expression is about 0.02or 2%, while the proportion of noninteracting protein pairs having highlycorrelated expression is about 2.3 ×10−4or 0.023%. Thus, the likelihood ratiofor two proteins with r>0.8 is L(r>0.8) = 0.02/0.00023 = 87. Similarly, athird feature, the similarity of biological function among two proteins, canbe analyzed to show that the likelihood ratio for two proteins having highlysimilar biological function is L = 25.5.Note that the three features we have discussed are individually only weaklypredictive of protein-protein interaction. The likelihood ratio based on anyone of the three features cannot exceed 600. However, a pair of proteins inwhich both members are essential, have high expression correlation and highsimilarity of biological function has a likelihood ratio of 3.6×87×25.5 * 7,987.These proteins can therefore be predicted to be interacting proteins.


===== [27/72] chapter-27.html =====

Prediction of Physical Interactions 105HHF1NHP6AHHT2HHT1HTZ1HTA1HTB2HTA2HHF2Nucleosome ProteinsFIGURE 3.11: A complex of nucleosome proteins in yeast as predicted bythe Bayesian network method of Jansen et al. (2003) using only gene ex-pression, gene function, and essentiality data. The complex contains proteinslinked to a single central protein (black node). The single interaction veriﬁedby TAP-tagging alone is shown as a thick solid line, interactions previouslyknown from high-throughput experiments (this knowledge was not used forthe prediction) are shown as dashed lines, and overlaps between the two areshown as thin solid lines.protein-protein interactions have been used by Lin et al. (2004) andSharan et al. (2005). Random forest methods have been used by Linet al. (2004) and Qi et al. (2006), who also compared the performanceof random forest methods to support vector machines. A good survey ofdata integration methods for prediction of protein-protein interactionis the review article by Liu et al. (2008).Finally we should also mention integrative methods to predictdomain-domain interactions from protein-protein interactions. Proteindomains are structural and functional subunits of proteins that are evo-lutionarily conserved. Distinct proteins may be composed of diﬀerentcombinations from the same set of domains. Therefore, multifunctionalproteins are typically multidomain proteins. Also, protein-protein inter-actions are typically mediated by speciﬁc domain pairs. Identiﬁcationof interacting pairs of domains is thus a powerful tool for predictingprotein interactions among novel proteins that possess those domains.106 Introduction to Biological NetworksMethods to identify interacting domain pairs include maximum likeli-hood estimation (Deng et al., 2002; Liu et al., 2005), Bayesian meth-ods (Lee et al., 2006; Kim et al., 2007), domain pair exclusion analy-sis (Riley et al., 2005), and parsimony explanation (Guimar˜aes et al.,2006).


===== [28/72] chapter-28.html =====

Chapter 4Metabolic Networks and GeneticInteractionsWe ﬁrst encountered metabolic networks in Chapter 1. Unlike thephysical interaction networks discussed in the two previous chapters,metabolic networks are somewhat more abstract. From the discussionin Chapter 1, we know that metabolic pathways depict series of chemi-cal reactions that modify chemical substances (metabolites) and in theprocess synthesize the basic building blocks of the cell, including nu-cleic acids, amino acids, and fatty acids. By breaking down metabolites,these reactions use the energy stored in chemical bonds. Thus each edgein a metabolic network is a meta-edge comprising at least three indi-vidual physical interactions: enzymei-substrate, enzymei-product, prod-uct-enzymei+1, where the product is really the substrate of the nextenzyme in the pathway (Figure 4.1). The concentrations of the variousentities that make up metabolic networks are governed by the chem-ical rate equations for the reactions these entities participate in, andthe form of these rate equations is in turn determined by the connec-tivity diagram (topology) and stoichiometry of the components of themetabolic network. The edges of a metabolic network may be bi- or uni-directional depending on the particular rates and equilibrium constantsof the individual reactions (Box 4.1).Metabolic networks are special because they oﬀer a direct testingground for the connection between genotype and phenotype. At thegenotypic level, a gene encodes a particular enzyme, and changes ingene expression therefore lead to changes in the concentrations of thecorresponding enzyme products. If detailed reaction parameters for allof the reactions these enzymes catalyze are known, one can predict thecorresponding changes in metabolite levels. These changes often lead tophenotypical changes in the organism of interest. For example, reducedexpression of enzymes that characterize anabolic reactions will lead tolow reaction rates for these reactions and therefore to slow cell growth.In a more complex example, consider a mutation in the gene for the en-107108 Introduction to Biological NetworksS1+E1[S1E1] [P1E1] P1+E1S1E1E1P1E2E2P2FIGURE 4.1: A schematic diagram of a metabolic pathway. The three reac-tions at the top—enzyme E1and substrate S1forming a complex, conversionof substrate into product P1, followed by dissociation of E1and P1—are repre-sented in a metabolic network as a single “meta-edge” depicting the conversionof substrate S1into product P1, which, in turn, acts as a substrate for thenext reaction in the pathway.zyme phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH), which catalyzes the conversionof the amino acid phenylalanine to the amino acid tyrosine. Tyrosineis involved in the production of the pigment melanin in the skin, butmore importantly, when excess levels of phenylalanine build up in thebody, it is converted to phenylpyruvate, which is implicated in braindamage. This condition is known as phenylketonuria (PKU). Thus, mu-tations in the PAH gene (or translation errors in the production of thePAH enzyme) lead to low levels of melanin as well as to PKU. Theseprocesses are described by the metabolic pathways for the conversionof phenylalanine to tyrosine and the conversion of phenylalanine tophenylpyruvate. Knowledge of the reactions in these pathways and therate constants governing them allows one to quantitavely predict thephenotypic eﬀects of reduced PAH expression.There is extensive available literature on the analysis of metabolicnetworks [see, for example, the book by Palsson (2006)]. Particular at-tention has been traditionally paid to the computational technique ofmetabolic network analysis known as Flux Balance Analysis (FBA),which does not require detailed knowledge of pathway/network param-eters. Our foray into metabolic networks here is motivated by theirspecial role in enabling the genotype-phenotype connection—in partic-ular, in the elucidation of genetic interactions.Metabolic Networks and Genetic Interactions 109Box 4.1 Chemical reaction parameters.Consider a chemical reaction in which one molecule of chemical species Adissociates into m molecules of species B and n molecules of species C. Thisis generally a reversible reaction, represented asAkf!krmB + nC,where kfand krare rate constants that determine the rates of the forwardand reverse reactions, respectively, and m and n are stoichiometric coeﬃcients.According to the law of mass action, which is valid for single-step reactionsand suﬃciently large concentrations, the rate of the forward reaction is kf[A]and the rate of the reverse reaction is kr[B]m[C]n, where [A] and [B] arethe concentrations of A and B. These rates are also called reaction ﬂuxes.At equilibrium, the forward and reverse reaction ﬂuxes are equal, keeping theconcentration of each chemical species constant. Thus, at equilibrium, we havekf[A]=kr[B]m[C]n,and the equilibrium constant, deﬁned as keq= kf/kr, iskeq=[B]m[C]n[A].The equilibrium constant has an important thermodynamic interpretation: itis related to the change in the Gibbs free energy ∆G when A dissociates intoB and C at equilibrium, as∆G = −RT ln keq,where R is the gas constant (approximately 8.31 J/(mol-K)) and T is the tem-perature in Kelvin. In this book, the term “reaction parameters” genericallydenotes rate constants, equilibrium constants, and species concentrations.4.1 Optimal Metabolic States and Flux Balance AnalysisEven though the topology or wiring diagram of metabolic networksremains unchanged over timescales corresponding to cellular lifetimes(in fact, the topology of important metabolic networks is strongly con-served across organisms, suggesting that it remains largely unchangedeven over evolutionary timescales), the actual state of the network is110 Introduction to Biological Networksgenerally time dependent because species concentrations are dynamic.As we have discussed, the behavior of the network is regulated at thegenome level by the regulation of expression of the enzymes that cat-alyze each reaction in the network. Furthermore, the state of the net-work generally has clear phenotypic implications.The genome determines the parts list of metabolic enzymes.The regulatory network, in principle, determines the expression lev-els/concentrations of these enzymes. The individual metabolite con-centrations inside the cell are partly determined by the external con-centrations of a few speciﬁc metabolites (which is usually ignored byassuming an unlimited supply of these). The numerical values of the en-zyme concentrations, coupled with knowledge of the metabolic network,can be used to computationally simulate the reactions of metab olism,and thus to predict the phenotypic “states” that correspond to themetabolic network states.More importantly for our purposes, the phenotypic eﬀects ofmetabolic gene deletions (leading to nonexpression of metabolic en-zymes) can be studied in silico by assuming that the reactions thoseenzymes catalyze are “turned oﬀ.” Similarly, by studying the pheno-typic eﬀects of pairs of gene deletions, we are then able to predictgenetic interactions among metabolic genes. This program for predict-ing the eﬀects of metabolic gene deletions, straightforward as it seems,is far from trivial to implement and is also limited by the amount ofavailable information. As previously indicated, a serious bottleneck inthe program is the lack of knowledge of chemical reaction parametersthat govern the rates of metabolic reactions. These parameters includerate constants that are, in turn, determined from more fundamentalparameters such as enzyme-substrate binding energies as well as otherfactors.While there are in vitro measurements of many of these parameters, itis not clear whether these values are applicable for in vivo calculations.Furthermore, even if reaction parameters are known, computationalsimulation of large metabolic networks is a daunting task involvingsimultaneous numerical solutions of a large system of coupled nonlinearordinary diﬀerential equations. An even higher order of complexity isevident when one imagines trying to hunt down genetic interactions bysystematically carrying out simulated deletions of every possible pairof genes and solving the entire set of associated diﬀerential equationsfor each deletion.Metabolic Networks and Genetic Interactions 111Box 4.2 Chemostats.For experimental purposes, it is desirable to create an environment for mi-croorganisms to grow in which their growth rate can be externally controlled.Such an environment is provided by the chemostat. A chemostat is essen-tially a chemical reactor that contains microorganisms living in a nutrient-rich medium. The volume in the reactor is kept constant by adding mediumand removing culture at appropriate rates as the microorganisms grow. Theimportant aspect of a chemostat is that the growth rate of the microorgan-isms can be controlled by controlling the rate at which nutrient-rich mediumis added to the chemostat (and consequently, the rate at which culture is re-moved). The medium typically contains at least one nutrient that is essentialfor growth. By supplying this nutrient at limiting, rather than surplus, con-centrations, the rate of growth of microorganisms can be tightly controlledand steady state (constant volume, constant nutrient concentration, constantcell density, etc.) can be achieved.4.1.1 Flux Balance Analysis: Basic AssumptionsFortunately, and somewhat surprisingly, it turns out that the steady-state behavior of a metabolic network can be eﬃciently determinedto reasonable accuracy without knowledge of reaction parameters andwithout having to eﬃciently simulate large systems of coupled nonlineardiﬀerential equations.The basic assumption is that the steady state of a metabolic net-work is optimal in some sense, that is, the chemical reaction ﬂuxes aredistributed in such a way as to maximize or minimize some biologi-cally important property that can be mathematically expressed as afunction of the ﬂuxes. This property may vary depending on the envi-ronmental conditions. The computational problem then involves ﬁndingthe ﬂux distribution that achieves the desired maximum or minimum,regardless of the reaction parameters. Examples of biologically impor-tant optimizations include maximization of biomass formation (lead-ing to maximal cell growth rate), minimization of ATP production inmitochondria (leading to the eﬃcient use of energy), minimization ofnutrient uptake in chemostats (leading to the eﬃcient use of nutri-ents; see Box 4.2 for a description of the chemostat environment), andmaximization of production of a speciﬁc metabolite (this has diﬀerentinterpretations depending on the metabolite in question).How does one mathematically optimize a phenotypic property to in-


===== [29/72] chapter-29.html =====

112 Introduction to Biological Networksfer the steady-state ﬂuxes in a metabolic network? This is the subjectof metabolic ﬂux balance analysis (FBA), a topic that has been ex-tensively studied and written about, including a detailed exposition byPalsson (2006). Here, we focus on the main ideas that render such anoptimization problem feasible.The rate of change of concentration of each metabolite in a metabolicnetwork can be represented in the form of a simple ordinary diﬀerentialequation of the formdXidt= Vsyn− Vdeg− Vuse+ bi, (4.1)where Xiis the concentration of metabolite i; Vsynand Vdegare thetotal rates of synthesis and degradation of metabolite i, respectively;Vuseis the rate at which metabolite i is used or consumed for metabolicrequirements; and the last term biis the net rate of transport of metabo-lite i into the cell. This last term is only relevant for metabolites thatﬂow across the cell boundary. Each total rate Vsyn, Vdeg, and Vuseis,in turn, a linear combination of individual reaction ﬂuxes, so that ifwe collect together the concentrations of all metabolites into a singlevector X, the rate of change of X can b e written asdXdt= S · v + b, (4.2)where v is the set of individual reaction ﬂuxes and b is the vector oftransport rates to and from the extracellular medium. S is an m × nstoichiometry matrix, where m is the number of metabolites, and n isthe number of reactions. A brief discussion of the stoichiometry matrixdescription of chemical kinetics is given in Box 4.3.Note that a system of metabolic reactions incorporates genomic in-formation through the enzymes that catalyze each reaction. These en-zymes aﬀect the individual reaction ﬂuxes but not the overall stoi-chiometry matrix (see Box 4.3).It is usually convenient to redeﬁne the vector v of reaction ﬂuxes soas to include the transport rates b, and correspondingly augment thestoichiometry matrix appropriately (Box 4.3). This yieldsdXdt= S#· v#, (4.5)where v#includes all ﬂuxes, including those representing transportacross the cell boundary, and S#is the stoichiometry matrix augmentedMetabolic Networks and Genetic Interactions 113Box 4.3 Reaction ﬂuxes and the stoichiometry matrix.Consider the simple example of reversible protein dimerization, where twoprotein monomers bind to form a dimer. This chemical reaction can be rep-resented as2Akf!krB,where kfand krare the usual rate constants. The reversible reaction formallycorresponds to two reactions: the forward and reverse reactions, with ﬂuxesvf= kf[A]2and vr= kr[B],respectively. Thus, the rates of production of A and B are given byd[A]dt= −2vf+2vr,d[B]dt= vf− vr, (4.3)where the factor of 2 in the ﬁrst equation arises from the stoichiometry of Aand ensures that [A] + 2[B] always remains a conserved quantity, as it shouldbe. The two equations above can be written as a single equation in matrixform by deﬁning a vector of species concentrations X,astoichiometry matrixS and a vector of ﬂuxes v as follows:X =*[A][B]+, S =*−221 −1+, v =*vfvr+.Then, Equations (4.3) can be written as the single matrix equationdXdt= S · v, (4.4)where · denotes ordinary matrix multiplication. In general, S has m rowsand n columns, where m is the number of chemical species and n is thenumber of reactions. The elements of the stoichiometry matrix are simply thestoichiometric coeﬃcients of the various chemical species, augmented by a −sign if the corresponding reaction depletes the chemical species in question.It is noteworthy that even if the elementary reactions are not single-stepreactions and therefore do not obey mass action kinetics (such as reactionscatalyzed by enzymes), the mathematical expressions for the reaction ﬂuxeswill change but the stoichiometry matrix remains the same. If chemicals areexternally added to or removed from the system, there will be an additionalterm in Equation (4.4), as in Equation (4.2). This term can be treated as anadditional ﬂux, and the stoichiometry matrix can be suitably modiﬁed so thatthe full system can still be represented by an equation like Equation (4.4).In the context of our example, let us suppose that A is being added at aconstant rate b1. Then we augment v with an additional row with the entryb1and augment S with an additional column in which the entry in the rowcorresponding to A is 1 and that in the row corresponding to B is 0.114 Introduction to Biological Networksby an identity matrix. At steady state, deﬁned by the concentrationsof species being constant in time (dXi/dt = 0), we obtainS#· v#=0. (4.6)The above system represents m equations in n unknown ﬂuxes. Be-cause the number of metabolites is usually far less than the number ofreactions (each metabolite is expected to participate in more than onereaction on average), the set of ﬂuxes is underdetermined by the aboveequations. In order to determine the ﬂuxes, additional conditions musttherefore be imposed.First, we recognize that the space of solutions of Equation (4.6) is alinear subspace of the full ﬂux space; that is, if vaand vbare solutionsof Equation (4.6), then so is any linear combination of vaand vb. Thislinear subspace is called the null space of the augmented stoichiometrymatrix S#. The fact that any valid set of steady-state ﬂuxes must liein this null space corresponds to one set of constraints on the allowedﬂuxes.Other constraints on individual ﬂux values arise from the fact thateach ﬂux has a maximum value because enzymes cannot catalyze reac-tions at arbitrarily high speeds. Furthermore, for ﬂuxes correspondingto the transport of material within the cell, there are additional lim-itations arising due to bounds on transport rates. Similarly, each ﬂuxis expected to have a minimum value based on the expectation thatthe chemical species in question must be synthesized at some minimalrate (in computational models, this minimum rate can be set to zeroif its value cannot be estimated with reasonable accuracy from in vitrostudies or other measurements). These considerations lead to inequalityconstraints on the ﬂuxes of the typeα ≤ vi≤ β. (4.7)The set of inequality constraints on individual ﬂuxes (or on linear com-binations of individual ﬂuxes) leads to the allowed null space beingbounded. This so-called “capped” null space is schematically repre-sented in Figure 4.2. Every point inside the capped null space is anallowed steady-state solution, while the “caps” or boundaries arise be-cause of the imposed lower and upper limits on the individual ﬂuxes.Metabolic Networks and Genetic Interactions 115FIGURE 4.2: A schematic diagram of the capped null space of the stoi-chiometry matrix (the space of feasible ﬂux distributions) of a metabolic net-work [see, for example, Varma and Palsson (1994)]. The “caps” are the planesurfaces that enclose the gray region of allowed values for the ﬂuxes. Theseplanar caps correspond to inequality constraints [see the discussion leading toEquation (4.7)]. The point labeled as the “optimal solution” corresponds to aset of ﬂuxes that maximize some objective function. Such a point must lie onthe boundary of the capped null space rather than in the interior, as arguedin the text.4.1.2 Flux Balance Analysis: The Objective FunctionThe aim of FBA is to ﬁnd a particular steady-state solution (i.e., apoint inside the capped null space) that corresponds to optimization ofa biologically important property, as mentioned above. Such propertiesare mathematically termed objective functions of interest, and one ofthe most important objective functions is one that describes the rateof growth of the cell. At least in prokaryotes, it is reasonable to con-jecture that cells have evolved to maximize their growth rate. Becauseone of the functions of a metabolic network is to synthesize the entirebiomass composition of the organism, we can hope to ﬁnd the steady-state distribution of ﬂuxes in a metabolic network that maximize theproduction of biomass (and hence, its growth rate). This problem isbest addressed by introducing a new ﬂux vgrowthdescribing the conver-sion of certain important metabolites (called biosynthetic precursors)116 Introduction to Biological Networksinto biomass. This reaction can be represented as!mcmXmvgrowth−−−−→ biomass, (4.8)where the stoichiometric coeﬃcients cmspecify relative proportions ofvarious metab olites in biomass composition, and diﬀer across organ-isms and even across growth environments. Values of these coeﬃcientsare measured and documented for many organisms, for example thebacterium Escherichia coli, whose metabolic properties have been ex-tensively studied (Neidhardt et al., 1996). For other organisms, suchas Helicobacter pylori, the coeﬃcients of biomass compositions are notavailable because these organisms cannot be grown under deﬁned andcontrolled nutritional conditions.4.1.3 Optimization Problem in Flux Balance AnalysisIn summary, the optimization problem of interest consists of maximiz-ing one of the ﬂuxes (such as the growth ﬂux above) subject to theconstraints of a steady state and the inequality constraints correspond-ing to enzymatic capacity limitations. In other words, we wish to ﬁnda single point within the capped null space that corresponds to themaximum value of the growth ﬂux. Mathematically, this type of prob-lem is called a linear programming (LP) problem: it is characterized byan objective function that is a linear function of the variables (in thiscase, the variables are the ﬂuxes), and by constraints that are eitherlinear equality constraints [as in Equation (4.6)], or linear inequalityconstraints [the capacity constraints of Equation (4.7)].Consider a general linear programming problem where the objectivefunction is a linear combination of the ﬂuxes. Suppose (v1,v2,v3,...)represents a point in the interior of the capped null space, as shown inFigure 4.2. Let us assume that the value of the objective function at thisinterior point is positive. Because the objective function is linear in theﬂuxes, multiplication of every ﬂux by a common number that is largerthan 1 will result in the objective function being multiplied by the samefactor. Thus the objective function will increase in value. Therefore, itis always possible to increase the value of the objective function atan interior point of the capped null space by moving to a neighboringpoint where all the ﬂuxes are somewhat larger in magnitude. It followsthat the maximum value of the objective function cannot be attainedat an interior point of the capped null space, but rather at a boundary


===== [30/72] chapter-30.html =====

Metabolic Networks and Genetic Interactions 117point1, as illustrated in Figure 4.2.For example, Escherichia coli needs various metabolites in the rightproportion to grow biomass. Two of the most imp ortant metabolitesare ATP (adenosine triphosphate) and NADH (reduced form of nicoti-namide adenine dinucleotide). In order to increase E. coli biomass by1 gram, it turns out that 41.257 mmol ATP (as the molecular weightof ATP is 507.18 g/mol, this corresponds to 20.925 g ATP) must beadded to the growth medium, while 3.547 mmol NADH (correspondingto 2.353 g NADH) must be removed from the growth medium. Variousother metabolites must also be added in the right proportions to eﬀectthe 1-g biomass increase, but for now let us assume a simplistic modelwhere just the two metabolites ATP and NADH need to be altered. Inthis simplistic model, the growth objective function isZ = 41.257 vATP− 3.547 vNADH. (4.9)It is clear that the above function attains its maximum value when theﬂux vATPtakes its maximum allowed value subject to the constraintsthat we have discussed and when the ﬂux vNADHtakes its minimumallowed value subject to the constraints. These maximum and minimumﬂux values are obviously attained at a boundary point of the cappednull space.The simple arguments above show that solutions to linear program-ming problems always lie at the boundaries or edges of the feasiblespace. The aim of ﬂux balance analysis is to ﬁnd the boundary pointscorresponding to steady-state ﬂuxes that maximize biomass produc-tion. Remarkably, these ﬂuxes reproduce many of the essential featuresof metabolism in prokaryotes, indicating that, to reasonable approxi-mation, prokaryotes have indeed evolved to maximize cell growth.Given a linear objective function and a set of inequality constraints onthe ﬂuxes, a simple way to computationally implement linear program-ming for a large metabolic network, and thus to optimize the objectivefunction, is via the use of the COBRA software (Becker et al., 2007;Orth et al., 2010).4.1.4 FBA Enables the Genotype–Phenotype ConnectionThe FBA paradigm is a way of incorporating genomic information (e.g.,expression levels of metabolic enzymes) into the prediction of pheno-1If the objective function at an interior point is negative, then it can be increasedby multiplying all ﬂuxes by a factor less than 1, and a similar ar gument applies.118 Introduction to Biological Networkstypical behavior, for example, the rate of biomass formation or cellgrowth. It follows that this paradigm may be used to predict pheno-typical changes that occur as a result of perturbations to the genotype.These perturbations can be carried out on the computer in variousways. Here are some scenarios.• The eﬀect of knockout of a metabolic gene may be simulatedby setting the ﬂux of the reaction that the corresponding en-zyme catalyzes to zero. This constraint can be incorporated intothe linear programming problem and the resulting change in therate of biomass formation computed. More accurate predictions ofphenotypical change are possible if the MOMA (minimization ofmetabolic adjustment) procedure (discussed in the next section)is used as an alternative to FBA.• By altering the lower and upper bounds on the speed of certainreactions, one can study the genotype-phenotype connection un-der various conditions.• Equality constraints can be handled in the linear programmingframework as special cases of inequality contraints correspondingto setting the lower and upper bounds equal to each other. Thisis useful because one can study the behavior of metabolic net-works under conditions where one or more ﬂuxes are held ﬁxed.This can even happen in a dynamic fashion. For example, if theﬂux through a certain reaction is repressed for a certain periodof time because of transcriptional regulation of the associatedenzyme during that time interval, this can be represented by set-ting the corresponding ﬂux to a small value that is constant overthe time interval (Covert et al., 2001). The optimization problemthen must be re-solved every time the constraint changes.• The sensitivity of phenotypic changes to individual reaction ﬂuxescan be found by changing each ﬂux by a small amount in a con-trolled fashion and measuring the corresponding change in phe-notype.Metabolic Networks and Genetic Interactions 1194.2 Minimization of Metabolic Adjustment and GeneDeletionsAs we have outlined, one of the central tenets of the FBA paradigmis that the natural ﬂux distribution corresponds to the optimal solu-tion of some objective function that is linear in the ﬂuxes. Typically,this function is the growth rate of the organism, as it is reasonableto hyp othesize—at least for simple unicellular organisms—that the or-ganism has evolved toward maximal growth performance. While thisassumption has been shown to (quite remarkably!) hold for wild-typeprokaryotes, the situation for organisms that suﬀer gene knockouts isfar from clear. It is not necessary that these artiﬁcially engineered mu-tants must also optimize their growth rate as they do not correspondto naturally evolving populations. Thus, results obtained from the ap-plication of the FBA principle to metabolic network models in which agene knockout has been incorporated must be considered suspect.For computing ﬂux distributions for organisms that undergo geneknockouts, Segr´e et al. (2002) developed the principle of the minimiza-tion of metab olic adjustment (MOMA) as an alternative hypothesis toFBA. Recall that a set of metabolic reaction ﬂuxes, or ﬂux distribu-tion, can be represented as a point in the capped null space. In MOMA,one assumes that the ﬂux distribution that is realized following one ormore gene knockouts is closest, or has the shortest distance, to thepoint corresponding to the wild-type ﬂux distribution in the cappednull space, rather than being a point that is optimal for a phenotypicproperty such as growth rate (as FBA assumes). Thus the central as-sumption of MOMA is that a gene deletion shifts the ﬂux distributionfrom the optimal one to the closest realizable ﬂux distribution. Thisclosest distribution is generally diﬀerent from the original optimal onebecause the optimal distribution may no longer be realizable under theadditional constraint corresponding to deletion of the gene in question.Because distance between two ﬂux distributions is related toaquadratic function of the ﬂuxes, mathematically the problem of ﬁndingthe new ﬂux distribution after gene deletion is a quadratic program-ming problem rather than a linear programming one. The resulting“sub-optimal” distribution of ﬂuxes is generally quite diﬀerent fromthe one obtained by application of FBA and, in particular, has diﬀer-ent phenotypical implications. Segr´e et al. found that MOMA repro-duces the true state of the “knocked-out” organism more accurately120 Introduction to Biological Networksthan FBA (Figure 4.3.)Having studied how the eﬀects of single-gene knockouts can be com-putationally simulated, we now turn to the question of the eﬀect ofdouble-gene knockouts, that is, genetic interactions. As we have seenearlier, genetic interactions directly relate physical interactions withtheir phenotypic consequences. For example, as we shall ﬁnd out ingreater detail in Chapter 9, the identiﬁcation of synthetic lethal ge-netic interactions can be directly translated to the discovery of noveltherapeutic targets or treatment regimens. The idea of using genetic in-teractions for therapeutic purposes has turned out to be quite promis-ing. In certain types of cancers, two simultaneous mutations in themajor DNA repair pathways make the cancer cells exquisitely depen-dent on a normally minor repair pathway (Figure 4.4). These cancercells then could be precisely targeted by a combination treatment thatsimultaneously causes DNA damage by general chemotherapy and atargeted drug that abrogates the minor DNA repair pathway. Becausenon-cancer cells do not depend on the minor repair pathway to maintainthe integrity of their genomes, only the cancer cells are highly suscep-tible. Note that the particular relationship among the three pathwaysis formally equivalent to that shown in the asynthetic genetic interac-tion panel of Figure 2.2. The allele states of the various genes in thethree pathways can be ascertained by DNA sequencing of the cancercells of the particular patient. Targeted therapy in combination withthe DNA damaging agent is used against the minor pathway only ifmutations in the two major pathways exist in the cancer cells but notin the healthy cells. This approach to cancer chemotherapy thereforeuses patient-speciﬁc gene network based knowledge, and is an exam-ple of personalized therapy. It is anticipated that such knowledge willincreasingly become important in personalized medicine and targetedtherapy in human diseases.4.3 Predicting Genetic Interactions among MetabolicGenesAs we have seen, FBA and MOMA are two methods, built up on thesame conceptual foundation, that attempt to computationally simulatethe eﬀects of genetic perturbations on phenotype. Although the MOMAmethod more accurately captures the eﬀect of single gene deletions, inMetabolic Networks and Genetic Interactions 121FIGURE 4.3: Comparison of growth yield as calculated by MOMA (y-axis)with that calculated by FBA (x-axis) for Escherichia coli mutants in whichindividual genes are deleted. Each point is labeled by the deleted gene, and(+) and (–) correspond to genes that are nonessential and essential, respec-tively. Essential gene knockouts should correctly lead to zero growth. In bothaxes, growth yields are normalized by their wild-type values. Thus, ujg roandνjg roare the growth yields of the mutant as predicted by MOMA and FBA,respectively, while νWTg rois the wild-type growth yield as predicted by FBA.As expected from the sub-optimality of the MOMA procedure, all points liebelow the diagonal because the MOMA-predicted growth rate is less thanthe FBA-predicted one. Points on the lower left-hand corner denote lethaldeletions identiﬁed correctly by both FBA and MOMA. Points on the top-right corner denote nonessential deletions that are also correctly identiﬁed byboth procedures. In other cases, predictions of the two procedures disagree,with MOMA being more accurate on average: three essential genes are cor-rectly identiﬁed by MOMA but not by FBA, while no nonessential gene wasincorrectly identiﬁed by either FBA or MOMA (although some nonessentialgenes, like nuoA, were predicted to have low growth rates by MOMA butnot by FBA). Reproduced with permission from Segr´e et al. (2002). [c+2002.National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A.]


===== [31/72] chapter-31.html =====

122 Introduction to Biological NetworksDNA damageABCDEFRepair of DNAXYZDNA damageABCDEFRepair of DNAZXX--Healthy CellsCancer CellsDNA damageABCDEFCell death due to failure of repairZXX--Cancer CellsGeneral chemotherapy agentTargetedchemotherapyagentXFIGURE 4.4: A rationale for personalized and targeted chemotherapy basedon genetic interaction data. Healthy cells repair their damaged DNA throughone or both of two major pathways: A-X-B and C-Y-D. A minor pathway,E-Z-F, also exists. In some cancer cells, DNA sequencing of the repair geneshas shown that the repair genes X and Y might both be mutated, such thatthe normally minor pathway, E-Z-F, becomes the only available pathway ofDNA repair in these cancer cells. This minor pathway can then be targetedfor chemotherapeutic blockade. However, the healthy cells of the patient arenot hypersensitive, because the major pathways of DNA repair, A-X-B andC-Y-D, are still functional in these cells.Metabolic Networks and Genetic Interactions 123this section we return to traditional FBA as a tool for analyzing theeﬀects of multiple gene deletions because it simpler in implementation.There is no conceptual barrier to replacing the FBA-based formulationoutlined below by a MOMA-based formulation.In FBA, the phenotypic eﬀect of a knockout can be monitored bydeﬁning a “ﬁtness” function that measures the rate of biomass produc-tion in the mutant organism relative to that in the wild-type organism.That is, if ∆X denotes the “knockout of gene/enzyme X” and Vgrowthis the optimized rate of biomass production, then the ﬁtness WXof amutant organism in which gene X has been deleted is given byWX=V∆XgrowthVwild-typegrowth. (4.10)Note that in this framework the ﬁtness of the wild-type organism is 1,by deﬁnition.It is important to observe that the eﬀect of a gene knockout or dele-tion cannot simply be modeled by setting the appropriate ﬂux to zerowithout changing any of the other ﬂuxes. On the contrary, setting oneof the ﬂuxes to zero is an additional constraint on the linear program-ming problem, which must now be solved anew, generally resulting ina completely diﬀerent set of ﬂuxes. It is true, however, that the spaceof ﬂuxes that must now be searched to ﬁnd the optimal solution is asubspace of the original search space, and therefore the optimal rateof biomass production as found in the presence of the additional con-straint can be no higher than the optimal rate in the absence of thatconstraint. In other words, V∆Xgrowth≤ Vwild-typegrowth, and therefore WX≤ 1.If we similarly deﬁne WXYas the ﬁtness (ratio of optimal growth rates)of the organism in which both genes X and Y have been deleted, thena similar line of reasoning implies that WXY≤ WXand WXY≤ WY.This argument further establishes that, within the FBA framework,the ﬁtness of triple mutants can be no higher than that of their parentdouble mutants, and so on. Thus, all mutations in the FBA frameworkare either neutral (i.e., do not change ﬁtness) or deleterious (i.e., de-crease ﬁtness). This phenomenon is of course an artifact of the FBAapproximation: namely, the assumption that the organism (whetherwild-type or mutant) lives in a state of optimality with respect to itsrate of biomass production. This assumption cannot be expected to betrue in nature; living organisms do not generally exist in a state of per-fectly optimal growth, thus leaving room for rare, beneﬁcial mutations124 Introduction to Biological Networksthat increase ﬁtness. Further, additional mutations that “hitchhike”on deleterious mutations can sometimes prove beneﬁcial relative to thewild-type. None of these eﬀects are accounted for in the approximateFBA framework, although they are, to some extent, accounted for inthe MOMA framework. Even so, the simplicity of the FBA frameworkand the relative rarity of beneﬁcial mutations encourage us to considerseriously its predictions.4.3.1 Computational Simulation of Mutation EﬀectsSegr´e et al. (2005) studied the computationally simulated eﬀects of sin-gle and double gene deletions of 890 metabolic genes in Saccharomycescerevisiae using the framework of FBA and the ﬁtness function de-ﬁned above. It is customary in the population genetics literature touse the term “epistasis” to mean any genetic interaction. This usage isin contrast to the terminology used elsewhere in this book (and in themolecular biology literature), where epistatic interactions constitute aspeciﬁc type of genetic interaction. For clarity and consistency, when-ever we wish to speak of a generic genetic interaction, we will thereforeuse the term “inﬂuence” instead of “epistasis.” Thus, if the ﬁtness of amutant organism in which two genes are deleted is not the product ofthe ﬁtnesses of the two single mutant organisms, we will say that thetwo genes genetically interact or inﬂuence each other. The amount ofinﬂuence can be quantiﬁed by (Collins et al., 2006)% = WXY− WXWY. (4.11)Non-zero values of % simply imply a genetic interaction between genesX and Y , while % = 0 corresponds to lack of genetic interaction (a“noninteractive” case according to the terminology in Table 2.3 andFigure 2.2), or multiplicative inﬂuence. This terminology stems fromthe fact that the independent ﬁtness eﬀects of the two single-mutantsare multiplied in the above measure; additive measures of inﬂuence arealso possible, as discussed in Chapter 2, and so are statistical measureswhere the eﬀect of a speciﬁc double gene deletion is compared to theaverage eﬀect of an ensemble of double gene deletions. For detailedexpositions of quantitative measures of genetic inﬂuence, the reader isdirected to the work of Cordell (2002) as well as further work by Snitkinand Segr´e (2011).The case %> 0 corresponds to a genetic interaction of the buﬀeringtype, an extreme example being the case where WXYtakes its largestMetabolic Networks and Genetic Interactions 125FIGURE 4.5: A schematic metabolic network showing buﬀering (dashedblack curve), aggravating (dotted black curve), and multiplicative (solid blackcurve) genetic interactions. The network represents conversion of a commonnutrient (empty rectangle) to a series of intermediate metabolites (empty cir-cles) to amino acids and nucleotides (ﬁlled circles) to biomass (ﬁlled rectangle).Deletions of metabolic genes are marked by crosses (“x”) placed on metabolicnetwork edges (thin gray arrows) that signify reactions mediated by enzymescorresponding to the metabolic genes. Each genetic interaction is uncoveredby the phenotype corresponding to the deletion of both members of a pairof metabolic genes. Note that the arrows at the very top and bottom of theﬁgure correspond to metabolic conversions that will not lead to production ofbiomass. Adapted from Segr´e et al. (2005).allowed value, namely min(WX,WY) (the argument at the beginningof this section shows that no larger value is possible). In this extremesituation, one mutation completely buﬀers the eﬀect of the other, lessdeleterious mutation.The case %< 0 corresponds to a genetic interaction of the aggravat-ing type, with an extreme example being that of the synthetic lethalinteractions, where WXY= 0, WX= WY= 1, and % = −1. Figure 4.5schematically displays the kinds of metabolic enzyme knockouts thatare likely to result in multiplicative, buﬀering, and aggravating interac-tions. Note that aggravating and buﬀering interactions lie outside thescope of the interactions covered in Table 2.3.Because the FBA model does not admit beneﬁcial mutations, it turns126 Introduction to Biological Networksout that % has both upper and lower bounds, as discussed above. Itsminimum possible value is −1, corresponding to synthetic lethal in-teractions, and its maximum possible value is obtained for perfectlybuﬀering interactions. It is therefore convenient to deﬁne a rescaledinﬂuence measure as follows:˜% =WXY− WXWY|˜WXY− WXWY|, (4.12)where˜WXY= min(WX,WY) if WXY>WXWY, and˜WXY= 0 ifWXY≤ WXWY. With this rescaling, ˜% = −1 for synthetic lethal in-teractions and ˜% = 1 for perfectly buﬀering interactions. After exclud-ing essential metabolic genes and gene pairs for which neither singlenor double knockouts have phenotypic eﬀects, Segr´e et al. found thatthe rescaled inﬂuence measure exhibits a sharply tri-modal disribution,with about 600 gene pairs displaying multiplicative inﬂuence (equiv-alent to no inﬂuence, ˜% = 0), about 200 gene pairs predicted to havesynthetic lethal interactions, and about 100 gene pairs predicted tobe nearly perfectly buﬀering. Remarkably, very few gene pairs are pre-dicted to have inﬂuence values that are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from thesethree extremes, a phenomenon that is consistent with limited experi-mental measurements of the ﬁtness of RNA viruses. Thus, the inﬂuenceeﬀects of all gene pairs in baker’s yeast were classiﬁed as buﬀering, ag-gravating, or multiplicative.Segr´e et al. also found that when genes were clustered into functionalcategories based on the metabolic process they participated in, the setof genetic interactions between all genes in one functional class andall genes in another functional class were predominantly “monochro-matic,” that is, they were either all aggravating or all buﬀering (thiswas found to be true even for all genetic interactions within the samefunctional class), with few exceptions (Figure 4.6). This second pre-diction is consistent with the picture of a gene being deﬁned mainlyby its functional role. Indeed, it was found that the exceptional non-monochromaticity is more prevalent among genes that belong to morethan one functional category.Remarkably, the feature of monochromaticity of genetic interactionssurvives even when the computational study of the eﬀects of dou-ble gene deletions is analyzed with respect to phenotypes other thanbiomass production or cell growth. Snitkin and Segr´e (2011) consid-ered the eﬀects of these deletions on 80 diﬀerent metabolic phenotypes(here MOMA, rather than optimization of biomass growth, was used


===== [32/72] chapter-32.html =====

Metabolic Networks and Genetic Interactions 127FIGURE 4.6: Monochromaticity of genetic interactions predicted by theFBA model. As in the previous ﬁgure, dotted and dashed lines representaggravating and buﬀering genetic interactions, resp ectively. Nodes representgenes; genes that belong to the same functional class are displayed within thesame box. Monochromaticity refers to the situation in which genetic interac-tions between genes in diﬀerent functional classes (diﬀerent boxes) are eitherall aggravating or all buﬀering (or nearly so), although interactions within afunctional class can be either aggravating or buﬀering.to calculate the modiﬁed ﬂuxes), and found that genetic interactionsbetween pairs of biological processes, for all phenotypes taken together,were mostly all aggravating or all buﬀering, although gene pairs ofteninteract in an aggravating manner relative to some phenotypes andbuﬀering with respect to others (Figure 4.7).4.4 General Methods for Predicting Genetic Interac-tionsAs we have seen, the FBA and MOMA methods are valuable intheir ability to computationally simulate the phenotypic eﬀects of geneknockouts and hence predict genetic interactions. However, they arelimited by the fact that only metabolic gene knockouts can be sim-ulated for examining their potential phenotypic eﬀects. Because the128 Introduction to Biological NetworksFIGURE 4.7: Persistence of monochromaticity of genetic interactions acrossmultiple phenotypes, as predicted by the MOMA model. Synergistic interac-tions are generalizations of the aggravating interactions for multiple pheno-types, while antagonistic interactions broadly refer to the buﬀering interac-tions. For each pair of biological processes, the fraction of phenotypes relativeto which interactions can be either synergistic or antagonistic (i.e., mixed) isrelatively low. Adapted with permission from Snitkin and Segr´e (2011).majority of genes in an organism do not code for metabolic enzymes,these approaches are not feasible for discovering genetic interactionsamong the majority of genes in an organism.To computationally discover gene interactions in a more general con-text, an indirect approach is necessary. Speciﬁcally, one looks for geneproperties, called features, that correlate with the presence of geneticinteraction, and uses the presence or absence of these properties topredict whether a genetic interaction is likely between the two genes inquestion. This prediction task is all the more challenging because of thesparsity of genetic interaction networks. For example, in yeast it is esti-mated that, roughly speaking, only one in ﬁfty gene pairs will partakeMetabolic Networks and Genetic Interactions 129in a synthetic sick or lethal (SSL) genetic interaction.2Accurate predic-tion of such sparse networks requires extremely low false positive rates(Box 4.4). Controlling false positive rates in a computational methoddesigned to predict these networks then requires that each predicted in-teraction have multiple sources of evidence, or multiple features. Someof the features found to be predictive of SSL interactions are shown inTable 4.1.Because synthetic lethality is expected to be more prevalent amongpairs of genes that have functional redundancy, many of the propertiesin Table 4.1 measure functional redundancy in diﬀerent ways, and arerelated to the properties used to predict protein-protein interactions(which are also more prevalent among functionally similar proteins).Direct evidence for functional similarity [similar functional classiﬁca-tions according to the Gene Ontology (GO) or the Munich Informa-tion center for Protein Sequences (MIPS), similar structural role orenzymatic activity, similar phenotype of knockout mutant] is expectedwithin synthetic lethal pairs.Indirect evidence for functional similarity may also be important forpredicting genetic interaction. For example, if the genes “co-occur” inthe same set of organisms, that indicates the operation of an evolu-tionary constraint that requires both genes to be present if any one is,and hence indicates a putative functional relationship. If the proteinproducts have direct physical interaction, participate in the same pro-tein complex, are homologous, and/or localized, that too is indicativeof similar function and therefore higher propensity for synthetic lethalinteraction. However, some properties that do not obviously correlatewith functional similarity, such as mutual clustering coeﬃcient, pro-tein interaction network position, and 2hop properties, need furtherclariﬁcation.The mutual clustering coeﬃcient is a mathematical measure of theextent to which two genes share a common set of interaction partners.The larger this measure, the more likely it is for the two genes to in-teract with each other. This coeﬃcient can be deﬁned in various ways[see Goldberg and Roth (2003) for a summary of deﬁnitions of thismeasure]. The “positions” of the products of the two genes in a protein2Synthetic sick interactions are milder versions of synthetic lethal interactions: whilea synthetic lethal interaction between two genes will result in cell death when bothgenes are knocked out, a synthetic sick interaction will only result in a lower rate ofcell growth under the same conditions.130 Introduction to Biological NetworksBox 4.4 False positive rate and accuracy in the prediction ofsparse networks.Suppose a computational method is designed to address the binary classi-ﬁcation problem, which is the problem of predicting the correct class outof two possible classes that each datum may belong to. It is customary tocall one class the positive (+) class and the other class the negative (−)class. An example that is of direct interest for our purposes is the problemof predicting whether a pair of genes interacts (+) or does not interact (−),which is a binary classiﬁcation problem. One measure of prediction error inbinary classiﬁcation problems is the false positive rate (FPR), which is theproportion of true negatives in the data that are incorrectly predicted to bepositive. Similarly, one can also deﬁne a false negative rate (FNR), whichis the proportion of true positives that are incorrectly predicted to be negative.Now let us suppose that we are trying to predict interactions between genes,and that these interactions in reality form a very sparse network, that is, thenumber of true positives is much smaller than the number of true negatives.For concreteness, we will assume a sparseness of one positive for every ﬁftynegatives, which is comparable to the true sparseness of the SSL networkin yeast. Furthermore, let us imagine that our prediction method is quiteaccurate and achieves an FNR of 0% and an FPR of 1%, that is, all truepositives are correctly identiﬁed and only 1 in every 100 true negatives areincorrectly predicted to be positive. However, because of the sparseness, thereare only 2 true positives for every 100 negatives. Our “accurate” predictionmethod will therefore predict 3 positives for every 100 negatives: it willcorrectly predict the 2 true positives and will additionally, and incorrectly,predict 1 false positive. Thus, this prediction method will predict 50% moreinteractions than actually exist, making it a very poor prediction method inspite of having zero FNR and low FPR. The catch here is to recognize thatgood accuracy in network prediction is only possible if the FPR is far lowerthan the sparseness level.The above considerations can b e formalized into the deﬁnitions of diﬀerentmeasures of accuracy, namely the positive and negative predictive values (PPVand NPV, respectively). The PPV is the proportion of predicted positives thatare true positives, and the NPV is the proportion of predicted negatives thatare true negatives. In the above example, while the NPV is 100%, the PPV is66.7% because only two of every three predicted positives are true positives. Ingeneral, the relationship between PPV, NPV, FNR, FPR, and the sparsenesscan be expressed using Bayes’ rule asPPV =s (1 − F N R)s (1 − F N R)+FPR,NP V =1 − FPR1 − FPR+ s FN R,where the sparseness s is the ratio of true positives to true negatives.Metabolic Networks and Genetic Interactions 131TABLE 4.1: Features that Correlate with the Presence ofSSL Interaction between Two GenesPresence of a common transcription factor that binds to anupstream region (common upstream regulator)Occurrence of the two genes or their homologs in the sameset of organisms (gene co-occurrence)Within-genome chromosomal distance (for prokaryotes)Fusion of orthologous genes in another genome(gene fusion)Chromosomal proximity of orthologous genes in other species(conserved gene neighborhood)Protein-protein interaction between the gene products(direct and network position)Same predicted physical complexmRNA co-expressionSimilarity of biological functions of the protein products(including similarity of biochemical activity and structural role)Similarity of phenotype of knockout mutantsProtein sequence homologyMutual clustering coeﬃcientSame subcellular localization2hop properties (see Section 4.4.1)Source: Wong et al. (2004).interaction network can also be quantiﬁed in various ways, includingthe shortest distance between the two proteins along the network, theirdegrees, their betweenness centralities, and so on [see Paladugu et al.(2008) for a summary of diﬀerent measures of network p osition]. Wenow focus on describing the 2hop prop erties, as these appear to corre-late very well with the presence of an SSL interaction.4.4.1 “2hop” Properties and Genetic InteractionsA “2hop” property of a pair of genes A and B is one that dependson the existence of a third gene, C, that is related, possibly in severaldiﬀerent ways, to A and B. For example, it may be known that A andC have an SSL interaction, and so do B and C. Then we say that the“2hop S-S” property for the A-B pair has the value 1. If no such geneC existed, we would say that the 2hop S-S property has the value 0for the A-B pair. Figure 4.8 shows an example where the 2hop H-Pproperty for the A-B pair equals 1.


===== [33/72] chapter-33.html =====

132 Introduction to Biological NetworksFIGURE 4.8: Illustration of 2hop properties as indicators of the presenceof SSL interactions between genes A and B. In the example shown, C hasa protein-protein interaction with A and protein sequence homology with B,thus yielding 2hop H-P = 1 for the A-B pair. Other 2hop properties may beconstructed using any two features from the list shown on the right. Adaptedwith permission from Wong et al. (2004).The question that arises is: Given that a 2hop property equals 1 forthe A-B pair, does that enhance the likelihood that an SSL interactionexists between genes A and B?Wong et al. (2004), who introduced 2hop properties for the problemof predicting SSL interactions, answered this question in the aﬃrma-tive for the 2hop properties generated by the ﬁve properties shownin Figure 4.8. Speciﬁcally, they found that 2hop P-S, 2hop S-S, and2hop S-X are the 2hop properties that are most predictive of an SSLinteraction between A and B. The fact that 2hop S-S is a strong indica-tor of SSL interaction is plausible given the preponderance of trianglesin the known SSL network of yeast: the “functional redundancy” in-terpretation of SSL interactions suggests that if A and C have an SSLinteraction, and so do B and C, then there is a relatively high likelihoodof SSL interaction between A and B.Similar arguments reinforce the value of other 2hop properties forSSL prediction: every property used to construct a 2hop property is anindicator of some aspect of functional redundancy.Metabolic Networks and Genetic Interactions 1334.4.2 Predicting Genetic Interactions from Protein Interac-tion NetworksIn the protein interaction networks of yeast, and some other organisms,it is well known that the degree, or numb er of interacting partners, ofa protein, is well correlated with the essentiality of the correspondinggene for the organism’s survival. By analogy, because existence of anSSL interaction between a pair of genes is indicative of the joint essen-tiality of the gene pair, it is plausible that network properties of both ofthe corresponding proteins, for example their degrees, correlates withexistence of SSL interaction.Paladugu et al. (2008) examined this question in yeast by studyingthe predictive value of a number of protein interaction network prop-erties of the two proteins in question for SSL interaction between thetwo corresponding genes. It turns out, at least in yeast, that proteininteraction network properties, especially in combination with 2hop S-Sand 2hop S-P, are strongly and robustly predictive of SSL interaction(Figure 4.9). In fact, Paladugu et al. also found that novel predictedSSL pairs in yeast were highly likely to possess functional similarity andcommon upstream regulators, even though functional and regulatoryinformation was not used in their method for SSL prediction.4.5 Approaches for Integrated Prediction of NetworksNetwork data are most meaningful when they are combined with othertypes of high-throughput data, such as sequence data, gene expression,protein expression, protein localization, evolutionary data, phylogeneticanalysis, and functional data. We have already seen data integration atwork at various points so far. Examples include the use of gene expres-sion data to infer regulatory interactions; the use of structural features,gene neighborhood analysis, gene fusion, and evolutionary informationto infer protein-protein interactions (in this context, we also discussedin Chapter 3 the integration of data using Bayesian networks); theuse of metabolic networks to infer the eﬀects of gene deletions and ge-netic interactions; and integration of data from various high-throughputsources to infer synthetic genetic interactions.An example of massive data integration, one that perhaps points theway toward much of the future work in computational network biology,is provided by the development of an integrated framework to simulta-134 Introduction to Biological NetworksFIGURE 4.9: Accuracy of predicting SSL interaction among two genes fromprotein interaction network properties of the two corresponding proteins, andfrom 2hop properties. The y-axis is the proportion of SSL interactions thatare correctly recovered at a certain prediction threshold (true positive rate),and the x-axis is the proportion of non-SSL interactions that are incorrectlypredicted to be SSL at that prediction threshold (false positive rate). Thesecurves are called Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves because oftheir origins in signal processing, a branch of electrical engineering. The areaunder an ROC curve is a measure of the overall accuracy of the predictionmethod. Here, the area under the curve that includes both 2hop features isabout 0.9, indicating a roughly 90% average accuracy for the prediction of SSLinteractions from protein interaction network properties and 2hop properties.Reproduced with permission from Paladugu et al. (2008).neously predict diﬀerent types of networks from a compendium of datasources, including information gathered from existing networks (Parket al., 2010). Such a framework integrates the predicted data in additionto the input data and is potentially very powerful because it allows theunbiased simultaneous analysis of diﬀerent types of interaction, eachtype having been predicted using the same computational method andsharing similar error rates.Here is a brief sketch of the prediction framework of Park et al.Metabolic Networks and Genetic Interactions 135that skims over many of the mathematical and computational details.First, an ontology of thirty diﬀerent biomolecular interaction typeswas created by combining information from a number of post-genomicdatabases. In this ontology, certain interaction types depend on others.The thirty interaction types and the dependency relationships amongthem are shown in Figure 4.10. Each interaction type was indepen-dently predicted for each pair of genes in yeast by integrating datafrom about 3,500 experimental conditions involving expression, co-localization, regulation, and so on, with the caveat that data directlypertaining to a given network type were withheld from prediction ofthat type. For each gene pair, the propensities for each interactiontype obtained from the prediction task are represented as scores Yi,i =1, . . . , 30. Suppose the true interaction label for the gene pair inquestion is represented by the binary score Xi, where Xi= 0 if the twogenes do not possess interaction i, and Xi= 1 if they do. From train-ing data, the probability distribution P (Yi| Xi) can be estimated. Thisdistribution is simply a measure of the error in predicting interactioni.The next step is to integrate prediction of the diﬀerent interac-tion types so that they are consistent with each other and consis-tent with existing data. This step uses the dependency informationshown in Figure 4.10 and existing network data. Thus, if interactioni in Figure 4.10 has child interactions j, k, l, the conditional probabil-ity P (Xi| Xj,Xk,Xl) is found by querying existing network data. Forexample, P (Xi=1| Xj=0,Xk=1,Xl= 1) is estimated as theproportion of gene pairs that possess interactions k and l but do notpossess interaction j, that possess interaction i. All this information cannow be integrated to ﬁnd the probability that the gene pair in questionpossesses interaction i. Denoting the set of child interactions of inter-action i in the ontology tree by Ci, this probability can be expressedasP (Xi| Yi,Ci) ∝ P (Yi| Xi,Ci) P (Xi| Ci),= P (Yi| Xi) P (Xi| Ci), (4.13)where the second equality follows because the predicted propensity Yiis not dependent on the existence of child interactions. Both P (Yi| Xi)and P (Xi| Ci) can be estimated from training data as outlined ab ove,and these estimates are combined to yield P (Xi| Yi,Ci), which repre-sents a modiﬁed, probabilistic score for the existence of interaction i.136 Introduction to Biological NetworksFIGURE 4.10: A tree representing the ontology of interactions. Each nodein the ontology is shaded according to the independent accuracy in predictingthat interaction, as quantiﬁed by the area under an ROC curve (denoted byAUC). Reproduced with permission from Park et al. (2010).It turns out that this modiﬁed score is more accurate than the score Yiobtained without consideration of the dependencies between various in-teraction types, and this is true for every interaction type studied (Parket al., 2010). The integrated database consisting of thirty interactomescan also be mined to reveal new and interesting predicted biologicalmechanisms.As a case in point, Park et al. (2010) discovered a higher-order re-lationship between diﬀerent components of the protein-sorting appara-tus. Proteins are synthesized within the cytoplasm and are often en-veloped within special membranous compartments (the protein cargo)from which diﬀerent classes of proteins are sorted and transported todiﬀerent intracellular compartments, such as the Golgi apparatus, vac-uoles, plasma membrane, endoplasmic reticulum, nucleus, and so on.The heterogeneous information integration strategy led to the predic-tion of several genetic interactions among components that were knownto occur within separate compartments. Thus the predictions provided


===== [34/72] chapter-34.html =====

Metabolic Networks and Genetic Interactions 137hypotheses that, if tested, could provide novel information on how cer-tain components could also function across compartments rather thanonly within compartments. Several of these predictions were validated;thus, a more integrated understanding of protein-sorting mechanismsemerged (Park et al., 2010).


===== [35/72] chapter-35.html =====

Chapter 5Testing Inferred NetworksIn this chapter we discuss ways in which inferred networks can be testedfor their validity. The tests we consider fall into two broad categories:direct tests of experimentally or computationally inferred networks viafurther experiments or via confrontation with other data sources—thesesources include other networks, expression data, and functional data—and indirect tests of the predictions of the network model. An exampleof an indirect test is the usage of a protein interaction network to pre-dict protein complexes, whose occurrence in vivo can be independentlyveriﬁed.There is necessarily some overlap between the examples discussedhere and those discussed in Chapters 3 and 4 on inferring the net-works themselves, because it often occurs that the process of validat-ing the predictions of a network model leads to reﬁnement of the net-work model. This is what happens, for example, when diﬀerent high-throughput datasets are combined to yield a more accurate network.Furthermore, predictions of one type of network mo del could well con-stitute another type of network model. For example, in the previouschapter we outlined how a protein interaction network could be usedto predict a genetic interaction network. This prediction task could beviewed either as inference of the genetic network model or, if the pre-dicted genetic network can be indep endently veriﬁed, as a test of theunderlying protein interaction network model.5.1 Co-expression as a Test of Physical InteractionPerhaps the simplest systematic tests of large protein-protein inter-action networks involve testing for co-expression of their correspond-ing genes or demonstrating that the two proteins are localized in thesame intracellular compartment. It is usually not practically feasible toexperimentally test co-expression and/or co-localization of every in-139140 Introduction to Biological Networksteracting pair of proteins in a protein-protein interaction network. Oneway around this problem is to examine large datasets of gene expressionfor evidence of correlated expression across many diﬀerent conditions.The assumption here is that gene expression deﬁned in terms ofmRNA levels positively correlates with protein expression (or proteinabundance). Calculation of Pearson correlation coeﬃcients of normal-ized expression levels of every pair of genes encoding the correspondingproteins across multiple conditions then estimates the likelihood thattheir encoded protein products do in fact physically interact. Experi-mental evidence indeed shows that genes encoding proteins that func-tion in the same multi-protein complexes are often expressed at similarlevels (Papp et al., 2003). In fact, as we discussed in Chapter 3, oneof the strongest predictors of protein-protein interaction edges appearsto be co-expression of their genes. It is therefore only natural that co-expression data are used to validate protein-protein interactions if thesedata are not used to generate the networks in the ﬁrst place.It is important to normalize the expression levels of genes acrossdiﬀerent experiments because otherwise systematic but spurious highpositive or negative correlations might occur among mRNA levels ex-pressed unevenly across experiments. In reality, mRNA expression lev-els only partially correlate with protein expression levels. It is obviouslymore useful to test protein-protein interaction networks by examin-ing correlated expression levels of the proteins themselves. However,technical diﬃculties of measuring thousands of diﬀerent proteins underhundreds of conditions have so far prohibited implementation of thistest in all but the smallest of interaction networks. Improvements inproteomics technologies are expected to signiﬁcantly impact this areain the future.Although the above considerations suggest a strong co-expression ofgenes whose protein products interact, it is important to note thatco-expression is not a foolproof test of interaction. A pair of interact-ing proteins might be co-expressed only under a few special conditionsin which the physical contact between the two proteins is biologicallysigniﬁcant, while in most other conditions these two proteins mightparticipate in separate or even unrelated functions through their in-teraction with additional proteins. Thus, a high expression correlationacross multiple conditions might potentially provide no information onthe existence of physical interaction between the corresponding proteinpairs. Conversely, the lack of expression correlation may well conveyTesting Inferred Networks 141the false impression that a particular protein-protein interaction edgemay be incorrect.5.2 An Experimental Test of Predicted Protein–ProteinInteractionsIn reality, there is no single computational test of physical interac-tion data that is considered a “gold standard”; a variety of methodsexist that validate physical interactions. Ultimately, whether or nottwo proteins do interact physiologically depends on the actual physicaldemonstration of such an interaction using physical methods such asx-ray crystallography. Here is one important example of a sequence ofsteps that was taken to test the computational prediction of protein-protein interactions. In this particular example (Markson et al., 2009),the problem was to construct and validate a physical interaction net-work among a series of imp ortant enzymes that have evolved to degradeother proteins.Protein turnover is an important physiological process. Some proteinsare rapidly degraded upon reception of a signal; in the absence of thesignal, these proteins are stable, while the rapid decay of the protein inthe presence of the signal initiates a speciﬁc physiological process. Oneinteresting example is the response of the transcription factor proteinp53, which is activated by DNA damage (see Figure 5.1). We remindthe reader that this protein was earlier discussed in the context ofsynthetic lethal interactions in Chapter 2.When the chromosomal DNA is broken (say, by x-ray radiation ora chemical agent), the broken DNA ends bind to speciﬁc proteins andtrigger a cascade of enzymatic reactions that leads to the addition of aphosphate group at a particular amino acid of a protein called Mdm2.The unphosphorylated form of this protein normally exists in the cy-toplasm and tightly binds to the inactive form of p53. Upon phospho-rylation, however, this protein (now called Mdm2p; see Figure 5.1) israpidly degraded, thus releasing p53 to be transported into the nucleus.Here, p53 is able to regulate a number of target genes that respond tothe DNA damage by either promoting DNA repair or by causing pro-grammed cell death. Evidently, suicide is a better option for a multicel-lular organism than risking the propagation of damaged DNA, whichoften leads to some form of cancer. The question of interest for us here142 Introduction to Biological NetworksDNA damageDNA damage signalp53Mdm2p53Mdm2p53Mdm2Pp53Enters the nucleus,acts as a transcriptionfactor, blocks DNAreplication and the cell cycle, and either promotes DNA repair or induces cell deathUb-Ub-UbMdm2P(inactive)(active)degradedFIGURE 5.1: p53-Mdm2 interaction and DNA damage response. In re-sponse to DNA damage, a signaling molecule attaches phosphate groups tothe Mdm2 protein, which subsequently dissociates from p53. p53 is then ableto enter the nucleus and activate transcription from a number of genes thatlead to several diﬀerent cellular responses: blocking of DNA replication, arrestof the cell cycle, and either promoting DNA repair or triggering cell death.The phosphorylated Mdm2 protein (called Mdm2p) gets tagged by Ubiquitinproteins, and the tagged protein is degraded.is the mechanism of degradation of the protein Mdm2p. How is it thatthe protein degradation machinery is so highly selective that it is ableto select speciﬁcally one protein out of thousands that are present inthe cell at any instant of time? It is obviously wasteful for evolutionto have designed a special protein-degrading enzyme for every protein.A simple solution happens to be that a relatively small set of enzymescalled Ubiquitin E3 ligases can recognize and “tag” larger subsets ofenzymes. The tag is a small protein called Ubiquitin. Once a protein iscovalently tagged with Ubiquitin, a protein degradation factory calledthe proteasome degrades that protein. Obviously, one does not expectUbiquitin E3 ligases to be around in their active forms all the time,otherwise their target protein will be readily destroyed at all times.Activation of a subset of Ubiquitin E3 ligases depends on their inter-action with smaller subsets of Ubiquitin ligase activators, which arefurther activated by other enzymes (Figure 5.2a). Many physiologicalsignals participate in these activation cascades.To fully understand how the stability of various proteins in the cell isTesting Inferred Networks 143regulated by the Ubiquitin-proteasome system, it is important to knowthe physical interaction network of ubiquitin ligases with other proteins(Figure 5.2b). How does one proceed with this task?Because there are numerous E3-target protein interactions to con-sider, each speciﬁc for one E3 enzyme and its target set, it is better tobegin with exploring the space of E2-E3 interactions (see Figure 5.2).One possibility is to take a simpler model system in which the E2-E3interaction space is small, ﬁnd all E2-E3 interactions by experiments,and then identify the orthologs of each pair in human by computationalmethods. This is the interolog-based prediction method we encounteredin Chapter 3.Because less than 50% of the E3 proteins in yeast have identiﬁableorthologues in humans, the techniques for computational identiﬁcationof the orthologous interactome in humans by inference from yeast two-hybrid data is not possible. For this reason, it was necessary to directlyinterrogate approximately 1,800 human E2-E3 interaction edges by theyeast two-hybrid technique.An independent method for validating and predicting E2-E3 interac-tions was developed using a structure-based homology modeling tech-nique. In this technique, a pair of proteins was predicted to be inter-acting if they harbored regions that were locally similar to the surfacedomains of protein pairs known to be interacting (this is very similar tothe “interolog” method of Chapter 3). Over 3,000 putative interactionpairs were analyzed using this method. Furthermore, the free energy ofbinding was also computed for these pairs using methods that are be-yond the scope of this book. These free energy scores were binned, andthe fraction of pairs in each bin that were detected by the two-hybridmethod was calculated. As shown in Figure 5.2c, there is a negative cor-relation between this fraction and the free energy score: pairs predictedto have low free energy of binding were more likely to be detected inthe two-hybrid assay. However, the spread of the data indicated thatthe free energy score was by itself insuﬃcient for accurate prediction ofinteraction.The validity of the two-hybrid interactions was further tested by inde-pendent means: pairs of interactors were mutagenized at the predictedinteraction surfaces and the mutants were rescanned for two-hybrid in-teractions. The idea here is that mutations in the predicted interactionsurfaces would disrupt the interactions exhibited in a two-hybrid test.Thus, computational prediction of interaction could be tested, at least


===== [36/72] chapter-36.html =====

144 Introduction to Biological NetworksUbiquitinUbiquitinUbiquitinUbiquitinE1E1E2E3InactiveActiveActiveActiveActivation+Transfer of UbiquitinTransfer of UbiquitinTransfer of Ubiquitinn-times(Ubiquitin)nTagged target proteinPre-target proteinSignalDegradation of target protein E1E2 E2 E3 E3 E3 E3T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T6 ..... Tn121234etc.(a) (b) (c)-10 -5 0 5Predicted free energy ∆G (kcal/mol)2-Hybrid incidence0.30.20.1FIGURE 5.2: (a) The reaction cascade for protein degradation by theUbuquitin tagging system. A few Ubiquitin E1 enzymes are ﬁrst taggedthrough autocatalysis by a small protein called Ubiquitin. Upon being tagged,the active E1 enzymes transfer the Ubiquitin protein to a number of diﬀerentUbiquitin E2 enzymes, which subsequently transfer the Ubiquitin tag to theUbiquitin E3 ligases. A speciﬁc Ubiquitin E3 ligase then physically interactswith its target protein and transfers the Ubiquitin tag to the target protein.This last reaction occurs several times; when a number of Ubiquitin moietieshave been transferred in tandem to the target protein, it is bound by the cell’sprotein degradation machinery. (b) A diagram of the minimal protein interac-tion network in the Ubiquitin protein degradation system. The combinatorialinteractions between speciﬁc subsets of target proteins and a limited numberof E3 ligases impart cell- and condition-speciﬁc protein degradation. The linesare physical interaction edges. (c) Comparison between computationally pre-dicted and two-hybrid interaction data. Protein homology modeling was usedto calculate the free energy of interaction between pairs of proteins, whichwas binned into groups. The frequency of detection of pairs in each group bya yeast two-hybrid interaction assay is plotted as a function of the predictedfree energy of interaction.for a subset of interactions, by direct experiment. If the predicted sur-faces contributed to the two-hybrid scores, it is anticipated that themutations would degrade the two-hybrid score. Indeed, approximately75% of the pairs so tested were conﬁrmed to have two-hybrid scoresthat depended on the degree of sequence conservation of the predictedinteraction surfaces.Ultimately, one of the the best tests for the occurrence of a protein-protein interaction is by a biological function that is dep endent on theTesting Inferred Networks 145existence of the interaction. In the above example this was possiblebecause a positive interaction between E2 and E3 proteins should leadto a transfer of Ubiquitin from E2 to E3. Indeed, 93% of the two-hybridinteractions were correlated with biochemical functions predicted forthe pairs. However, the absence of a function does not imply the absenceof an interaction; it may equally imply that the test could not providethe appropriate conditions for successful function, and may thereforecontribute to the false negative rate.The example of the Ubiquitin ligase protein interaction networkserves to illustrate three main points. First, no single method for thedetection of protein-protein interactions is deﬁnitive. Second, direct ex-perimental detection of interactions coupled with computational pre-diction wherever possible leads to higher conﬁdence in the interactionnetwork than either method alone. Third, whenever possible, it is im-portant to test the interacting pairs by functional tests.5.3 Combining Protein Interactions Discovered by High-Throughput ExperimentsOne of the pressing problems with large-scale screens for protein-protein interactions, such as the two-hybrid screen or co-IP screen, isthat the resulting interaction networks, while large, are highly untrust-worthy because of error due to both false positives and false negatives.False positives may arise in two-hybrid screens because of nonspeciﬁcand unstable “stickiness” of a protein to other proteins (this may inturn be due to the protein having an unusually large number of hy-drophobic residues on its surface—see Chapter 7 for a discussion ofthis). False negatives, on the other hand, may arise due to low coverageof the two-hybrid experiment and due to under-sampling of bait-preyclones within the proteins that are covered. There are also systematicfalse negatives due to the fact that a bait-prey mating could proveunsuccessful in a two-hybrid experiment, even though the interactionoccurs in vivo (Huang et al., 2007). The co-IP experiment, while con-sidered a strong test of direct physical interaction, actually only detectsparticipation in the same protein complex. Physical interaction in a co-IP experiment is then inferred by an intervening “matrix” or “spoke”model, as discussed in Chapter 2. Because the “matrix” model includesall prey-prey interactions, it has a high propensity for false positives,146 Introduction to Biological Networkswhile the more conservative “spoke” model may miss out on real prey-prey interactions, leading to false negatives. Further, large scale co-IPexperiments are often biased toward the most abundant proteins, lead-ing to loss of coverage and, therefore, to false negatives.How may these independent, yet error-prone, high-throughput ex-periments be combined to yield a reliable picture of the true physicalinteraction network? A solution to this problem must begin with adiscussion of a simpler problem ﬁrst posed and solved by the mathe-matician George Polya (Polya, 1976).5.3.1 Polya’s ProofreadersThe general problem of combining multiple sets of error-prone data toobtain reliable estimates of error in each dataset (and thus improve theaccuracy of the data) was crystallized by Polya into a simple exampleinvolving multiple, independent “proofreads” of the same text. Con-sider a book that has M misprints and is independently read by twoproofreaders A and B. A notices m1misprints in the book, B noticesm2misprints, and m3misprints are noticed by both. Note that the mis-prints counted in m3are also counted in m1and m2, and therefore thetotal number of detected misprints is m1+m2−m3. The actual numberof misprints, M, is unknown and so are the propensities for A and B todetect errors accurately. Let us represent these propensities as follows.Let pAbe the probability that A will detect a true misprint, and let pBbe the analogous probability for B. Then the mean number of misprintsdetected by A will be MpA, the mean number of misprints detected byB will be MpB, and the mean number of misprints detected by bothwill be MpApB(the probabilities pAand pBare multiplied because Aand B are assumed to be independent readers). When the numbers ofmisprints (true as well as detected) are large, the detected numbers ofmisprints will be well approximated by the mean numbers. Therefore,m1= MpA,m2= MpB,m3= MpApB. (5.1)Solving these three equations for the three unknowns M, pA, and pByieldsM =m1m2m3,pA=m3m2,pB=m3m1. (5.2)This elegant method therefore enables one to estimate not just the errorrates for the two proofreaders, but also the number of misprints that aremissed by both of them. This number is the true number of misprintsTesting Inferred Networks 147minus the number of detected misprints, which is M −(m1+m2−m3)=(m1− m3)(m2− m3)/m3.We now discuss how errors in high-throughput datasets and the truenumber of protein-protein interactions can be similarly estimated andhow these estimates can be used to assign conﬁdence values to individ-ual interactions. The interactions with highest conﬁdence can then beassessed for their biological signiﬁcance.5.3.2 Integration of Independent High-Throughput DatasetsPolya’s proofreading problem has a direct analogy in the world of pro-tein interaction data. The “misprints” here correspond to protein-protein interactions, and the independent “proofreaders” are the in-dependent high-throughput experiments. However, the protein inter-action problem is somewhat complicated by the fact that the experi-ments can have false positive errors (as described above) in addition tofalse negative ones. If we use data from two high-throughput experi-ments, that leads to two additional parameters to estimate. In this case,three equations no longer suﬃce to estimate all unknown parameters.Therefore, we need data from at least three independent experimentsto estimate all unknown parameters: the false positive and false nega-tive error rates in each experiment in addition to the total number oftrue protein-protein interactions in the network. The situation can besomewhat simpliﬁed, and the estimates made more accurate, if one ofthe three experiments is a “gold-standard” experiment, that is, it hasnegligible false positive rate. The measured data consist of the numberof interactions found in each experiment individually (three numbers),the number of common interactions found in two of three experiments(three numbers), and the number of common interactions found in allthree experiments, resulting in a total of seven observations. The un-known parameters are false positive rates in two experiments, falsenegative rates in all three experiments, and the total number of trueinteractions, resulting in a total of six parameters.The above framework was outlined in work by d’Haeseleer andChurch (2004), who used a “gold-standard” reference set of 1,542 yeastprotein-protein interactions culled from the MIPS database. The othertwo datasets were chosen from a collection of yeast two-hybrid andco-IP experiments. Gold-standard datasets, because they are more ac-curate on the interactions that they cover, typically have low coverageof the network and therefore do not report many existing interactions.148 Introduction to Biological Networks1411MIPS15425430474241706157Uetz et al. 947Ito et al. 44751205MIPS1542213428233383350156Gavin et al. 3761Ho et al. 3618FIGURE 5.3: Relative sizes and intersections of a gold-standard MIPSreference dataset of protein-protein interactions and 2 two-hybrid experi-ments (Uetz et al., 2000; Ito et al., 2001) (left panel), and two co-IP ex-periments (Gavin et al., 2002; Ho et al., 2002) (right panel). The numbersdirectly below the dataset labels refer to the total number of interactions ineach experiment, while the numbers within the circles refer to the numberof interactions in each intersection and its complement. While there are tennumbers in each panel, any three of them can be expressed in terms of theothers, resulting in seven independent counts.Another way of saying this is that they have a high negative false neg-ative rate. The overlap of high-throughput datasets that have goodcoverage (i.e., low false negative rate) but high false positive rate withgold-standard datasets that have low false positive rate but less cover-age is a common technique employed in network biology for estimatingerrors in interaction data, and for ultimately discarding interactionsthat are highly error-prone.Figure 5.3 displays the intersections (d’Haeseleer and Church, 2004)of the gold-standard MIPS reference set, in one case, with two yeasttwo-hybrid experiments, and in the other case, with two co-IP experi-ments. With three datasets chosen at a time in this manner, and withone of them always being the ﬁxed MIPS reference set, we can write theequations that will determine various unknown parameters. Table 5.1lists the observed and unknown variables in the problem. Note that thefalse positive rates for high-throughput experiments 1 and 2 are 1 − q1and 1 − q2, respectively, and the false negative rates are 1 − p1and1 − p2, respectively. An additional known count in the problem is thetotal number of unique protein pairs, which we call P . Thus, P − N isthe total number of true noninteractions.


===== [37/72] chapter-37.html =====

Testing Inferred Networks 149TABLE 5.1: Variables Related to the Estimation of ErrorRates in High-Throughput (HTP) Protein InteractionExperimentsType Description SymbolObservedNo. of interactions in ref. dataset gNo. of interactions in HTP experiment 1 n1No. of interactions in HTP experiment 2 n2No. of interactions in 1 ∩ 2 n12No. of interactions in ref. ∩ 1 g1No. of interactions in ref. ∩ 2 g2No. of interactions in ref. ∩ 1 ∩ 2 g12UnknownPr(true interaction correctly reported by ref.) pPr(true interaction reported by 1) p1Pr(true interaction reported by 2) p2Pr(true noninteraction reported by 1) q1Pr(true noninteraction reported by 2) q2True number of total interactions NBy analogy to Polya’s proofreaders, we can equate each observedcount to an expected count. However, because of the presence of falsepositives, each observed count (except the counts involving the ref-erence set) gets two contributions: one from true interactions beingcorrectly reported, and one from true noninteractions b eing falsely re-ported as interactions. Therefore, the relevant equations areg = Npn1= Np1+(P − N )(1 − q1)n2= Np2+(P − N )(1 − q2)n12= Np1p2+(P − N )(1 − q1)(1 − q2)g1= Np1pg2= Np2p. (5.3)The above constitute six equations that may be solved for the six un-known parameters. In addition, there is an equation for g12as a productof N, p, p1, and p2, but in the case when the reference network has nofalse positive error and the datasets are independent, this additionalequation is unnecessary and serves as a consistency check on the ob-served data.In reality, however, the assumptions that the reference dataset iswithout false positive error, and that the three datasets are indepen-150 Introduction to Biological Networksdent, are never quite true. Indeed, a quick calculation using the countsin Figure 5.3 reveals that the counts are not consistent with these as-sumptions (the reader may try this as an exercise!). How do we theninfer the error rates and the true total number of interactions? We willtry to answer this question somewhat qualitatively here.First, let us suppose that the datasets can be treated as independentbut the MIPS reference dataset actually has some false positive error.It is trivial to model this error in a manner identical to that for thetwo HTP datasets. The false positive error of the reference datasetthen becomes an additional unknown parameter and modiﬁes the ﬁrstequation and the last two equations in Equation (5.3) above. Because ofthe additional unknown parameter, we need an additional equation—the equation for g12—which is no longer redundant.Violation of the independence assumption is more serious, and thatcan happen in various ways. Consider, for example, a situation wherethe HTP datasets are pairwise independent but the reference datasetis not independent of the HTP datasets. In this case, the last two equa-tions in Equation (5.3) are changed to g1= Np1p|1and g2= Np2p|2,where p|1is the probability that a true interaction is correctly reportedby the reference dataset given that it was correctly reported by exp er-iment 1, and similarly for p|2. This introduces two new parameters ingeneral, but only one new parameter if we demand that p|1= p|2, whichis tantamount to requiring that the probability for the reference set toreport an interaction correctly is biased in the same way irrespectiveof whether the interaction was also reported by either HTP dataset1 or HTP dataset 2. For this requirement to be satisﬁed, it is neces-sary that both HTP datasets, although independent, should reﬂect thesame type of experiment. Therefore, for example, both HTP datasetsin the intersection should either correspond to two-hybrid experimentsor to co-IP experiments, as indicated in Figure 5.3. With this provisoin place, d’Haeseleer and Church found that the error rates inferredin this manner for HTP experiments were quite insensitive to whichadditional HTP experiment was used in the intersection.Using these methods, d’Haeseleer and Church, and later Hart et al.(2006), estimated error rates of various HTP datasets as well as the sizeof the yeast interactome. The false positive rates for HTP data rangefrom about 45% to as much as 90%, while the estimated size of the yeastinteractome is roughly 50,000 interactions. Further, after error rateshave been computed, it is possible to re-examine each pair of proteinsTesting Inferred Networks 151(A and B below) and assess, in Bayesian fashion, the probability thatthey truly interact given the results of various HTP experiments:Pr(A and B interact | expt.1, expt.2,...) ∝Pr(expt.1, expt.2,...| A and B interact)Pr(A and B interact), (5.4)and a similar formula holds for the probability of a true noninteraction.The proportionality factor in the above equation can be found by re-quiring that the probabilities for interaction and noninteraction sum to1. On the right-hand-side of the above equation, Pr(expt.1, expt.2, ...|A and B interact) can be found using the inferred false positive ratesand dependency assumptions among experiments, while Pr(A and Binteract) can be found using the inferred total number of true interac-tions relative to the total number of protein pairs. Thus, the judiciouscombination of high-throughput interaction datasets can be used to de-rive a measure of conﬁdence for every interaction and noninteraction.It is therefore possible to rank the interaction pairs according to theirconﬁdence levels, which in turn can be used to ascribe biological func-tions to the high-conﬁdence pairs according to the method describedbelow.5.4 From Curated Protein–Protein Interactions to Pro-tein ComplexesWe have discussed how distinct error-prone protein interaction datasetsmay be combined to yield estimates of the true probability of interac-tion between two proteins. The resulting protein interaction networkmay then be represented as a weighted graph, that is, a network inwhich an edge (interaction) between two nodes (proteins) has a numer-ical weight corresponding to the probability of that interaction. One ofthe crucial tests of the accuracy of such a weighted graph is its abil-ity to faithfully reconstruct biological function. Many cellular processesare performed by stable protein complexes: sets of interacting proteinsthat carry out their functions as a single unit. Therefore, an indirecttest of the accuracy of a protein interaction network is the validationof the protein complexes that are predicted by the network.Unfortunately, however, the pattern of protein complexes that areconsistent with a given protein interaction network is not unique.Rather, it depends on the method used to reconstruct the complexes152 Introduction to Biological Networksfrom the network. Complex identiﬁcation requires merging of appro-priate sets of protein interactions, an additional inference step beyondthe identiﬁcation of individual protein interactions. In principle, if onemethod was deﬁnitively known as the “best” method to identify pro-tein complexes from individual interactions, then the protein complexespredicted by that method could be compared to known protein com-plexes in order to test the accuracy of the protein interaction networkitself.Like many problems in network biology, however, the problem ofcomplex identiﬁcation from protein interaction data is an active area ofresearch, and no one method can be conclusively recommended. Thus,while we are not in a position to unambiguously test the accuracy of aprotein interaction network using predicted complexes, it is safe to con-clude that if many well-validated computational methods correctly androbustly identify the same set of complexes, then the underlying pro-tein interaction network is probably trustworthy. On the other hand, ifthere exists large variation among the predictions from diﬀerent meth-ods, then the network itself is probably suspect.Here we discuss two of the many methods used to identify complexesfrom curated protein interaction data. One method is largely unsuper-vised, that is, it does not require prior knowledge of the speciﬁc natureof speciﬁc protein complexes, while the other method is supervised, thatis, it predicts new complexes by learning from the properties of knowncomplexes.5.4.1 Complex Identiﬁcation Using Markov ClusteringMost unsupervised methods to identify complexes in protein interactionnetworks employ the general idea that complexes correspond to locallydense clusters in the network; they are characterized by a large pro-portion of within-cluster interactions and a small proportion of interac-tions across clusters. Thus, unsupervised methods to identify complexesare essentially methods that identify clusters or modules. The Markovclustering method devised by van Dongen (2000) is particularly usefulbecause of the ability to tune the “granularity” or compactness of theidentiﬁed clusters.Because clusters are locally dense regions in a network, one expectsthat the number of paths of a given length between two nodes in thesame cluster should be high relative to the number of such paths be-tween two nodes in diﬀerent clusters. Thus, a “random walker” on theTesting Inferred Networks 153network will frequently take steps within the same cluster and onlyinfrequently transition across clusters. Now suppose there is a one-steptransition probability matrix T that determines the movement of therandom walker on the graph. Its elements Tijcorrespond to the proba-bility that a random walker who starts at node j of the graph reachesnode i in one step. Such a matrix is also called a stochastic matrix onthe network. For a weighted graph, a stochastic matrix can be naturallyconstructed by appropriately normalizing the edge weights. For exam-ple, consider the network of protein-protein interactions whose edgeweights wijcorrespond to probabilities of interaction. We can constructa stochastic matrix for this network by deﬁning Tij= wij/ ("kwkj).The random walker will therefore have higher probability to transitionacross edges that have stronger evidence for protein-protein interaction.There are two key operations that lie at the heart of the Markovcluster approach. First, note that a matrix power of a stochastic ma-trix is also a stochastic matrix corresponding to a many-step transitionprobability. For example, T2is a stochastic matrix whose elements cor-respond to probabilities of transition from one node to another in twosteps. The operation of taking the matrix power of a stochastic ma-trix is called expansion, because it corresponds to computing randomwalks of higher length. Because higher length paths are more prevalentwithin clusters than between clusters, the expansion operation asso-ciates higher probabilities to node pairs within clusters. At the sametime, the new stochastic matrix resulting from expansion is less sparsethan the old one, as nodes that had no direct “one-step” connectionsmay still be connected by multiple steps.A second operation, called inﬂation, consists of taking powers Trijofeach element of a stochastic matrix and then renormalizing the matrixto obtain a new stochastic matrix. Mathematically, this operation hasthe eﬀect of increasing the probability of more reliable edges while de-creasing the probability of less reliable ones. Thus, inﬂation serves toconcentrate the stochastic matrix on reliable interactions, while expan-sion causes the paths of a random walker on the network to becomemore evenly spread. If expansion and inﬂation are applied in an alter-nating fashion to the stochastic matrix, the resulting graph becomesmore and more clustered. These clusters are then predicted to be pro-tein complexes. The ﬁnal prediction can be somewhat varied dependingon the values of the power exponents in the expansion and inﬂation op-erators, which is what lend ﬂexibility to the method.


===== [38/72] chapter-38.html =====

154 Introduction to Biological NetworksA DBCE2/32/32/31/31/31/31/41/411/2A DBCE11111FIGURE 5.4: Markov clustering applied to a small network of ﬁve nodes.A connected network of ﬁve nodes, labeled A–E, is shown in the left panel.Numbers signify transition probabilities associated with the transitions indi-cated by arrows. These transition probabilities can be deﬁned even for anundirected weighted network (such as a protein interaction network) as de-scribed in the text. The right panel shows the resultant network after ﬁveiterations of alternating expansion and inﬂation. In this example, the powerparameters (denoted by r in the text) for the inﬂation and expansion opera-tions are 5 and 3, respectively. As shown, all transition probabilities convergeto 1 or 0 in a matter of ﬁve iterations, and two clusters are readily identiﬁed.A similar procedure applied to large protein interaction networks may be usedto identify protein complexes.The Markov clustering approach as applied to a small network isillustrated in Figure 5.4 and Box 5.1.Krogan et al. (2006) used the Markov clustering approach to identifycomplexes in a weighted yeast protein interaction network generated bya combination of experimental and machine learning approaches. Theyidentiﬁed 547 nonoverlapping protein complexes and analyzed (1) theagreement of these complexes with known yeast complexes, (2) homo-geneity of biological function of proteins within the same predictedcomplex, and (3) co-localization within the cell of proteins within thesame predicted complex. In all cases, they reported better results thanprevious approaches (better agreement with known complexes, morefunctional similarity within complexes, and less variation in cellular lo-cation among proteins within a complex), a ﬁnding attributed to theaccuracy of the protein interaction network that they constructed. Thecomplex identiﬁcation process thus led ultimately to a validation ofthe underlying network. As stated earlier, such validation is clearly notfoolproof, as the inability to ﬁnd validated complexes could well be ashortcoming of the complex identiﬁcation algorithm rather than the un-Testing Inferred Networks 155Box 5.1 Matrix operations in Markov clustering: an example.The two fundamental operations in Markov clustering, namely expansion andinﬂation, are illustrated here with an example. Consider the ﬁve-node networkshown in the left panel of Figure 5.4, where probabilities of transition betweennodes are shown next to the arrows that signify each possible transition. Thestochastic matrix of this network isT =02/31/3 0 02/3 0 0 1/301/3 0 0 2/3001/41/2 0 1/400010,where rows and columns of T are ordered according to the alphabetical orderof the nodes. As stated in the text, the expansion operation consists of takinga power of the matrix. Let us assume for simplicity that the power parameterr = 2. Then each expansion step consists of squaring the stochastic matrix:T2=02/31/3 0 02/3 0 0 1/301/3 0 0 2/3001/41/2 0 1/4000102=5/9 0 0 4/900 19/36 7/18 0 1/1207/18 4/9 0 1/61/3 0 0 2/3001/41/2 0 1/4,while an inﬂation step consists of squaring each element of T followed bynormalizing the rows so that each row sums to 1:04/91/9 0 04/9 0 0 1/901/9 0 0 4/9001/16 1/4 0 1/160 0 0 1 0normalize−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→(divide by row sum)04/51/5 0 04/5 0 0 1/501/5 0 0 4/5001/62/3 0 1/600010.One observes that an expansion step causes the spreading of probabil-ity: there are fewer zeros in the T2transition matrix than in the Ttransition matrix, while an inﬂation step causes greater concentration inhigh-probability transitions (the ratio of the A → B transition probability tothe A → C transition probability increases from 2 to 4 after one inﬂation step).In general, the power parameter r can be arbitrary. For example, the networkshown in the right panel of Figure 5.4 is achieved using r = 5 for inﬂationand r = 3 for expansion and after ﬁve alternating iterations of expansion andinﬂation.156 Introduction to Biological Networksderlying network. However, it is equally clear that inaccurate networkswill lead to inaccurate prediction of complexes, no matter how goodthe complex identiﬁcation procedure is. It is therefore useful to employmore than one computational method for complex identiﬁcation, as wehave discussed.5.4.2 Complex Identiﬁcation Using Supervised ClusteringOne of the drawbacks of Markov clustering, and of unsupervised meth-ods in general, is that it tacitly makes assumptions about the types ofclusters one is looking for. Speciﬁcally, the Markov clustering methodassumes that protein complexes form “clique-like” structures in thenetwork. Cliques are sub-networks that are densely connected withinthemselves but have few connections with the rest of the network. Whilethe assumption of “cliquishness” of complexes seems quite reasonableand, in fact, holds for most complexes, complexes that do not have thisproperty may be missed by the method (false negatives) and, on theother hand, cliques in the protein interaction network that do not cor-respond to true functional complexes may be identiﬁed as such (falsepositives). It is therefore reasonable to consider alternative methods forcomplex identiﬁcation that do not make simplifying a priori assump-tions about the topology of protein complexes, but instead learn fromthe structure of known complexes.A simple yet powerful supervised approach for complex identiﬁcationis based on a Bayesian network model (Qi et al., 2008). We have previ-ously encountered dynamic Bayesian networks for predicting regulatoryinteractions. Here, the problem can be stated as follows. Given a sub-network of a protein interaction network, we wish to ﬁnd the probabilitythat this sub-network represents a protein complex. To model this prob-ability, we ﬁrst identify several features of the sub-network that are ex-pected to be distributed diﬀerently among true protein complexes thanamong “non-complexes.” Let us call these features F1,F2, . . . , Fm. Onesuch feature that immediately comes to mind is the size (i.e., numberof proteins) in the sub-network; it is reasonable to assume that the sizedistribution of complexes would be diﬀerent from the size distributionof non-complexes. We call this feature n, the number of nodes in thesub-network. The desired probability that the sub-network is a trueprotein complex can then be written as the posterior probabilityP (c =1| n, F1, . . . , Fm) ∝ P (n, F1, . . . , Fm| c = 1)P (c = 1), (5.5)where c is the class label for the sub-network, with c = 1 indicatingTesting Inferred Networks 157that the subgraph is a complex and c = 0 indicating that the subgraphis not a complex. The above equation follows from Bayes’ rule.How do we compute the probabilities on the right-hand side of Equa-tion (5.5)? Because this is a supervised method, the answer lies in usingdata from known protein complexes. We can calculate n and the re-maining features for a set of known protein complexes and thus, at leastin principle, empirically estimate the joint distribution of these featuresfor known complexes, which is the ﬁrst factor on the right-hand side ofEquation (5.5). Empirical estimation of such a highly multivariate dis-tribution is, however, unreliable unless one has access to a very largeamount of data, and it is best to proceed by simplifying the multi-variate distribution in some way. Such a simpliﬁcation is possible byconstructing a Bayesian network model that elaborates the dependen-cies among the various features. Qi et al. (2008) assumed the Bayesiannetwork model of Figure 5.5, in which the features F1,F2, . . . , Fmareconditionally independent given the subgraph size and the class labelof the subgraph. Under this assumption, the joint probability of Equa-tion (5.5) factorizes as follows:P (n, F1, . . . , Fm| c = 1) = P (F1, . . . , Fm| n, c = 1)P (n | c = 1)=n'i=1P (Fi| n, c = 1) P (n | c = 1). (5.6)Putting Equations (5.5) and (5.6) together yields the posterior oddsratio for a candidate sub-network:P (c =1| n, F1, . . . , Fm)P (c =0| n, F1, . . . , Fm)=P (c = 1)P (n | c = 1))ni=1P (Fi| n, c = 1)P (c = 0)P (n | c = 0))ni=1P (Fi| n, c = 0).(5.7)The various probabilities on the right-hand side of the ab ove equa-tion are straightforward to estimate from known complexes. We canestimate the ratio of numbers of complexes to non-complexes in pro-tein interaction networks from known complex data [this yields P (c =1)/P (c = 0)], we can estimate the individual distributions of each fea-ture in known complexes and non-complexes [this yields P (Fi| n, c = 1)and P (Fi| n, c = 0) for each feature], and we can estimate the size dis-tributions of complexes and non-complexes [this yields P (n | c = 1)and P (n | c = 0)]. Candidate sub-networks with a posterior odds ratiogreater than 1 can then be identiﬁed as complexes in this method.The features F1,F2, . . . , Fmused by Qi et al. to discriminate be-tween complexes and non-complexes are mainly topological features of158 Introduction to Biological NetworksFIGURE 5.5: The Bayesian network model architecture of Qi et al. (2008).In this model, it is assumed that the distributions of the features F1,F2, . . . , Fnare determined by whether or not the subgraph is a protein complex and by thesize of the subgraph. Furthermore, given these two pieces of information, thefeatures are independent. Finally, the model assumes that the distribution ofsubgraph size is determined solely by whether or not the subgraph is a proteincomplex.the candidate sub-network. They include properties that we examinein Chapter 7: the density, clustering coeﬃcient, features of the degreedistribution of the nodes in the sub-network, and so on. However, theBayesian network framework itself is quite generic and there is no rea-son why other features, including biological features (e.g., prop ertiesof the mRNA/protein expression distribution among the nodes of thesubgraph), cannot be incorporated into the Bayesian network.Qi et al. estimated distributions of features among known complexesin the MIPS database. They estimated feature distributions for non-complexes by selecting nodes at random from the protein-protein in-teraction network. They then developed a simulated annealing method(which is a computational optimization method that is beyond thescope of this book) to search for sub-networks that have a high pos-terior odds ratio (i.e., the putative protein complexes). Finally, theymeasured the success of their method by ﬁnding the overlap betweennewly identiﬁed complexes and existing ones. Their results signiﬁcantlyoutperformed those from other unsupervised and supervised methods.


===== [39/72] chapter-39.html =====

Testing Inferred Networks 1595.5 Testing DNA–Protein InteractionsWe now turn to the testing of physical interactions between DNA andprotein. For such interactions to be biologically meaningful, the bind-ing of the protein to the speciﬁc DNA sequence should constitute adetectable biological function.Note that here we consider only protein-DNA interactions that arespeciﬁc for particular DNA sequences. Thus we will not consider non-speciﬁc interactions that are independent of DNA sequence. We willalso not consider cases where the sequence preference is so ubiquitousthat thousands of interactions exist for the protein in question. Ex-amples of this scenario include interactions between histone proteinsand DNA, and those between methylated DNA-binding proteins andmethylated DNA.In Chapter 3, we used gene expression as a means for computationallypredicting DNA-protein interaction. The problem we address here ishow these computational predictions may b e suitably tested.Highly sequence-speciﬁc protein-DNA interaction edges usually im-ply that the protein is a transcription factor, which could be negativelyor positively acting, or, very rarely, a sequence-speciﬁc DNA modifyingenzyme (e.g., one that may cleave the DNA at a particular sequencemotif). If the protein is known to be a transcription factor, then a testof a speciﬁc interaction edge might constitute examining the predictionthat if the protein is expressed, then its target gene is either expressedor not expressed at a high level—that is, determining the existence ofa correlation that is high in magnitude (i.e., highly positive or nega-tive) between the expression levels of the protein and its target gene’smRNA across many diﬀerent conditions. This is a static inference, inwhich we make no obligatory reference to the timing of expression ofthe protein and its target gene, although the diﬀerence in expressiontiming might itself constitute a “condition.” A test such as this maytake the form of comparing two networks, a protein-DNA interactionnetwork and a network of co-expression.A more precise test of a protein-DNA interaction may involve test-ing a dynamic property of the interaction. For example, if a proteinis a positive (or negative) regulatory factor of its target gene, then wepredict that a change in the expression level of the protein (or its corre-sponding mRNA) with time should positively (or negatively) correlatewith changes in the mRNA level of its target gene. This in principle160 Introduction to Biological Networksshould be measurable in a time-series experiment, in which RNA sam-ples are collected across multiple time points during which the geneexpression levels are not in equilibrium, and the time variation of themRNA level corresponding to the DNA binding protein should sys-tematically predict the time variation of its target gene’s mRNA level.Note that this is exactly the type of correlation that was exploited inthe REVEAL and related methods (discussed in Chapter 3) to pre-dict protein-DNA interactions in the ﬁrst place. It is clear, therefore,that expression data can only be used to test experimentally discoveredDNA-protein interactions, not computational predictions.An interesting way of testing a protein-DNA interaction edge involvestesting a genetic prediction. For example, mutation of a speciﬁc DNAsequence at the target site of the protein is expected to inhibit the bind-ing of the protein to the DNA target, and thus should cause a changein the expression level of the target gene. The converse experiment canalso be carried out: mutating the gene that encodes the protein shouldhave the eﬀect of changing expression levels of its target genes underat least one given condition.If none of the above eﬀects can be demonstrated, then it may meanthat the protein-DNA interaction edge does not exist, that the inter-action edge has no biological signiﬁcance, or that we have not yet dis-covered the exact conditions under which the function actually takesplace.A marvelous example of how complex DNA-protein interaction net-works are built and tested is provided by work in C. Murre’s labo-ratory (Lin et al., 2010). B-cells are lymphocytes that participate inimmunity against invading organisms sp eciﬁcally by rearranging theirgenes for making antibodies against foreign proteins (see Box 3.4). Theyare formed from a collection of somatic (i.e., adult) stem cells that pro-duce all blood cells. It was earlier known that three critical transcriptionfactor proteins—E2A, EBF1, and FOXO—are important for convertingprecursor cells into B-cells by selectively regulating hundreds of genes.What genes do these transcription factors regulate, and what is thenetwork of interacting proteins and DNA that is important for makingB-cells out of their precursor cells?To address this question, Murre’s laboratory identiﬁed the DNAbinding sites of the three transcription factors by directly measuring theoccupancies of these proteins on the genome at three diﬀerent stagesduring the development of the precursor B-cells to the mature B-cells.Testing Inferred Networks 161Interestingly, the extent of occupancy of these proteins changed duringdevelopment. For example, E2A bound more than twice as many sitesat a later time in development as it did at an earlier time, illustratingthe dynamic nature of DNA-protein interaction networks.What controls which DNA sites are occupied at a particular time bythe same protein? The answer seems to lie in a complex code inﬂu-enced by the other DNA binding proteins bound at those sites. As justone example, a particular modiﬁed form of a histone protein (H3K4-methylated) that wraps around the DNA without much sequence speci-ﬁcity was found to co-locate with E2A.To generate a combined network of protein-DNA interaction relatedto B-cell development (Figure 5.6), Murre’s laboratory joined handswith Ideker’s laboratory (Lin et al., 2010). First they identiﬁed genesthat showed diﬀerential expression during B-cell development, reason-ing that the three transcription factors should directly regulate at leastsome of these genes. To remove most of the indirectly regulated genesfrom this set, they subsequently ﬁltered out those genes exhibiting dif-ferential regulation during B-cell formation but whose protein productswere not situated next to observed DNA occupancy sites of the threetranscription factors at the corresponding stages. This yielded nearly2,000 target genes for the three transcription factor proteins. As ex-pected for the network of genes regulated by these transcription factors,the target gene set was highly statistically enriched for gene functionsinvolved in lymphocyte development. This statistical enrichment of thegene set for lymphocyte-development-related functions is considered avalidation of the initial observation of transcription factor binding tothe DNA target genes.5.6 Congruence of Biological Function among Interact-ing PartnersAn important aspect of the process of testing interactions is toclassify genes according to function so that the functional con-gruence between interacting genes/proteins can be assessed. Thisassessment is facilitated by the Gene Ontology (GO) procedure[http://www.geneontology.org; Ashburner et al. (2000)] that system-atically classiﬁes gene and protein function.Ontology is the study of the relationships of entities, such as genes162 Introduction to Biological NetworksEBF1E2AFOXO1TCF7BCL6HOXA7FOXP1CEBP8 BCL2EGR1ETS2NOTCH1 RUNDC2 GATA3 STAT3BCL11AETS1RAG1IRF4HDAC7CD19ERGPAX5CD79ACD79BAActivatingRepressingBindingFIGURE 5.6: The network of protein-DNA interaction in B-cell develop-ment. The three central transcription factors—E2A, EBF1, and FOXO1—bind to target DNA sequences nearby approximately 2,000 genes. The ex-pression levels of these genes are regulated during B-cell development. Thetarget gene sets are diagrammatically represented as ovals, with the size ofan oval increasing with the number of genes in the corresponding set. The ar-rows show activating protein-DNA interactions, and bars represent repressiveinteractions. Dotted lines ending in ﬁlled circles represent FOXO1 binding tothe DNA near the regulatory regions of genes in the sets. A few representativegenes that are known to play important roles in B-cell development in each setof target genes are separately shown in dashed boxes. A few other importantgenes in some of the sets are also noted. The gene set “A” did not appearto have any known B-cell development related genes when this network wasreported. Adapted and simpliﬁed from Lin et al. (2010).or their encoded proteins, with other entities (e.g., other genes or pro-teins), and the grouping of such entities based on their common orshared properties. The Gene Ontology (GO) Consortium was estab-lished in 1998 as a collaborative eﬀort of biologists studying a fewmodel organisms. The original aim of the consortium was to addressthe need for a uniform description of gene products and their relationsacross diﬀerent databases. GO has now matured into a general descrip-tion and classiﬁcation system for genes and gene products across entireTesting Inferred Networks 163biological systems, including humans.GO presents a structured and controlled vocabulary to describe geneproducts in terms of three ontological descriptor classes: their associ-ated biological processes, their cellular components, and their molecularfunctions. These descriptors are independent of the species of organ-isms, and are arranged in the form of three separate acyclic directedgraphs.Near the root of each of the three ontologies are a few unique onto-logical descriptions, and from these general ontologies one can traversealong the acyclic graphs through the branches to the leaves—thus en-countering more and more detailed ontological descriptions. For exam-ple, at the highest level of the biological process, one of the ontologicaldescriptors is “DNA Metabolism” (Figure 5.7). One level down areseveral ﬁner ontological subgroups, such as “DNA Replication,” “DNARepair,” “DNA Recombination,” etc. Below this level, there are furtherspecialized ontological descriptors, such as “DNA Ligation,” “DNA Un-winding,” etc. A gene called CDC9, which encodes a protein that hasthe biochemical property of ligating (i.e., joining) two pieces of DNA,is a leaf in this tree and is classiﬁed by the ontological property of“DNA Ligation.” However, this gene’s protein product has functionscorresponding to two separate biological processes: “DNA Repair” aswell as “DNA Recombination.” Hence, CDC9 is reachable from bothof these branches, as shown in Figure 5.7. Furthermore, the “DNAReplication” process has a subprocess called “DNA-dependent DNAReplication,” which also reaches “DNA Ligation.” Thus, the ontolog-ical description of CDC9 is reachable from “DNA Metabolism” alongthree diﬀerent branches of the GO hierarchy. The reader should note,however, that there may be multiple genes annotated with exactly thesame ontology. For example, both CDC9 and LIG4 genes have the sameGO annotation but they are two distinct genes.Similarly, the molecular function ontological description has a hierar-chical tree associated with it, which classiﬁes in ﬁner and ﬁner ways thefunction of a gene product to molecular detail. Figure 5.8 shows an ac-tual example of the results of GO analysis carried out on a set of genes.The classiﬁcation tree shows that some genes are annotated with themolecular function termed “DNA Binding,” which are further classiﬁedinto two groups: “Sequence-speciﬁc DNA Binding” and “TranscriptionFactor Activity.” The latter genes are also annotated with a higher-leveldescriptor, that of a “Transcriptional Regulator.” Thus, for example, a


===== [40/72] chapter-40.html =====

164 Introduction to Biological NetworksDNA MetabolismDNAReplicationDNA RepairDNARecombinationDNA-dependentDNA replicationDNA LigationRAD51CDC9FIGURE 5.7: An example involving the “DNA Metabolism” Biological Pro-cess and its sub-processes in the Gene Ontology hierarchy.“Transcriptional Regulator” need not be a “Transcription Factor” butthe latter is always a “Transcriptional Regulator.”The third ontology, the cellular component category, relies on the ideathat the basic structural organization of all cellular life is the same or isbased on very similar basic motifs. Examples include the nucleus, cyto-plasm, mitochondria, plasma membrane, and so on. These componentsalso display hierarchical organization. For example, the nuclear matrixis a subcompartment of the nucleus, which itself is a subcompartmentof the cell. In an actual example of GO cellular component analysis(Figure 5.9), a group of genes is classiﬁed into two separate groupson the basis of the physical organization in the cell of their proteinproducts: “Proteinaceous Extracellular Matrix” and “Neuroﬁlament.”The common terminology presented by GO for the purpose of deﬁn-ing genes and their products and for uniformly classifying the functionsof these entities leads to consistent and unambiguous understanding ofthe contextual biological signiﬁcance of genes. Such a database alsoallows the research community to assign properties of genes or geneproducts at diﬀerent levels of “granularity.”A major eﬀort in molecular biology research is to infer the biologicalfunctions of genes from co-expression data. The most useful ontologyfor relating biological function to co-expression is the Biological Pro-cess, given the ad hoc but convenient assumption that a pair of co-expressed genes function in the same or related biological pathway(s).However, molecular functions of these two genes might be distinctlydiﬀerent, or their products might be localized in diﬀerent intracellularcompartments, such that their respective positions in the GO MolecularTesting Inferred Networks 165Molecular FunctionBindingTranscriptionregulator activity(69 genes)Transcriptionfactor activity(53 genes)Nucleic acidbindingDNAbindingSequence-specificDNA binding(39 genes)Ion bindingCation bindingMetal ion bindingTransition metal ion bindingCadmium ion binding(4 genes)Copper ion binding(9 genes)FIGURE 5.8: An example in which multiple genes share the sameMolecular Function category (i.e., binding) in the Gene Ontology hierar-chy. The relationships shown were obtained by querying the GO database[http://www.geneontology.org; Ashburner et al. (2000).]Function or Cellular Component schema might indeed be diﬀerent.5.7 Testing Genetic InteractionsAs we know, genetic interactions can have varied interpretations de-pending on their type. For example, an allele-speciﬁc suppression in-teraction implies a protein-protein physical interaction (see Chapter1). Synthetic lethal interactions, on the other hand, have more com-plex consequences for physical interactions.One interpretation of synthetic lethality is that members of synthetic166 Introduction to Biological NetworksCellular ComponentExtracellular regionCellCytoskeletonExtracellular regionpartIntracellularExtracellular matrix(23 genes)MacromolecularcomplexIntracellularorganelleOrganelleNon-membrane-boundorganelleCytoskeletal partIntermediate filamentcytoskeletonCell partIntracellularpartProteinaceous extracellular matrix(21 genes)OrganellepartProtein complexIntracellularorganellepartIntracellularnon-membrane-boundorganelleIntermediate filamentNeurofilament cytoskeletonNeurofilament(3 genes)FIGURE 5.9: An example illustrating the Cellular Component categoryin the Gene Ontology hierarchy. The resolution of protein location increasesas one reads down the heirarchy. The relationships shown were obtained byquerying the GO database [http://www.geneontology.org; Ashburner et al.(2000).]Testing Inferred Networks 167lethal pairs function in parallel but redundant pathways, such that theloss of any two members of the same pathway causes no appreciablediﬀerence to the organism but the loss of a member each from the tworedundant pathways is lethal (see Figure 1.5). Indeed, classiﬁcation ofmost synthetic lethal genes that encode known proteins belonging towell-established biochemical pathways indicates that the majority ofsynthetic lethal pairs map across diﬀerent pathways rather than withinthe same pathway (Kelley and Ideker, 2005). Thus, they mostly fol-low the patterns of Figure 1.5a and Figure 1.5b. We therefore expectthat GO classiﬁcation of synthetic lethal pairs should reveal system-atic correlation in the biological functions of the two genes in a pair.In other words, pairs of synthetic lethal genes should have short Bi-ological Process GO distances separating them. This is because whentwo separate pathways that converge to the same essential biologicalprocess are simultaneously disrupted, synthetic lethality occurs.On the other hand, the two members of the synthetic lethal gene pairneed not be related in their Molecular Function or Cellular ComponentGO ontologies. This is because two interacting proteins that participatein the same biological pro cess may have diﬀerent biochemical functions.For example, Mdm2p is a Ubiquitin E3 ligase for p53, while p53 is atranscription factor that binds DNA. While both proteins participatein the same biological process (regulation of transcription) and theyphysically interact with each other, there is no biochemical similaritybetween them (see Section 5.3 above).Note, however, that two separate but largely redundant pathwaysshould encode proteins that are largely overlapping in their molecu-lar functions. This follows from the rationale that if two pathways areredundant, they must perform similar biochemical functions even ifthey have distinct participating proteins. This provides another func-tional test for synthetic lethality. Imagine a set of synthetic lethal pairscomposed of two gene sets A and B, in which every member of A issynthetic lethal with every member of B, but there are no syntheticlethal pairs within A or B. If the Molecular Function GO positions ofall genes in this set are enumerated, then one predicts that the averageGO distance within A will be nearly equal to that within B.A second prediction is that proteins encoded by A should prefer-entially physically interact among themselves, and so would proteinsencoded by B, but that A proteins may not preferentially interactwith those in B (see Figure 1.5a, where A and A’ constitute examples168 Introduction to Biological Networksof A and B).There are many exceptions to the above tendency of mapping syn-thetic lethal pairs to between-pathway members (Kelley and Ideker,2005), which may indicate incomplete knowledge of biochemical path-ways or alternative interpretations of synthetic lethality. One alter-native interpretation is that the products of a synthetic lethal genepair could both belong to the same multi-protein complex (thereforebelong to the same biochemical pathway; see Figure 1.5b). It mayjust so happen that the loss of one of them is insuﬃcient to causecomplete dysfunction of the complex, but that the simultaneous lossof both causes complete disruption. In this case, one expects to ﬁndan over-representation of protein-protein interaction edges among syn-thetic lethal pairs than expected by chance, and GO molecular functiondistances should be short among these synthetic lethal pairs.5.8 Structure-Based Tests of InteractionIn Chapter 3, we discussed how structural properties of two proteinscould be used to predict their propensity for physical interaction. Sim-ilarly, it is possible to test and score protein-protein interactions dis-covered by high-throughput methods if we know whether a pair ofhomologs of these proteins interact with each other and, if they do, thethree-dimensional structure of the resultant complex. We have alreadyseen how a protein-protein interaction network can be indirectly testedby comparison of the complexes that are computationally predicted fromthe network with experimentally discovered complexes. We now con-sider a more direct approach whereby two proteins that are found tointeract in a high-throughput screen can be validated by computing ascore that is based on the probability for homologs of these proteins tocome in contact within a protein complex.The basic method is summarized as follows. First, one constructs adatabase of experimentally discovered protein complexes that is suﬃ-ciently large to cover major functional families of proteins. From thisdatabase, one can identify pairs of amino acid residues (each memberof the pair being from a diﬀerent protein) that are in contact as deﬁnedby a suitable distance criterion. Amino acid pairs that are found to befrequently in contact among the protein complexes in the database arejudged to have high propensity for interaction. It follows that a pair of


===== [41/72] chapter-41.html =====

Testing Inferred Networks 169proteins that has a large proportion of these amino acid pairs will bejudged to have a higher propensity for interaction than pairs of proteinsthat have a low proportion of these amino acid pairs. Thus, a pair ofputatively interacting proteins can be scored for their propensity forinteraction according to the frequencies with which individual aminoacid pairs within these two proteins are found to be in contact in thedatabase of known complexes.The methodology above was proposed by Aloy and Russell (2002).They developed a scoring function for measuring the propensity of in-teraction for an arbitrary pair of residues in terms of the ratio of theactual number (Cab) to the expected number (Eab) of contacts of thoseresidues in the database. Speciﬁcally, for residues a and b, they deﬁnedthe score SabbySab= log10*CabEab+, with Eab= TnanbN2, (5.8)where naand nbare the total number of a and b amino acid residuesin the database that participate in contacts, N ="iniis the totalnumber of such residues, and T is the total number of interacting pairsof residues.In Aloy and Russell’s method, a putative interaction between twoproteins is scored by ﬁnding the homologs of these proteins in the com-plex database and scoring the interaction between the homologs bysumming up the scores of all interacting pairs of residues. This total(summed) score is then assessed for statistical signiﬁcance by compar-ing this score to the total scores achieved by randomized versions ofthe protein sequences: if the actual score turns out to be larger thanthe scores of a large proportion of randomized sequences, the putativeinteraction is deemed signiﬁcant.This structural method of validating interactions is powerful: wherehomologs of proteins to members of known complexes exist, it not onlyvalidates but also accurately predicts the propensity for interaction. Inaddition, the method yields insight into the mechanism of interactionbecause it identiﬁes the residues involved as well as the structure of theinteraction surface. A drawback of the method, however, is its limitedrange of applicability at the time of writing: only a small fraction of theinteractions discovered by large-scale experiments (yeast two-hybrid,co-IP, etc.) can be mapped to known complexes.


===== [42/72] chapter-42.html =====

Chapter 6Small Model NetworksIn previous chapters we examined interaction networks of various kinds.The wiring diagrams, or topological properties, of known biological in-teraction networks form a small subset of all possible kinds of networkorganization. The most prevalent topological features are thought tobe power-law degree distributions and modular structure, that is, theappearance of locally dense clusters, both of which we discuss in greaterdetail in subsequent chapters. These speciﬁc features of network topol-ogy might have been selected by evolution because they impart robust-ness to random attack, as discussed in Chapter 1. Alternatively, theymight have no speciﬁc utility and be the result of a historical acci-dent that is merely propagated by evolution. In either case, however,one would surmise that structural or topological features of the net-work should be informative of biological function. This is because thestructure either had selective value or was preserved due to functionalconstraints on certain genes (or their products). In other words, if thetopology itself had a selective property, then the study of the conserva-tion of topological properties in evolution could potentially reveal thebiological function that is selected for. On the other hand, if topolog-ical features merely happened to be preserved as a by-product of theconservation of some other features, then these other features might berevealed by studying the conservation of topology.So far we have remained mostly silent on the biological relevance ofnetwork structure. Here we approach this issue by examining in de-tail a few speciﬁc models of biological interaction networks. These areprobably the most well-understood network models in biology—the ge-netic and regulatory network controlling the life cycle of a bacterialvirus (bacteriophage) called lambda and the cell cycle regulation ofthe lower eukaryotic organism (Saccharomyces cerevisiae). These dis-cussions are aimed at illustrating the mechanistic basis of individualinteractions and how these biological mechanisms are embedded withinthe network at large.171172 Introduction to Biological NetworksBox 6.1 BacteriophagesA bacteriophage is a virus that can infect a host bacterium and reproducewithin it. Bacteriophages are pathogens that are usually composed of a DNAor RNA genome that is packaged within a protein shell. Their highly reducedgenomes encode a limited number of genes, approximately a third to a half ofwhich are essential for the life cycle of the phage. There are several diﬀerenttypes of bacteriophages, but here we focus on one special virus, the lambdaphage.6.1 Life Cycle of the Lambda PhageThe genome of bacteriophage (or simply, phage) lambda (Box 6.1) as itis contained in the free virus particles (virions) outside a virus-infectedcell is a linear double-stranded (duplex) DNA with short single-strandends that are complementary to each other. The phage particles adhereto a speciﬁc receptor protein (encoded by the host cell) that is expressedon the surface of a susceptible host Escherichia coli cell. Upon bindingto the receptor protein, the DNA of the phage particle is injected intothe host cell. The newly entered DNA quickly circularizes by comple-mentary base pairing at its single-stranded ends, and a particular modeof DNA replication (the θ mode) begins, in which further circular DNAcopies are made (Figure 6.1).If only one phage infects the host cell, and this cell happens to con-tain abundant nutritional resources, it is observed that there is a ∼99%chance that the replication process will soon switch to a second mode(the σ mode; Figure 6.1), which leads to the production of numer-ous tandem copies of the virus genome. These tandem copies of phagegenome together form the concatemeric linear double-stranded DNA1,which is the substrate for the machinery that packages the DNA intothe phage virion. Each cell produces approximately 100 to 300 virions,each of which contains exactly one genome’s worth of lambda DNA.These virion particles emerge out of the host cell by destroying thehost cell (lysis; see the bottom left panel of Figure 6.1).The life cycle of the phage depends on the interactions between the1A concatamer is a long stretch of duplex or double-stranded DNA that containsrepeated copies of the unit genome.Small Model Networks 173phage-encoded proteins and the proteins of the host cell. For example,successful transition to the σ mode of replication requires the inhibitionby phage-encoded proteins of certain host enzymes that normally de-grade the linear double-stranded DNA. This inhibition is mediated byprotein-protein interactions between the host enzymes and the phage-encoded proteins. Successful replication, expression of the virion pro-teins, and cell lysis are controlled by genes that are expressed by thephage genome late in the infection process. The entire process, be-ginning from the sigma mode of replication to emergence of the newvirions, is the lytic cycle of lambda.It is observed that if a host cell is simultaneously infected by twoor three phages, the chance that the infecting phages will follow thelytic life cycle reduces to about 50% or 10%, respectively. The alter-nate mode of the life cycle—lysogeny—is the production of a set ofproteins that allows the phage DNA to insert itself at a favored loca-tion on the host’s chromosome (Figure 6.1). This is accompanied byrepression of all genes encoded by the phage except one, the cI gene.The likelihood that the lysogenic cycle will be followed is somewhatincreased if the host is growing under nutrient-poor conditions. In thelysogenic state, the phage DNA is called a prophage and the host cellthat harbors the prophage is called the lysogen. As the lysogen divides,the prophage DNA replicates along with the host chromosome onceevery cell generation until there is a threat to the host genome (per-haps due to DNA damage, ultraviolet radiation, or heat shock). Whenthis threat occurs, the phage DNA reverses the process of integrationinto the host genome and is released as a circular DNA of unit phagegenome length. This circular DNA now undergoes the sigma mode ofDNA replication and enters a lytic cycle. Subsequently the host cellbursts, thus liberating a crop of new virions capable of infecting otherhosts. In the prophage state, the virus makes the host cell immune tofurther infection by related viruses, as we discuss below.Remarkably, it is observed that the prophage state is extremely sta-ble, such that a spontaneous conversion from lysogenic to lytic state hasa probability of about 10−8per phage particle per generation. Thus, ifa single, recently established lysogen is followed at the single cell level,and given that a single host cell divides into two daughter cells approx-imately once every 30 minutes, a spontaneous switch from lysogenic tothe lytic state would occur once every 5,000 years! This nonmutatedstate of the DNA in which all genes except cI are kept under the re-174 Introduction to Biological NetworksFIGURE 6.1: The life cycle of bacteriophage lambda and the lysis-lysogenydecision. Adapted with permission from Cooper (2000).pressed condition is an example of the epigenetic state, which in thiscase appears to be more stable compared to spontaneous DNA basechange due to mutation (Ptashne, 2005), a phenomenon that occurs ata rate of 1 in 106to 108per base-pair per generation. The mechanismthat shuts down all phage genes except cI is also the basis of immunityagainst all further lambda virus infection, because the “early genes” ofthese newly invading genomes are also shut down by the cI protein.We now examine how the remarkable biology of lambda is executedthrough the interaction of proteins, DNA, and RNA. One of the mostimportant hallmarks of the life cycle of lambda is the decision to un-dergo either the lytic or the lysogenic mode, which has been classicallydescribed as a simple switch controlled by two proteins, cII and cIII.Small Model Networks 175Once this decision has been made, the state—either lysogenic or lytic—is maintained by the activity of one of two other proteins, cI or Cro,depending on whether the state is lysogenic or lytic, respectively.6.2 Interaction Network in the Lysis–Lysogeny DecisionThe essence of the interaction network of the type we discussed inprevious chapters that is relevant to the lysis-lysogeny decision andmaintenance is shown in Figure 6.2a. Each node in this network rep-resents either a gene or an encoded protein, and edges between nodesrepresent protein-DNA or protein-RNA interactions. Gene names inthis network are printed in italics while protein names are not. Earlyin the infection process, the host-encoded RNA polymerase protein ac-tivates the transcription of two phage-encoded genes, N and Cro. Theproduct of gene N , namely the anti-termination protein N, binds tothe RNA polymerase protein to form an RNA polymerase-N complexthat activates transcription of int, cII, cIII, O, P, and Q genes. TheO and P proteins are essential for starting the replication of lambdaDNA, Int is essential for integration of the lambda DNA into the hostchromosome once the decision to lysogenize has been made, and Q isanother protein that modiﬁes RNA polymerase by direct interaction.The RNA polymerase-Q complex allows transcriptional activation ofthe “lytic” genes (not shown in the ﬁgure). asQ is a negative regu-lator of Q, and cII is a transcriptional activator of int, asQ, and cI.The cI gene is both a negative regulator of Cro and N, and a pos-itive regulator of itself. The cII protein is inactivated (degraded) bythe host-encoded protein HﬂB. The cIII protein inactivates HﬂB. Thuswe see that this network of interacting genes and proteins embodiesseveral negative and positive feedback loops. In the next few sections,we study these feedback mechanisms further in the context of the lifecycle of the lambda bacteriophage.6.2.1 Regulatory Loops in the Lysis–Lysogeny Decision andMaintenanceThe loops N → RNA Pol-N → cII → cI - N, cI → cI, and cI -Cro - cI are required for the establishment of lysogeny. The path N →RNA Pol-N → CIII - HﬂB - CII → cI is also known to be importantfor establishing the lysogenic state (Figure 6.2b). Moreover, the positive


===== [43/72] chapter-43.html =====

176 Introduction to Biological NetworksFIGURE 6.2: A highly simpliﬁed diagram of the gene regulatory network ofphage lambda. (a) The networks important for three phases of the lambda lifecycle (early, lysogenic, and lytic) are combined. (b) The subnetwork impor-tant for the establishment of lysogeny. (c) The subnetwork important for themaintenance of lysogeny. Edges with arrows denote activation (positive regu-lation) and edges with bars denote repression (negative regulation). Adaptedand simpliﬁed with permission from Dodd et al. (2005).feedback loop cI → cI is essential for the maintenance of lysogeny, andis the single mechanism responsible for the stable epigenetic prophagestate discussed in the previous section.The classical view of the lytic cycle induction is through the loop:Cro - cI - N → RNA Pol-N → cII → Cro, leading to continuedrepression of cI by Cro (Figure 6.2c). The path N → Q, initiatedindirectly by Cro through the release of cI repression on N (cI - N), isresponsible for triggering the transcription of lytic genes. Note here thatthe relative dynamics of two eﬀects of Cro on N, namely the magnitudeand the rate of Cro’s direct negative eﬀect on N versus Cr o’s indirectpositive eﬀect on N via cI, is important for ﬁguring out whether theexpression of Q will be triggered, thus leading to a lysogenic state. ThisSmall Model Networks 177FIGURE 6.3: A highly simpliﬁed diagram of the temporal events in the generegulatory network of phage lambda. (a) Early gene expression, immediatelyafter infection; (b) delayed gene expression, before the lysis-lysogeny decisionhas been taken; (c) gene expression during the establishment of lysogen; (d)gene expression during the maintenance of lysogeny; (e) gene expression dur-ing the lytic phase. Note that stage (e) may follow immediately after stage(b) or (c). Shaded squares represent binding sites of the RNA polymerase andregulatory factors. For example, RNA polymerase binds to pLto transcribeN, Int, and CIII, whereas CI binds to pLto repress transcription from theposition on the DNA. Adapted and simpliﬁed from Oppenheim et al. (2005).cannot be captured by the static model represented by Figure 6.2;it must be augmented both by actual experimental data as well asby dynamical modeling of the expression levels of the various genesand proteins in this network. A more detailed summary of the timedexpression of genes in the network is given in Figure 6.3, and a succinctdescription of these events is provided by Oppenheim et al. (2005), towhich the interested reader is referred.178 Introduction to Biological Networks6.2.2 The Lysis–Lysogeny SwitchIt is evident from the above discussion that competition between thetwo loops in Figure 6.2a, namely N → cII → cI - N and Cro - cI -N → cII → Cro, is the critical factor for tipping the balance betweenlysogeny and lysis. If a suﬃcient build-up of cII protein occurs, then thecI gene is activated, which turns oﬀ the expression of N and thereforecII, and consequently Cro is also turned oﬀ. Thus cI will reinforceits own synthesis through the cI → cI loop. If, on the other hand, Croprevails, then cI is repressed while N remains active at least transiently(because it is found that the drop in cI concentration necessary toactivate the expression of N precedes the rise in Cro concentrationthat represses N). This leads to N → Q, which initiates transcriptionof the lytic genes. Note that the product of the Q gene modiﬁes theRNA polymerase so that the latter can transcribe the lytic cycle geneswithout having to depend on N for its activity, as shown in Figure 6.2.These events lead to establishment of the lytic state.The positive regulatory action of cII on its three target genes, cI,int, and asQ, requires an appropriate concentration of cII protein inthe cell, which is determined by a number of factors, including theactivity of the host-encoded protease HﬂB. Inhibition of HﬂB activityby cIII helps increase the accumulation of cII protein. Because it isobserved that ab out 99% of the cells infected with one phage DNAundergo a lytic cycle, while only about 50% of cells infected with twophages do so, it is thought that more cIII and cII proteins are madein the latter case than in the former. The increased concentration ofcIII and cII proteins is expected to be suﬃcient to trip the switch toestablish a sustained amount of cI protein and hence to lysogenize. TheHﬂB protein is present in relatively low amounts such that its inhibitoryactivity on cII can be overcome by cIII. Therefore it is likely that thepath cIII - HﬂB - cII → cI should be critical for cI establishment.Two or more phage infections per cell are usually suﬃcient to provideenough cI for lysogeny.One of the critical factors for the switch is the slight delay betweenthe rise in cI expression and the activation of the Q protein. This ismediated by the positive regulatory eﬀect of cII on transcription of asQ,the negative regulator of Q that we encountered earlier. This delay inthe rise of Q protein expression, which is positively regulated by N (viaRNA Pol-N) and also under feed-forward negative regulation throughcII (via asQ), is currently thought to be critical in the establishment ofSmall Model Networks 179lysogeny (Figure 6.2). This is because when N is transiently expresseddue to a sudden drop in cI concentration, it triggers the expression of Qthrough the N → RNA Pol-N → Q path, while the repressive (negativefeed-forward) path RNA Pol-N → cII → asQ - Q lags behind thedirect induction of Q expression.6.2.3 Stability of the ProphageThe cI protein is a highly eﬃcient negative regulator (of Cro and N )as well as a positive regulator of itself (autoregulator). This remarkableproperty of a single protein arises due to a combination of its specialstructure and the geometrical arrangement of its binding sites on theDNA [see Court et al. (2007)]. Cro is transcribed from the pLpro-moter while N is transcribed from the pRpromoter, both of which arerepressed by cI (Figure 6.4). Cro expression is essential for late geneexpression. Thus, a stable repression of Cro by cI maintains the stableprophage state.What causes the unusual stability of the epigenetic state of repressionof the lytic genes of lambda by cI? The cI protein has three importanttypes of domains: one DNA binding domain, two dimerization interfacedomains, and one transcription activation domain. The DNA bindingaﬃnity of the monomeric protein is weak, but the simultaneous bindingof two cI proteins on the two appropriately arranged binding sequenceson the DNA allows protein-protein contact via the dimerization surfaces(Figure 6.4a,b). Cooperativity between the two monomers increases thestability of the b ound dimer on the DNA target (Figure 6.4). End-to-end tetramerization of cI stabilizes the tetrameric cI-DNA complexfurther (Figure 6.4b). This prevents the promoters pL(that controls Crotranscription) and pR(that controls N transcription) from transcribingCro and N.The N and Cro genes are divergently transcribed, that is, they areencoded on opposite DNA strands, and have suﬃcient separation forthe intervening DNA to fold. Each gene has three upstream tandemcI binding sequences arranged such that the tetrameric cI bound attwo of the three binding sequences occludes the binding of RNA poly-merase to the promoter sequences of the two genes. Furthermore, thetetramers bound at the two genes interact with each other, forming ahighly stable octamer, with the intervening DNA looped between thetwo sites (Figure 6.4c). This looped structure, stabilized by the highlycooperative association of the octameric cI with its cognate binding180 Introduction to Biological Networksa)b)c)L1 L2 L3R3 R2 R1L1 L2 L3R3 R2 R1L3 L2 L1R3 R2 R1cI monomer cI monomercI tetramer cI tetramercI octamerpLpRpLpRpLpRONONOFFOFFXXSuper repressedSuper repressedpRMpRMpRMXOFFONONRNAPRNAPRNAPRNAPFIGURE 6.4: Cooperativity in protein recruitment on DNA. (a) The pro-tein cI (ellipse) has weak aﬃnity for each of the binding sites L1, L2, L3, R1,R2, and R3 on the DNA (represented by the cylinder). At low cI concentra-tion, cI is unable to bind DNA, and RNA polymerase transcribes from thepromoters pLand pR. However, pRM, which transcribes cI, is inactive. (b)At higher concentrations of cI in the cell, protein-protein interactions rein-force each monomer’s aﬃnity for the binding site and allow two monomersto bind simultaneously to the DNA. This represses pLand pRbut activatespRMby allowing RNA polymerase to bind L3 through contact with the cIprotein bound at R2. (c) Tetramer-tetramer interactions can fold the inter-vening DNA into a loop, and supercoiling of the DNA can provide additionalstability to the structure. Adapted with permission from Ptashne (2005).sequences, causes a practically complete repression of N and Cro geneexpression.A crucial element of the process of stable cI gene expression is thepresence of a third cI target sequence near N and Cro (R3 and L3),somewhat further away from the two sites where the octameric cI binds.The cI protein has relatively less aﬃnity for the third site than for the


===== [44/72] chapter-44.html =====

Small Model Networks 181other two sites; when this site is unoccupied by cI, RNA polymerase isable to dock on the promoter region of the cI gene (pRM) and allowtranscription (Figure 6.4c). This allows continued production of cI pro-tein for maintaining the repression of N and Cro, essential for a stableprophage state.A relevant question here is how robust the lambda lysis-lysogeny cir-cuit is to substantial changes in its component parts. It has b een shownthat despite drastic changes in the components (the replacement of R3by R1, for example), little or no detectable change in the expression ofany of the genes necessary for the switch occurred (Little et al., 1999).The apparent robustness of this circuit could not be predicted frompast studies of the individual components alone.6.2.4 Induction of the Lytic CycleThe amount of cI protein required to maintain the lysogenic state isjust suﬃcient to block the transcription of the N and Cro genes ofany subsequent phage particles that may infect the lysogenic cell, thusexplaining the immunity of the lysogenic cell to further infection. How-ever, the maintenance concentration of cI can be reduced by factorssuch as DNA damage, in which case the cI protein undergoes degra-dation by an unrelated process. This leads to a transient drop in cIlevel beyond that which can retain the octameric complex at the twosites as explained in the previous subsection (Figure 6.4). As a result,Cro is transiently transcribed from the promoter pL(see Figure 6.3 forschematic representations of the promoters that control the relevantgenes). The Cro protein is a repressor that binds to the same sites as cI(but lacks cI’s activating function), thus repressing N, cI, cII, and cIII.However, the feed-forward inactivation of Q by asQ is also inactivated(Figure 6.2a) because this feed-forward circuit is dependent on the pos-itive regulation of asQ by cII. This causes transient expression of theQ protein, which triggers the default pathway that activates Q via theRNA Pol-Q complex (Figure 6.2a). The activation of Q trips the lyticpathway, leading to the transcription of genes necessary for the σ modeof DNA replication, synthesis of phage coat proteins, assembly of thephage particles, packaging of DNA into the particles, and destructionof the host cell.182 Introduction to Biological Networks6.3 Recruitment of Proteins as a Theme in RegulatoryNetworksThe overarching theme behind lambda gene regulation and the success-ful completion of the lambda life cycle is the selective recruitment ofspeciﬁc proteins at the correct location on the DNA. For example, thehost RNA polymerase has strong aﬃnity for the promoter sequencespLand pR, which are upstream of N and cII, respectively. However,RNA polymerase falls oﬀ the DNA shortly after transcribing N orbefore even transcribing cII. The N protein interacts with the RNApolymerase so that the modiﬁed RNA polymerase can transcribe pastthis point. Aided by the interaction of N with the RNA polymerase,transcription reaches cII and cIII. We have already seen how protein-protein interaction aids the recruitment of cI on the DNA to mediaterepression as well as activation. Maintenance of the repressed state by ahighly stable and compact looped structure of the DNA is possible dueto recruitment of the repressor proteins. This theme of regulation byrecruitment is general: the recruitment occurs due to modular interac-tion domains that can be removed and replaced artiﬁcially or naturallyover the course of evolution to produce novel functions (modularity asa recurrent theme in biological networks is discussed in Chapter 8);all gene regulatory networks involve one or more of the mechanismsdescribed above, although with signiﬁcant variation in the details.6.3.1 Regulatory Mechanisms Other than Passive Recruit-mentIn both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, transcription of most genes is ac-tivated by the recruitment of binding proteins that provide an “adhe-sive surface” on which the basal transcriptional apparatus can dockand begin its activity. There are, however, some exceptions to this inprokaryotes. In nitrogen metabolism genes, a form of the RNA poly-merase spontaneously binds the promoter region but does not begintranscription until an enzymatic process activates the inactive tran-scription. This exception in prokaryotes is actually the rule in eukary-otes, where the RNA Polymerase II complex binds, often aided bypassive recruitment by DNA-binding transcription factor proteins, toform the so-called “transcription pre-initiation complex” that must be“activated” ﬁrst by a series of diﬀerent enzymes. Only upon this “ac-tivation” step does the RNA Polymerase II molecule begin sustainedSmall Model Networks 183synthesis of RNA upon the DNA template. Thus, passive recruitmentprovides the connectivity of the network and enzymatic modiﬁcationtriggers RNA synthesis.6.4 The Network of Cell Cycle RegulationWe have seen how a relatively simple network of gene, protein, andRNA can regulate the complex life-cycle choices of a virus. We havealso noted some of the diﬃculties in putting together models of theseinteraction networks that accurately describe the properties of the bi-ological system. In this section we examine a somewhat more complexnetwork of great practical value, the cell-cycle network of baker’s yeast,and show that this network appears to have evolved a highly robuststructure. The general lesson one learns from this is that biological net-works are likely to have b een selected for robustness and stability. Ifwe are able to identify speciﬁc robust properties important for func-tion, then it should be possible to select the most robust topologiesas likely candidates for the actual network topology as well as explic-itly design synthetic networks with a view toward endowing them withidentiﬁable robust properties. In Chapter 8 we discuss properties ofnetworks that appear to underlie robustness. Here, on the other hand,we discuss an important network that has been pieced together over thelast several decades by biologists. The level of detailed understandingthat we currently possess makes it now possible to model and simulatethe behavior of this network for making quantitative predictions thatare testable by genetic and biochemical experiments. Importantly, thisnetwork is highly conserved among all eukaryotic organisms, includinghumans, in which errors in the behavior of this network cause diseasessuch as cancer. Thus, quantitative modeling of the human cell-cycleregulation network, although not yet possible, will likely be crucial forunderstanding cancer and the eﬀects of chemotherapeutic agents oncancer cells. Here, however, we restrict ourselves to a discussion of thecell-cycle network in yeast cells, which is simpler than its human coun-terpart.Over 700 genes are involved in the control of a cyclic series of eventsthat control the accurate progression of various landmark events inthe life of a cell and the clock-like behavior underlying the normalgrowth and division of the single-celled eukaryotic organism, Saccha-184 Introduction to Biological Networksromyces cereviseae. This has become a model system to study processesof cell division in all eukaryotic organisms because the central mech-anism and the genes that control these are highly conserved amongeukaryotic organisms, as mentioned earlier. Using the yeast cell cycleas a model, crucial insights on cancer have been obtained. For exam-ple, most normal human cells with a well-deﬁned function, such as anepithelial cell (which forms the lining of most tissues, including skin,blood vessels, ducts through which hormones are secreted, etc.) or anerve cell or a muscle cell, do not divide. These specialized cells, alsocalled diﬀerentiated cells, arise from so-called “progenitor cells” thathave limited capacity for cell division and are themselves derived from“stem cells” that can readily divide. The undividing diﬀerentiated cellsare demonstrably “arrested” at a speciﬁc cell-cycle phase, called G0.To re-enter the division phase, as occurs when a diﬀerentiated cell istransformed into a cancer cell, a series of genetic events must occur.Studies of the yeast cell cycle have contributed to our understandingof molecular events that must occur in these transitions. Another areawhere yeast cell cycle studies have contributed to understanding can-cer is the mechanism by which cell-cycle progression is coupled to thecompletion of various essential cellular events during the life of cell.For example, the entire DNA of the genome must be replicated—acomplex and somewhat slow process relative to the total time of thecell division cycle—before the nucleus divides into two daughter nu-clei. Otherwise, drastic chromosomal abnormalities will occur, such asthe ripping apart of incompletely replicated DNA duplexes during thenuclear division process. Cancers are generally asso ciated with manysuch chromosomal abnormalities, thus suggesting that cancer cells areassociated with defects in the biological processes that ensure the com-pletion of DNA replication before nuclear division. Let us now see whatthese biological processes are.Yeast cells are normally at a resting phase in which they grow involume by metabolizing nutrients. This stage is called G1 (Figure 6.5).When a certain critical nuclear-to-cytoplasmic volume ratio is achieved,the so called START “switch” is actuated, so that the cell enters theS phase in which DNA replication is initiated and subsequently com-pleted, which results in doubling the number of chromosomes. At thatpoint the cell enters the G2 phase, which is a preparatory phase forthe next phase, M or mitosis. In the M phase, the two sets of chromo-somes undergo a complex series of associations, following which theySmall Model Networks 185SG2MG1STARTFIGURE 6.5: Sequence of major cell cycle events in baker’s yeast. The cellcycle starts at the end of the G1 (resting) phase, when it enters the S phase.The S phase is characterized by replication of DNA and repair of discontinu-ities in DNA replication. This is followed by a second brief rest phase, G2.The cell then enters the M phase, when DNA becomes compacted into distinctchromosomes that assemble at the equator of the cell nucleus, tethered to the“spindle” apparatus. The homologous sets of chromosomes undergo separa-tion, followed by movement of each complete set of chromosomes to one of thepoles of the cell, and division of the cell cytoplasm into two daughter cells.At the end of M phase, the cells enter G1, during which metabolic activityleads to an increase in cell mass. When a critical cell mass (more accurately, acritical nuclear-to-cytoplasmic volume ratio) is reached, the cell leaves G1 toenter the S phase again. In the absence of a cell size signal, the cell continuesto stay in the G1 phase.move away to the opposite ends of cell, the cell divides in two, and eachdaughter cell receives one complete set of chromosomes. Then each cellreenters the G1 phase.The cell cycle can be compared to the cycle of a washing machine,where a timing device controls the sequential progression of a seriesof separate events. If one of the processes is defective, the progressionof the sequence of events is halted until the defective process is com-pleted. Likewise, in the cell cycle, if DNA replication is incomplete,then the cycle arrests in S phase. If the chromosomes fail to align ap-propriately prior to separation of the pairs to the two daughter cells,the cycle arrests in M phase. If not enough nutrients are present or ifanother signal that is required to commence START is not initiated,the cell cycle arrests in G1 phase. These points where the cell cycle isarrested pending the completion of important cellular events are termed


===== [45/72] chapter-45.html =====

186 Introduction to Biological Networks“checkpoints” in the cell cycle. Thus we speak of S- or M- or G1-phase-speciﬁc checkpoints. Sometimes one makes ﬁner distinctions. Examplesinclude DNA-damage checkpoints, signifying checkpoint arrest at thetermination of S-phase or within the M-phase, in which the cell cy-cle is arrested due to damaged DNA left unrepaired; and the spindlecheckpoint, which is actuated due to incomplete function of the spindleapparatus that pulls the chromosomal sets apart.Unlike the washing machine that has a speciﬁc program to control thesequence of events, pumps, and sensors that monitor the completion ofeach event, the cell has no such physical program or clock, although itdoes have sensors. Instead, the cell relies on the dynamical propertiesof a regulatory network to control the precise timing of the cell cycleevents.A central role in this network is played by an enzyme called Cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK, also called Cdc28p in yeast). This enzymehas the catalytic prop erty of adding high-energy phosphate groups toserine or tyrosine residues of many other substrate proteins, thus inturn aﬀecting the chemical properties of the substrate proteins (manyor most of these substrate proteins are enzymes themselves, whose cat-alytic properties are aﬀected by the gain or loss of the high-energyphosphate group). The catalytic property of Cdc28p is altered by thebinding to a set of cyclins, which are a set of small-molecular-weightproteins of related amino acid sequences. There are several diﬀerent cy-clins in every eukaryotic organism, including yeast. The various cyclinsare synthesized in certain speciﬁc phases of the cell cycle, dependingon the activities of phase-speciﬁc transcription factors that regulatethe transcription of these various cyclin genes, and a set of negativeregulators that degrade (break down) these speciﬁc cylin proteins in acell cycle phase-speciﬁc manner. Thus, the G1 cyclin, for example, issynthesized in G1 phase due to accumulation of a speciﬁc transcriptionfactor protein and the lack of a G1 cyclin degrading enzyme in the G1phase. When the S phase begins, an enzyme that degrades G1 cyclinbecomes active. Simultaneously, the transcription factor that triggersthe synthesis of the G1 cyclin mRNA is no longer active. This com-bined process of the control of a cell phase-speciﬁc cyclin synthesis anddegradation ensures a sharp peak of G1 cyclin activity during the G1phase and its low activity in other phases of the cell cycle.Out of approximately 700 diﬀerent proteins, a core set of 11 proteinsand their interactions capture the essential dynamics of the system,Small Model Networks 187which is represented in the simpliﬁed model of Figure 6.6 (Li et al.,2004).Many important processes in cell cycle regulation can be describedas biochemical switches (with an ON state and an OFF state), a sim-pliﬁcation that does not sacriﬁce the essential biology of the problem.Therefore, it is reasonable as a ﬁrst approximation to assume that thereare 211(= 2,048) possible states for this network of 11 nodes.In a simple Boolean model of the network, the state Siof the ithnode at time t + 1 is a function of states at time t of all nodes that areconnected to it, described by the following rule:Si(t + 1) =21, if"jJijSj(t)+h>00, otherwise,(6.1)where Jij= 1 if node j is connected to i in an activating (or positivelyregulating) manner, Jij= −1 if node j is connected to i in an inacti-vating (or negatively regulating) manner, Jij= 0 if the two nodes arenot connected, and h is an arbitrary threshold parameter. Assumingh = 0, that is, the genetic switch has no inﬂuence when it does notreceive any input information, and is active when the input signals arepresent, the network can be simulated on the computer to start from agiven initial condition (which is one among 2,048 possible initial con-ditions) and the states of each of its 11 nodes followed in discrete timesteps to ﬁnd stable conﬁgurations of the network as a whole, if thereexist any.In addition to the formulation of the rate laws of relevant protein con-centrations in terms of a set of constants and parameters as describedabove, the model also uses conditional logic to reduce the set of pos-sible interactions among the network components and for consistencywith available biological experimental data. Due to the existence of theconditional logical steps and the large number of equations, the modelis not solved analytically but is instead integrated numerically. In otherwords, the resulting diﬀerential equations and rules are integrated nu-merically to produce time course plots of protein concentrations thatare considered important output functions of the model.When this computer experiment was carried out with the simpliﬁedcell cycle model in Figure 6.6, 1,764 of the 2,048 possible initial statesconverged to a stable state of the network in which the values for theexpression levels of Cdh1 and Sic1 were 1 (ON) each, and all the restwere 0 (OFF). This suggests that for most of the initial states, the188 Introduction to Biological NetworksFIGURE 6.6: A simpliﬁed model of the network of cell cycle regulation.Each node represents either a single protein or a protein complex. Positiveregulation is represented by solid lines ending in arrows and negative regu-lation by dashed lines ending in ﬁlled circles. Some edges are bidirectional.The node labeled “Cell size” denotes a collection of genes that produce a sig-nal when the ratio of nuclear and cytoplasmic volumes drops below a certainthreshold. This drop is characterized by a transition from G1 to S phase inthe cell cycle; metabolic activities prior to the transition lead to an increasein cytoplasmic volume while the nuclear volume remains relatively constant.Adapted with permission from Li et al. (2004).Small Model Networks 189“ﬂow” through the network converges to a network state in which, ofthe 11 proteins, only two (Cdh1 and Sic1) are expressed and the re-maining proteins are not expressed. There were two other minor stablestates, which could be reached from 151 and 109 initial network states,respectively. For all three stable network states, the ﬁnal protein ex-pression patterns corresponded to those in the G1 phase of the cellcycle. Furthermore, four additional stable states were found that couldbe reached from less than 10 initial states each. When random networkswith 11 nodes and the same number of edges (in which the connectionswere randomized) were tested for stable states, no such bias for stablestate conﬁgurations was observed.The above observations show that the cell cycle regulation network,which undoubtedly has evolved through natural selection, has a singlestable state corresponding to the G1 phase of the cell cycle. Noting thatmost environmental signals, such as low nutrition availability or a hor-mone signal, arrest cells in the G1 phase (cells in other phases completetheir progress through the cell cycle, enter G1, and are arrested there),this simulation exercise provides strong evidence that the architectureof this network might have evolved to be robust to initial states. Thatthe cycle maintains the biologically relevant progression can be testedby “exciting” the START state in G1 with the cell size signal, whichthen can be observed to progress through S, G2, M and return to G1via discrete steps.Given the small size of the core network of cell cycle regulation inFigure 6.6 as compared to the actual network, which despite its massivesize [880 chemical species and 732 reactions (Kaizu et al., 2010)] stillremains incomplete, it is surprising that the reduced model capturesthe essential properties of the cell cycle. The Boolean model of thecell cycle network described above, however, is insuﬃcient to capturemore subtle dynamics, such as the actual rates of increase and decreaseof various protein levels and the timescale of their periodic variationsover the course of the cell cycle. Ultimately, the aim is to develop amathematical model of the cell cycle that can quantitatively predictthe eﬀects of variation in any of the protein levels on all other proteinsand cell biological events. One use of such a model, for example, wouldbe to predict the quantitative eﬀects of a drug molecule that activatesor inactivates an enzymatic step in the process, as in the case of ananticancer drug. To that end, it is necessary to construct more detailedmodels based on the mechanistic understanding of each of these steps.190 Introduction to Biological NetworksCdc20inactiveSynthesisDegradationCdc20 activeCDC14 Cdh1inactive Cdh1 activeSynthesisDegradationClb2SynthesisDegradation Sic1SynthesisDegradationMcm1Mcm1Mcm1M Clb5SDegradationSynthesisCell massFIGURE 6.7: A partial mechanistic model of cell cycle regulation in buddingyeast. Only a few reactions important for the control of DNA synthesis in the Sphase and entry into the M phase are shown in boxes. These reactions, alongwith several more, were numerically modeled by Chen et al. (2004). Solidarrows denote chemical reactions while dashed arrows denote regulation.In a particularly interesting example of quantitative modeling of theyeast cell cycle, a mechanistic model of the most essential enzymaticsteps in cell cycle regulation was constructed (Chen et al., 2004) (Fig-ure 6.7). This model had nearly twice as many nodes as that in theBoolean model discussed above. Corresponding to each enzymatic stepin this mo del, a diﬀerential equation was written down, which resultedin a system of coupled diﬀerential equations. For example, correspond-ing to the rate of change of active Cdc20 protein concentration withtime, which is positively regulated by Mcm1 and is also degraded at aconstant rate through the action of Mad2, one writesd[Cdc20]Tdt= k1+ k2[Mcm1] − k3[Cdc20]T, (6.2)where [Cdc20] and [Mcm1] represent concentrations of the proteinsCdc20 and Mcm1, respectively, and k1,2,3are rate constants for the


===== [46/72] chapter-46.html =====

Small Model Networks 191TimeCell massCdc20 concentrationFIGURE 6.8: A schematic diagram of the results of simulation of a com-putational model of the cell cycle network of Figure 6.7. The dashed curvecorresponds to the cell mass and the solid curve corresponds to the concen-tration of Cdc20.synthesis and degradation of [Cdc20]. The values of the individual rateconstants were either calculated by actual experiments or chosen tolie within reasonable ranges. The simulation output included cell massand concentrations of certain sentinel proteins, such as cyclins or CDKactivity. Simulation of this set of coupled diﬀerential equations yieldstime-dependent concentrations of the various sentinel proteins and cellmass (Figure 6.8), each of which shows a cyclic pattern. The sentinelproteins are those that exhibit periodic cell cycle-dependent variationsof concentration in the cell and have been shown to cause the accurateprogression of the cell cycle itself. Using the simulation data, it is pos-sible to make precise predictions of the concentration dynamics givenany perturbation to the model (representing experimental perturba-tion of a component of the cell cycle regulatory network). Alterationof parameters in the model can simulate deletions, gene dosage eﬀects,binding aﬃnity changes, etc. In Equation (6.2), for example, the valueof the constant k2can be set to 0, signifying that the transcription fac-tor Mcm1 fails to induce the transcription of the Cdc20 gene (in fact,the relevant protein is a complex of the Mcm1 protein and anothertranscription factor protein called SFF, which is omitted here for sim-plicity). We can then numerically simulate the eﬀect of this adjustmenton all other concentrations. Similarly, one can increase the value of k2,which signiﬁes an increase in the eﬃciency with which Cdc20 mRNAis synthesized, and then simulate its eﬀects. Working in this fashion, itis possible to systematically search the parameter space for parameter192 Introduction to Biological Networksvalues for which the species concentrations lie within normal bounds,thus pinning down the robustness regime of the yeast cell cycle networkas modeled in this simpliﬁed version. Moreover, many of these predictedeﬀects can actually be tested by genetic experiments (e.g., by deletingthe binding site of Mcm1p at the promoter site of the CDC20 gene,or by artiﬁcially hooking up the CDC20 gene to a stronger promotersequence, and so on). Thus it is possible to experimentally identifyincorrect predictions and use this information to iteratively alter thenetwork so as to ultimately bring the experimental observations intocongruence with those predicted by the altered model.


===== [47/72] chapter-47.html =====

Chapter 7Tractable Models of Large NetworksWhat are the design principles of biological networks? Are there spe-ciﬁc constraints that operate on their structure as they evolve? Whatare the mechanisms of network evolution and what properties of biolog-ical networks do these mechanisms preserve? Questions such as theseare diﬃcult to answer in general, but have led to a ﬂurry of activity inthe area of building model networks that mimic the large-scale connec-tivity properties of networks observed in nature. In order to comparemodel networks to real biological networks, we consider here variousglobal statistics that describe network structure, including the degreedistribution, clustering coeﬃcients, and mean path lengths.As we have discussed in earlier chapters, many biological interactionsat the molecular level consist of physical binding events and/or chemicalreaction events. We know that one way a gene regulatory interactionoccurs is when a transcription factor protein binds to the promoterregion of the gene that is being transcribed. A protein-protein interac-tion consists of physical binding of two proteins to form a complex. In ametabolic network, a directed interaction edge signiﬁes the occurrenceof a chemical reaction. In more abstract networks, on the other hand,edges may not have such a transparent interpretation but may stillarise out of multiple binding/reaction mechanisms. For example, twogenes that have a synthetic lethal interaction frequently lie on separatepathways of serial protein-protein interactions that are connected toeach other at one end point.The physico-chemical events that underlie a network are suscepti-ble to changes due to gene mutations. Mutations alter the gene se-quences (and protein structures) of the fundamental players (nodes)and therefore change binding energies and reaction rates. Mutationscan also alter DNA sequences where proteins (such as transcriptionfactors) may bind to regulate a gene. A series of mutations in suchnoncoding DNA regions accumulated during the process of biologicalevolution will therefore lead to rewiring of the network due to altered193194 Introduction to Biological Networkstranscription factor binding. Old binding sites may be lost. New sitescan emerge. Furthermore, genes can be duplicated over the course ofevolution and the number of such duplicates can change as the organ-ism evolves. Under this process, multiple genes may carry the samebiological function and therefore the same sets of network connections.These multiple genes, in turn, are independently susceptible to evolu-tionary divergence by mutations, thus leading to further rewiring ofthe network. Such considerations lead to a set of putative rules forthe evolutionary dynamics of a network, consisting of a mixture ofnode duplication, node speciﬁcation, and rewiring processes. The pre-cise mechanisms that determine how these processes are manifestedat the network level, as well as the relative frequencies of occurrenceof each process, are largely unknown, and diﬀerent assumptions aboutthe nature of these processes and their frequencies lead to strikinglydiﬀerent types of model networks.In this chapter, we lay the foundations for modeling network growthand evolution by using well-studied theoretical models as examples.The aim here is to understand the origins of biological complexity atthe network level, as well as to use the models to extract informationabout how evolution operates at the network level. To gain insightinto these models, we begin with a discussion of regular, random, andsmall-world networks, the way they are “wired,” and their properties.Because large networks are complex objects, it is important to extract afew statistical measures that capture their overall properties in order tofacilitate comparison of real networks with model networks. The statis-tical properties that we focus on here are the mean path length throughthe network and the average clustering coeﬃcient of the network.We further discuss various classes of models of network evolution,including biophysical models that represent ﬁrst steps in bringing largenetwork models into the familiar domain of known molecular interac-tion mechanisms. We then turn to the question of evolutionary insightsthat we obtain when mo del networks and model network mechanismsare confronted with real data. Unless otherwise stated, we assumein this chapter that all networks under consideration are connectednetworks or connected components of larger, disconnected networks(Box 7.1).Tractable Models of Large Networks 195Box 7.1 Network components.A network is said to be connected if every pair of nodes can be connected bya path constructed from the edges that comprise the network. A network thatis not connected (i.e., has at least one pair of nodes that cannot be connectedby a path along the network) is a disconnected network. A disconnectednetwork can be naturally split up into sub-networks that are, by themselves,connected networks but are not connected to each other. These sub-networksare called components of the original network. Any two nodes within acomponent can be connected by a path but nodes in diﬀerent componentscannot be connected to each other.In the case of directed networks, an additional distinction is made. A directednetwork is weakly connected if the corresponding undirected network is con-nected. It is strongly connected if, for every pair of nodes u and v, there existsa directed path along the network from u to v and one from v to u. Consider,for example, a directed network with three nodes a, b, and c and two directededges: an edge from a to b and an edge from c to b. This network is weaklyconnected because there is an undirected path between any two nodes. How-ever, it is not strongly connected because there is no directed path along thenetwork from a to c. Note that a strongly connected network is automaticallyweakly connected but the converse is not true.7.1 Mo dels of Regular NetworksWe begin our mathematical exploration of network models by consid-ering what is perhaps the simplest model network, a regular network, inwhich every node has the same degree r. A regular network containingn nodes, each of degree r, hasE =12nr (7.1)edges, where the factor of 1/2 arises because each edge is shared by twonodes. More generally, for an arbitrary network, E = (1/2)"ni=1ki,where kiis the degree of node i, and the sum runs over all n nodesin the network. The study of regular networks as one extreme, andtheir counterpart, random networks, as the other, is essential to theunderstanding of more realistic networks that have properties that areintermediate between the two extreme mo dels.Although regular networks appear to be simple, there are many dis-tinct ways of wiring a regular network out of a given number of nodes196 Introduction to Biological Networks1-latticeFIGURE 7.1: All distinct regular networks with n = 8 and r = 4, includingthe conﬁguration that corresponds to a 1-lattice.and edges. These distinct ways give rise to distinct networks. To bemore precise, we introduce the concept of network isomorphism. Wewill say that two networks are isomorphic if there exists a one-one cor-respondence between the nodes of one network and the nodes of theother such that the number of edges (0 or 1) between any two nodes ofone network is equal to the number of edges between the corresp ondingtwo nodes of the other network. Here, we tacitly assume that the nodesof the network have no labels, or even if they do, they are unlabeledfor the purpose of establishing the isomorphism.Thus, we say that two unlabeled networks are distinct if they are notisomorphic. The number of distinct labeled networks is smaller than thenumber of distinct unlabeled networks, because node labels essentiallydeﬁne the one-one correspondence between the two networks. The no-tion of isomorphism is quite general, and it is instructive to keep thisin mind when comparing a network generated by a model to a real one.Figure 7.1 displays all distinct (i.e., nonisomorphic) regular networkswith n = 8 and r = 4.For our purposes, we consider a special type of regular network, calleda 1-lattice, principally because the computation of many network statis-tics is relatively simple for such a network. A 1-lattice is a labeled,undirected network in which each node is connected to its immediatelyneighboring nodes in exactly the same way. Only one of the regularnetworks shown in Figure 7.1 is a 1-lattice.Suppose we label the nodes on a 1-lattice with n nodes by the integers1 to n. Mathematically, an arbitrary node in a 1-lattice, labeled v, isjoined to all nodes uiand withat satisfy the following criteria:ui=(v − i + n) (mod n),wi=(v + i) (mod n), (7.2)where 1 ≤ i ≤ r/2, and it is generally assumed that r ≥ 2. The modulooperation above (abbreviated as “mod”) ensures that the labels “wrapTractable Models of Large Networks 197around” correctly. That is, the diﬀerence between the two sides of eachequation in Equations (7.2) is an integer multiple of n. A 1-latticecan therefore be represented as a ring, as shown in the ﬁrst panel ofFigure 7.1.7.1.1 Path Length in a Regular NetworkIt is quite straightforward to ﬁnd the typical path length in a 1-lattice.Consider the mean length of all shortest paths between pairs of nodesin the network. Because all nodes in a 1-lattice are connected in thesame way, let us start with some arbitrary node v. There are thenexactly r nodes that have a shortest distance of 1 from v. For the sakeof simplicity, we assume that r is even, so that there are equal numbersof nodes (r/2) on either side of v. Because each of these r nodes also hasdegree r, there are a further r nodes that have a shortest distance of2 from v. Proceeding inductively, there are an additional r nodes thathave a shortest distance of 3 from v, and so on, until all the nodes in thenetwork are exhausted. We can therefore group nodes in the networkin such a way that two nodes belong to the same group if they have thesame shortest distance from v. Each group contains r nodes, and if wedo not assign the node v itself to any group, there are (n − 1)/r groupsin the network1. We may label the groups according to their shortestdistance from v. Thus, nodes in group i have a shortest distance of ifrom v, with i ranging from 1 to (n − 1)/r. The average path lengthl is then equal to the sum of shortest distances from each group to vdivided by the total number of groups:l ="(n−1)/ri=1i(n − 1)/r=12*n − 1r+1+∼n2rwhen n is large. (7.3)This shows that the average path length grows linearly with the size nof a 1-lattice. When the number of nodes is large, l is also expected tobe large.7.1.2 Clustering Coeﬃcient of a Regular NetworkThe average clustering coeﬃcient of a network is a measure of the den-sity of triangles or cliques in a network. Alternatively, it is a measure1We assume for simplicity that (n − 1)/r is an integer. If it is not, Equation (7.3)must be modiﬁed appropriately. This modiﬁcation does not change the result thatthe mean path length gr ows linearly with the size of the network for large n.


===== [48/72] chapter-48.html =====

198 Introduction to Biological Networksof the probability that the direct neighbors of a given no de are con-nected to each other. For each node, the local clustering coeﬃcient ofthat node is the ratio of the actual number of edges between neighborsof the node and the maximum possible number of edges between theneighbors. Thus, if a node i has degree r, the maximum number ofpossible edges between its r neighbors is Emax(i)=r(r − 1)/2, and theclustering coeﬃcient measures the actual number of edges as a fractionof Emax.An alternative deﬁnition of the local clustering coeﬃcient can begiven in terms of the number of triangles the node participates in, andis given byCi=N$(i)N3(i), (7.4)where N$(i) is the number of triangles that node i participates in, andN3(i) is the total number of connected triplets of nodes with i as thecentral node. That is, N3(i) is the same as the total number of pairsof edges emanating from i, which gives N3(i)=Emax(i). Similarly,the total number of triangles that i participates in is just the numberof neighbors of i that are connected to each other. These observationsshow that the two deﬁnitions of local clustering coeﬃcient that we haveoutlined are equivalent.For the 1-lattice, the neighboring r/2 nodes on one side of an arbi-trary node v are all connected to each other, resulting in (r/4)(r/2− 1)edges [because a set of m nodes in which every node is connected toevery other node has m(m − 1)/2 edges], and so are the neighbor-ing r/2 nodes on the other side. Furthermore, there are an additional(r/4)(r/2 − 1) connections between the neighbors on each side of v.This results in a total ofE =3r43r2− 14(7.5)connections among the r neighbors of v. The local clustering coeﬃcientof v is thereforeC =EEmax=34*r − 2r − 1+∼34, (7.6)where the last, approximate relation holds for moderately large valuesof r.Because every node in a regular network has the same value of C(from the deﬁnition of a regular network), the local clustering coeﬃcientTractable Models of Large Networks 199TABLE 7.1: Typical Path Lengths andAverage Clustering Coeﬃcients for VariousNetworksNetwork Size lCWorld Wide Web 153,127 3.1 0.11Math. co-authorship 70,975 9.5 0.59Silwood park food web 154 3.4 0.15Word co-occurrence 460,902 2.7 0.44E. coli reaction network 315 2.6 0.59C. elegans neural network 282 2.7 0.28Power grid (western U.S.) 4,941 18.7 0.08Note: “Size” refers to number of nodes, and l andC are the typical path length and average clusteringcoeﬃcient, respectively. Source: Albert and Barab´asi(2002).is equal to the average clustering coeﬃcient of the entire network. Thisaverage clustering coeﬃcient does not depend on the size of the networkand, as shown in Equation (7.6) above, is slightly less than 75% of itsmaximum possible value.We have thus found two distinct topological properties of 1-latticesthat are “global” in nature because they are computed using knowledgeof the entire network. First, the typical path length scales in proportionto the size of the network and is therefore potentially large for largenetworks; and second, the average clustering coeﬃcient is independentof the size of the network and is always fairly large. Of course, the terms“large” and “small” do not really mean anything unless we can comparethese to corresponding values in other types of networks. Comparisonof typical path lengths and clustering coeﬃcients of real networks tothose of the 1-lattice reveals that while average clustering coeﬃcientsof real networks are similar to those of a 1-lattice, the typical pathlengths are far smaller (Table 7.1). We will now see that the oppositeis true for random networks.7.2 Random Network ModelsRandom networks, although they have a long history, have receivedmuch attention in recent years. They are useful both as models for200 Introduction to Biological Networksman-made and natural networks as well as null models whose propertiesmay be compared to those of real networks. In biology, random networkmodels often form the basis for computing the statistical signiﬁcanceof an observation pertaining to an experimentally or computationallyinferred biological network. On the other hand, the randomness in suchmodels, it is hoped, can be made to capture the random componentof the evolution of living systems. Thus, cleverly constructed randomnetwork models can potentially mimic the process of evolution at thenetwork level, as shown through several examples in the following sec-tions.The seminal theoretical work of Erd¨os and Renyi (1959, 1960) [seealso Bollob´as (2001)] formed the foundation for the study of randomnetworks. As such, a simple random network can be deﬁned in twodiﬀerent ways that are essentially equivalent when the network is large.The ﬁrst way is to deﬁne a random network G(n, M) as a labelednetwork with n nodes and M edges such that the edges are distributeduniformly at random between pairs of nodes. The second way is todeﬁne a random network G(n, p) as a labeled network with n nodesin which each one of the potential n(n − 1)/2 edges exists with prob-ability p. These two ways are practically equivalent if we make thecorrespondence M = pn(n − 1)/2. The distinguishing feature of a ran-dom network, in either case, is that the occurrence of an edge betweentwo arbitrary nodes is independent of the occurrence of any other edge,that is, all edges are independent.It turns out (as we shall see later in this section) that the simpleconcept of a random network as developed by Erd¨os and Renyi is suf-ﬁcient to completely determine the distribution of node degrees (alsocalled the degree distribution) of the network. The Erd¨os-Renyi randomnetwork is therefore not a good general model of the diverse types ofnetwork in existence, each of which may have diﬀerent degree distribu-tions, and is also not very useful as a null model that can be comparedwith a network that has a diﬀerent degree distribution. For these rea-sons, a large amount of research has been directed toward extending theErd¨os-Renyi notion of a random network to allow for arbitrary degreedistributions and toward developing mathematical techniques for com-puting statistical properties of these general random networks. Beforewe embark on a more detailed discussion of the original Erd¨os-Renyirandom network, it is thus instructive to learn the mathematical for-malism for the description of general random networks and then treatTractable Models of Large Networks 201the Erd¨os-Renyi random network as a special case of this formalism.7.2.1 Random Networks with Speciﬁed Degree Distribu-tionsWe now consider random networks that have a prespeciﬁed degree dis-tribution, which are constructed somewhat diﬀerently from the simpleErd¨os-Renyi random network. Our description follows that of Newmanet al. (2001) and Molloy and Reed (1995, 1998).In qualitative terms, a random network with a speciﬁed degree distri-bution will have node degrees whose frequency of occurrence mirror theprobabilities speciﬁed in the degree distribution. These node degreesare therefore said to be sampled from the speciﬁed degree distribution.Each node degree is sampled independently of the degree of any othernode. Because the degree of every node is sampled from the same de-gree distribution, we say that the set of node degrees constitutes anindependent and identically distributed (iid) sample. We call this setof node degrees the degree sequence of the network.Note that many diﬀerent networks can have the same degree se-quence; thus, the degree sequence alone does not uniquely specify thenetwork itself. We therefore imagine an ensemble of networks that allhave the same degree sequence. But the ensemble of networks consis-tent with the same degree distribution is even larger, because manydiﬀerent degree sequences can be sampled from a single degree distri-bution. Technically speaking, a random network with speciﬁed degreedistribution is a network that is chosen uniformly at random from thelarger ensemble.When we compute network statistics, such as average path lengthand clustering coeﬃcient, for random networks, we are really comput-ing quantities that are averaged over the larger ensemble of networksdescribed above. However, for reasons that are somewhat beyond thescope of this book, it turns out that if the network or the degree se-quence is large enough, these statistics will accurately describe thestatistics of a typical random network that has the speciﬁed degreedistribution.When forming a picture of a network with speciﬁed degree distribu-tion, it is tempting to include a regular network in this picture becausea regular network does have a speciﬁc degree distribution: one that ispeaked at a single value! It is, however, important to emphasize that,unlike in the case of random networks, network statistics computed for202 Introduction to Biological Networksa 1-lattice do not arise as a special case of the theoretical formalismpresented below. This is because the 1-lattice displays a very specialkind of wiring pattern that is not representative or typical of the wiringpattern of a randomly selected regular network. Thus, the theory de-scribed below is not really applicable to 1-lattices.There are other networks that are not covered by the theoreticalmethods we are about to describe. These include networks in whichthe degree of a given node is not independent of the degrees of othernodes, as such networks cannot be generated by an iid sampling of adegree distribution. Many real networks have this feature of correlationbetween node degrees. However, the random network still serves a usefulpurpose here that we have indicated before—namely, as a statisticalnull model that can be compared to real networks.7.2.2 Clustering Coeﬃcient of a General Random NetworkConsider a random network with some degree distribution pk. That is,pkis the probability that a node chosen uniformly at random fromthe network has degree k. We may deﬁne the probability generatingfunction (pgf) G0(x) for the distribution pkas follows:G0(x)=∞!k=0pkxk. (7.7)Assuming that pkis correctly normalized, it follows that G0(1) = 1.Given the pgf G0(x), we can obtain the original distribution pkfromit by taking appropriate derivatives:pk=1k!dkG0dxk555x=0. (7.8)The above equation explains why G0is called a generating function:derivatives of G0with respect to powers of x “generate” the degreedistribution.We may also use the pgf to compute moments of the degree distribu-tion. Moments are mean values of powers of the degree. For example,the ﬁrst moment, which is the average degree of a node, is given byz = .k/ =!kkpk= G#0(1), (7.9)where ./denotes the mean value, and a prime denotes a single deriva-tive with respect to the argument. More generally, higher moments are


===== [49/72] chapter-49.html =====

Tractable Models of Large Networks 203given by.kn/ =!kknpk=%*xddx+nG0(x)&x=1. (7.10)Another important property of the pgf arises from the following ob-servation. If the distribution of some property l is generated by somegenerating function, then the distribution of the sum of diﬀerent val-ues of l, summed over, say, m independent realizations, is generatedby the mth power of the pgf. For example, if we choose m nodes atrandom from a random network, then the distribution of the sum oftheir degrees is generated by G0(x)m. To see how this works, considerthe expansion of G0(x)m:G0(x)m=6!kpkxk7m=!k1k2...kmpk1pk2···pkmxk1+k2+···+km. (7.11)The coeﬃcient of xkin the sum above is a sum of products of theform pk1pk2···pkmwith k1+ k2+ ···+ km= k, which is precisely thedistribution of the sum of degrees of the m chosen vertices.An important distribution that leads to the computation of meanpath lengths and clustering coeﬃcients for a random network is thedistribution of the degree of nodes that we arrive at by following arandomly chosen edge. Such an edge will arrive at a particular nodewith probability proportional to the degree of that node. This nodewill therefore have a degree distribution proportional to kpk. If we nowconsider starting at a randomly chosen node v and follow a randomlychosen edge starting at v and going to a nearest neighbor w, then thenumber of outgoing edges from w is distributed according toqk=(k + 1)pk+1"jjpj=1z(k + 1)pk+1, (7.12)where the (k + 1) factor arises because w has degree k + 1 if it has koutgoing edges. The pgf for qkis thereforeG1(x)=∞!k=0qkxk=1zG!0(x). (7.13)204 Introduction to Biological NetworksConsider a second neighbor u of v, and suppose that w and u have kwand kuoutgoing edges, respectively. Under the independence assump-tion for random networks, the probability that u and w are connectedis kukw/(nz), with kuand kwindependently distributed according toqk. The mean clustering coeﬃcient of the network is then the mean ofthis probability, givingC =1nz8!kkqk92=1nz3:.k2/−.k/;2. (7.14)Note that C is proportional to 1/n, leading to the conclusion thatlarge random networks with speciﬁed degree distribution have verysmall mean clustering coeﬃcients. There are, however, exceptions tothis when certain modiﬁcations are made to the deﬁnition of a randomnetwork. One of the modiﬁcations that is discussed in some detail belowconcerns random networks where not just the degree distribution butalso the “cluster” (or triangle) distribution is speciﬁed.Another example of a random network that displays large clusteringis the so-called “one-mode projection” of a bipartite network. A bipar-tite network is one in which the nodes naturally split into two classes,say A and B, such that nodes of one class only connect to nodes ofthe other class. With a random bipartite network as a starting point,one can form a new network consisting exclusively of nodes in class A(or exclusively nodes in class B) such that two nodes in class A areconnected if they shared a common neighbor in class B in the originalbipartite network. This is a one-mode projection of the original bipar-tite network, and it has been shown to have high clustering coeﬃcient(Newman et al., 2001).7.2.3 Path Length in a General Random NetworkLet us consider an arbitrary node u with degree k in a random network.As shown above, the generating function for the number of neighbors(other than u) of each of the k neighbors of u is G1(x). Therefore, us-ing the “powers” prop erty of the pgf outlined above, the pgf for thedistribution of the total number of second neighbors of u is G1(x)k,assuming that the number of neighbors of each of the k neighbors of uare independent random variables2. Therefore, the pgf of the distribu-2Because the neighbors of u can connect to each other, the independence assumptiondo es not strictly hold. However, the assumption is a good approximation for largeTractable Models of Large Networks 205tion of the number of second neighbors of a node picked at random isgiven by!kpkG1(x)k= G0(G1(x)), (7.15)and, by similar arguments, the pgf of the distribution of the num-ber of mth neighbors of a node picked at random is G(m)(x)=G0(G1(···G1(x) ···)), where G1acts on itself m − 1 times. Thus themean number zmof mth neighbors of a randomly chosen node iszm=dG(m)dx555x=1= G#1(1)zm−1. (7.16)With the initial condition z1= z, this recursion is solved aszm=*z2z1+m−1z1. (7.17)We are now in a position to estimate the typical path length l in arandom network. This path length is reached when the total number ofneighbors out to that path length is equal to the total number of nodesin the network, that is, 1 +"lm=1zm= n. Using Equation (7.17), thisgivesl =ln<(n − 1)(z2− z1)+z21=− ln z21ln(z2/z1). (7.18)This shows that the typical path length grows logarithmically with thenumber of nodes in a large random network. Because of the logarithmicdependence of the path length on n, this path length can be quite smalleven for very large random networks. Table 7.1 shows that the typicalpath length in most real networks is quite small relative to the size ofthe network. This feature of real networks is therefore, at least in aqualitative sense, nicely captured by the random network model.There are thus two important distinctions between the 1-lattice and arandom network with an arbitrarily speciﬁed degree distribution. First,unlike a large 1-lattice, a large random network with speciﬁed degreedistribution usually displays very little clustering (see, however, thecaveat above regarding special cases where large clustering is possible ina random network as well as a generalization to the conﬁguration modelrandom networks, in which the clustering coeﬃcient (and hence, the probability thattwo neighbors of u connect to each other) is small.206 Introduction to Biological Networksdiscussed below). Second, typical path lengths in a random networkare signiﬁcantly smaller than in 1-lattices. These two distinctions willturn out to be important in the discussion of small world networksbelow. Before we do that, however, let us see how random networkswith speciﬁed degree distribution can be constructed on the computer.7.2.4 The Conﬁguration Model and Its ModiﬁcationsBecause random networks with speciﬁed degree distributions are use-ful as null models for testing hypotheses about the properties of realnetworks, it is important to be able to generate such networks on thecomputer in an eﬃcient manner. One of the simplest methods of doingso is the conﬁguration model of Bollob´as (2001) and Newman et al.(2001). The method is quite simple and can generate either an undi-rected network with speciﬁed degree distribution or a directed one inwhich both ingoing and outgoing degree distributions are separatelyspeciﬁed.We ﬁrst describe the more general case of generating a directed ran-dom network. In most practical applications, one is interested in com-paring such a network to a real network in which both ingoing andoutgoing degrees of every node are known. The construction of the ran-domized version of the real network then proceeds as follows. Supposethe real network has n nodes. For every node i in the real network within-degree jiand out-degree ki, we create a node in the randomizednetwork with jiinward-pointing edge stubs and kioutward-pointingedge stubs. Repeating this process for every node results in a collec-tion of nodes with stubs. Each out-stub is then randomly paired witha distinct in-stub and the process is repeated until all stubs are paired.This procedure results in a random network that has the same set ofin- and out-degrees as the real network under consideration3. It is com-mon practice to further prune this network at the end by removing anymultiple edges and self-loops, if the real network also does not pos-sess multiple edges or self-loops. The case of an undirected network istreated in a similar manner, the only diﬀerence being that the stubshave no directionality and therefore any two randomly chosen distinctstubs can be paired.Milo et al. (2002) describe a slightly mo diﬁed version of the conﬁgu-3This random network is, however, not uniformly sampled from the space of allnetworks consistent with the given degree sequence (King, 2004).Tractable Models of Large Networks 207FIGURE 7.2: A piece of a network in which single edges and triangles areseparately speciﬁed. The node indicated by the gray arrow has degree k = 7,with s = 3 single edges and t = 2 triangles. Note that k = s +2t.ration model presented above. In this version, a chosen pair of stubs isﬁrst inspected: if the addition of an edge across this pair would createa multi-edge or a sel-loop, a new stub pair is chosen; otherwise, theedge is accepted. If at some stage, no stub pair can be added withoutcreating a multi-edge or self-loop, the entire sub-network constructedso far is rejected and the process is started anew from scratch.It is also possible to construct random networks in which the localclustering around each node is speciﬁed in addition to the degree of thenode, as shown by Newman (2009). The local clustering is speciﬁed bythe number of triangles in which the node participates. Thus, in thisgeneralized conﬁguration model, one speciﬁes two quantities for eachnode i: the number of triangles tiin which the node participates and thenumber of single edges other than triangles, si. This setup is depicted inFigure 7.2. Construction of such a network on the computer proceedsin a manner analogous to that in the basic conﬁguration mo del: toeach node i we assign sisingle-stubs and tidouble-stubs. Then werandomly pick pairs of nodes and randomly connect single-stubs fromeach member of the pair. Similarly, we randomly pick triplets of nodesand connect randomly chosen double-stubs from the members of thetriplet to form triangles. This is continued until no unconnected stubsare left behind. For this condition to be satisﬁed, the total number ofsingle-stubs must be a multiple of 2, and the number of double-stubs


===== [50/72] chapter-50.html =====

208 Introduction to Biological Networksmust be a multiple of 3.The generating function method may also be used to calculate net-work statistics for random networks with clustering. As an illustrationof the method, we brieﬂy outline the computation of the average clus-tering coeﬃcient for such a network. In this computation, it is moreconvenient to use the triangle-based deﬁnition of the clustering coef-ﬁcient. We have already seen that the local clustering coeﬃcient of anode can be deﬁned as the ratio of the number of triangles that thenode participates in and the number of connected triplets that it par-ticipates in. From this deﬁnition, it can be shown that the averageclustering coeﬃcient of the entire network is (Newman et al., 2001)C =3N$N3, (7.19)where N$and N3are the total number of triangles and the total num-ber of connected node triplets, respectively, in the entire network (thefactor of 3 arises because a triangle corresponds to 3 connected nodetriplets).Returning to the generating function method of computing the aver-age clustering coeﬃcient for random networks with clustering, let pstbethe joint distribution of singleton degrees and triangles for the network.A two-variable generating function G(x, y) is then deﬁned asG(x, y)=∞!s,t=0pstxsyt, (7.20)in terms of which the ordinary generating function for the total degreemay be expressed asG0(z)=∞!k=0pkzk=∞!s,t=0pstzs+2t= G(z, z2). (7.21)We then have3N$= n∞!s,t=0tpst= n∂G(x, y)∂y555x=y=1, (7.22)andN3= n∞!k=0*k2+pk=12n∂2G0(z)∂z2555z=1. (7.23)Tractable Models of Large Networks 209The derivatives on the right-hand sides of the two equations abovecannot be computed explicitly without speciﬁc knowledge of the dis-tribution pst. However, it is important to note here that the factors ofn cancel upon substitution into Equation (7.19). Thus, it is possible tohave nonzero clustering even in the limit n →∞for such networks, afeature that does not exist in typical random networks with speciﬁeddegree sequence.7.2.5 Erd¨os–Renyi Random NetworksAs stated earlier, the Erd¨os-Renyi random network is completely spec-iﬁed by the number of nodes n and the parameter p that represents theprobability that two nodes chosen at random are connected by an edge.This network corresponds to the standard notion of a random graph inthe mathematical literature, and there are a large number of results forsuch graphs, most notably the dramatic emergence of a large connectedcomponent as p is increased [see, for example, Erd¨os and Renyi (1959,1960); Bollob´as (2001)].Because there are:nk;ways in which a node can connect to k othernodes (out of a maximum of n connections), the degree distribution ofan Erd¨os-Renyi random network is binomial:pk=*nk+pk(1 − p)n−k, (7.24)givingG0(x)=ez(x−1)and G1(x)=G0(x), (7.25)where z = np. Using Equation (7.14), this degree distribution gives aclustering coeﬃcient of C = z/n, and, using Equation (7.18), a typicalpath length of l * ln[n(z −1)]/ ln(z) −1 for large networks. Again, notethe complementary properties of the 1-lattice (see Equations (7.3) and(7.6)) and the Erd¨os-Renyi random network with respect to clusteringand typical path length: a random network has lower clustering andlower typical path length than a 1-lattice with the same number ofnodes.7.2.6 Small-World NetworksMany biological networks display some surprisingly similar global ortopological features shared among many natural and man-made net-works (Sol´e and Pastor-Satorras, 2003; Albert and Barab´asi, 2002). InChapter 1, we brieﬂy mentioned the prevalence of power-law degree dis-tributions in protein interaction networks—a feature that is strikingly210 Introduction to Biological Networksuniversal across many diﬀerent natural and man-made networks—andwe turn to some models that give rise to this feature in the sectionsthat follow. It turns out that many biological networks that have power-law degree distributions, including protein interaction networks (Jeonget al., 2001), metabolic pathway maps (Jeong et al., 2000), and foodwebs (Montoya and Sol´e, 2003), also have small typical path lengthand large average clustering coeﬃcients (Table 7.1). The simultane-ous presence of these features is not consistent with either 1-lattice (orrelated) models or with standard random network models (unless, ofcourse, one puts large clustering into a random network “by hand,” asin the generalization to the conﬁguration model we discussed above).Networks that display small typical path lengths accompanied bylarge clustering, regardless of their degree distributions, are calledsmall-world networks, following the seminal work of Watts and Strogatz(1998).A simple method (Watts and Strogatz, 1998) of generating a small-world network exploits the fact that it is related to the 1-lattice withrespect to its clustering and to an Erd¨os-Renyi random network withrespect to its typical path length. One begins with a sparse 1-lattice(r 1 n) in which each edge is randomly rewired with probability psuch that self-loops and multi-edges are excluded. This process intro-duces, on average, pnr/2 “shortcuts,” which connect nodes that wouldotherwise be separated by a large path length in the regular 1-lattice.One can then examine the properties of the resulting network as afunction of the single parameter p. The limit p = 0 corresponds to a1-lattice, and the limit p = 1 corresponds to an Erd¨os-Renyi randomnetwork (Figure 7.3). While the Watts-Strogatz mechanism for genera-tion of small-world networks is likely too simplistic to be an importantbiological evolutionary mechanism for small-world networks (at leastin part because degree distributions of small-world networks createdby this mechanism do not correspond to those observed in biologicalnetworks), it illustrates an important point: namely, that a very smallamount of disorder (in the form of random rewiring) is suﬃcient to cre-ate “shortcuts” between distant nodes, and thus to create small-worldnetworks out of regular ones.Remarkably, one ﬁnds a range of values of p that exhibits small typi-cal path length and large clustering, that is, small-world behavior (Fig-ure 7.4). This simple model demonstrated for the ﬁrst time that smallpath length could theoretically coexist with large clustering, in agree-Tractable Models of Large Networks 211REGULAR SMALL-WORLD RANDOMp=0 p=1IncreasingRandomnessFIGURE 7.3: A small-world network (middle panel) can be generated bychoosing a value of the rewiring probability p between the regular networklimit (p = 0; left panel) and the random network limit (p = 1; right panel).ment with the observed characteristics of real networks. The model isalso consistent with (and indeed inspired by) the structure of somesocial networks, in which it is common to establish connections withmany people in one’s immediate vicinity, plus a few connections (short-cuts) with acquaintances far away that link separated neighborhoods.7.3 Evolving Networks by Preferential AttachmentIn addition to possessing small-world properties, many networks arefound to have power-law degree distributions, that is, pkis propor-tional to k−γ, where γ is called the power-law exponent, as we brieﬂymentioned in Chapter 1. These networks include a variety of socialnetworks, the World Wide Web, Internet domain and router networks,and disparate biological networks, including the network of protein-protein interactions in various organisms, metabolic networks, tran-scriptional regulatory networks, and protein domain networks [see, forexample, Albert and Barab´asi (2002) for properties of these networks].Such power-law distributions are not explained by the regular, random,or small-world network models we have studied so far4.4A degree sequence that is distributed according to a power-law distribution can besp eciﬁed in constructing a random network according to the conﬁguration model,but such a distribution is an input to the model r ather than being a consequence of212 Introduction to Biological Networks0.0001 0.001 0.01 0.1 1Rewiring probability p00.20.40.60.81L(p)/L(0)C(p)/C(0)FIGURE 7.4: A schematic diagram of the typical path length (black curve)and average clustering coeﬃcient (gray curve) for a Watts-Strogatz small-world network as a function of the small-world rewiring probability p (Wattsand Strogatz, 1998). The two statistics are normalized by the values they takein a regular network: L(0) and C(0). There is a large range of values of p forwhich the typical path length is small and the average clustering coeﬃcientlarge.While networks that possess power-law degree distributions aretermed “scale-free” networks, the latter phrase leads to many erro-neous interpretations, including the implication that the network is, insome sense, self-similar, or that it resides at the critical point of a phasetransition5. To avoid such interpretations, we refer to such networks as“power-law networks.”Although power-law distributions are ubiquitous in various contextsand have a long history, Barab´asi and Albert (1999) were the ﬁrst toconstruct a simply interpretable dynamical model of network growththat robustly leads to a power-law degree distribution in a way thatit.5For a fuller description of the history and possible mechanisms for power-law net-works, the reader is referred to the essay by Keller (2005).


===== [51/72] chapter-51.html =====

Tractable Models of Large Networks 213does not depend on the structure of the initial network. This modelhas been termed the BA model and is arguably the simplest dynami-cal model of network growth by preferential attachment of nodes. Aswe argue below, this model is also to o simplistic to be a biologicallyplausible model for network evolution by itself, but it is such an impor-tant progenitor of biologically plausible network models of increasingsophistication that it is necessary to ﬁrst understand the BA model inorder to follow developments in the ﬁeld.The input to the BA model is a small network that can be quite arbi-trary. The BA model is a dynamical model that evolves this initial smallnetwork to a larger network. For simplicity, “time” in the BA model(and in a host of other models that followed it) is imagined to proceedin discrete steps. A single new node with exactly m stubs (where mis chosen arbitrarily but remains ﬁxed during the entire dynamics) isintroduced into the network at each time step. Each of the m stubspreferentially link to existing nodes in the network, with probabilityproportional to the degree of the existing node. Thus, existing nodeswith high degrees have a greater chance of being linked to newly bornnodes; and conversely, a newly born node has greater chance of beinglinked to nodes that already have a large number of connections. This“rich getting richer” eﬀect is characteristic of many social systems andis also plausible for networks such as the World Wide Web, in whichnew webpages usually preferentially contain links to existing pages thathave high visibility. Note that in the BA model, no nodes or edges aredeleted (thus, the network grows as time progresses), and the numberof nodes in the network at time step t is equal to t + m0, where m0isthe number of nodes in the initial network.With this picture in mind, we are now in a position to constructa mathematical description of the BA model. Suppose there are nk,tnodes of degree k at time t. After one time step, a new node of degreem has entered the network, thus increasing the number of nodes ofdegree m by 1. Further, m existing nodes have been chosen to be linkedto the newly born node; the degrees of these m nodes have increasedby 1. The probability of node i being chosen is proportional to itsdegree ki. Because some node must be chosen, the sum over all nodesof this probability must be 1. Thus the properly normalized probabilityof node i being chosen is ki/"jkj= ki/"k(knk,t). Putting all this214 Introduction to Biological Networkstogether, the number of nodes of degree k at time t + 1 is given bynk,t+1= nk,t+ δk,m+m"k!k#nk!,t[(k − 1)nk−1,t− knk,t] , (7.26)where the δk,mterm represents the increase by 1 of nodes with degreem, and the remaining terms represent the increase in the number ofnodes with degree k due to the increase in degree of nodes that earlierhad degree k − 1, and the decrease in the number of nodes with degreek due to the increase in degree of nodes that earlier had degree k.We now develop what is called a master equation for the probabilitypk,tof ﬁnding a node with degree k at time t, given by pk,t= nk,t/(t +m0). Rewriting Equation (7.26) in terms of this probability leads topk,t+1=1t + m0+1%(t + m0)pk,t+ δk,m+m.k/t((k − 1)pk−1,t− kpk,t)&,(7.27)where .k/t≡"k!k#pk!,tis the mean degree of the network at time t.Upon following the time progression of the above equation, it can beshown that the distribution pk,tbecomes stationary on long timescales,when the network has become very large. At this point, pk,tcan beassumed to be the constant, time-independent distribution pk. It followsthat the mean degree of the network also becomes constant at latetimes. Substituting pkin place of pk,t+1and pk,t, and substituting .k/ inplace of .k/tin the above equation, we obtain, after some rearrangementof terms, the following relationship between pkand pk−1:(k + α)pk=(k − 1)pk−1+ αδk,m, (7.28)where α = .k//m. Multiplying the above equation by k on both sidesand subsequently summing over all values of k leads to a simple ex-pression for the mean degree at late times, namely, .k/ =2m, whichimplies α = 2. Substituting this value of α back into Equation (7.28)and rearranging terms again leads to a recursion equation for pkinterms of pk−1:pk=(k − 1)(k + 2)pk−1, for k > m. (7.29)The above recursion equation can be solved by using it to express pk−1in terms of pk−2, then pk−2in terms of pk−3, and so on, until we get topm. Thus, we obtainpk=(k − 1)(k − 2) ···m(k + 2)(k + 1) ···(m + 3)pm=(m + 2)(m + 1)m(k + 2)(k + 1)kpm. (7.30)Tractable Models of Large Networks 215For large values of k, the degree distribution pkof the BA model istherefore proportional to k−3, corresponding to a power-law distribu-tion with exponent γ = 3. Note that this result does not depend on mor on properties of the initial, small network.The BA model of network growth by preferential attachment givesa simple mechanism for generating networks with power-law degreedistributions. Although the original form of the BA model outlinedabove can only explain power-law degree distributions that have anexponent of 3, there are generalizations of the BA model, based on thesame fundamental idea of preferential attachment, that lead to a rangeof values for the exponent. A very simple model (Chung and Lu, 2006)begins with two preferential rules of growth: (1) node growth, in which anew node is added and connects with an existing node with probabilityproportional to the degree of the existing node, and (2) edge growth,in which a new edge is added that preferentially links nodes of highdegree. At each time step, rule (1) is selected with probability p andrule (2) with probability 1 − p. This model leads to a power-law degreedistribution with exponent γ = 2 + p/(2 − p). As p ranges from 0 to1, the exponent takes values between 2 and 3. Similarly, a preferentialattachment model (Dorogovtsev et al., 2000) that is slightly generalizedfrom the BA form to include an initial “attractiveness” of existing nodesleads to exponents that can fall anywhere in the range [2, ∞), dependingon the initial attractiveness.The preferential attachment mechanism appears a very plausible onefor such networks as the World Wide Web, citation networks, and othertypes of social and man-made networks. In these networks, new nodesare likely to connect to existing nodes that already have a large num-ber of connections, either to increase attention to themselves (WorldWide Web and social networks), or because highly connected nodeshave wide-ranging impact (citation networks). It is, however, not clearthat the preferential attachment scheme is directly relevant to molecu-lar networks in biology. There is no sound biological basis for why newgenes or proteins that appear over the course of evolution must interactwith other genes or proteins that already have a large number of in-teractions. Using yeast protein interaction data culled from two-hybridstudies, Wagner (2003) found a strong positive correlation between thedegree of a protein and its likelihood of acquiring new interactions,a ﬁnding that is consistent with preferential attachment, albeit usinghigh-throughput data that, as we know from earlier chapters, are error-216 Introduction to Biological Networksprone. On the other hand, Middendorf et al. (2005) developed machinelearning methods to ﬁnd the best evolutionary model for a given net-work among a set of models. When applied to the Drosophila proteininteraction network, their method rejects the preferential attachmentmodel in favor of a duplication-mutation-complementation model thatwe discuss later in this chapter.In spite of the possible limitations of the preferential attachmentscheme when applied to networks in molecular biology, the readershould be aware that the BA model spawned a large amount of workon evolutionary models for networks, including many that did not usepreferential attachment as a fundamental mechanism of growth. Specif-ically, more realistic models for networks in molecular biology are oftenbased on the premise of gene duplication, a phenomenon that is knownto have wide-ranging impact on the evolution of genomes.7.4 Evolving Networks Based on Gene DuplicationGene duplication is one of the primary forces behind the evolution ofgenomes. At the molecular level, gene duplication is a random event; itmay occur as an error in DNA replication, during homologous recom-bination, by replicative ampliﬁcation of transposable elements, or evenarise by duplication of an entire chromosome. Usually, the duplicatedversion of a gene is under less selective pressure than its parent, and istherefore free to mutate rapidly and could potentially take on a novelfunction. This phenomenon results in asymmetric divergence over thecourse of evolution of the two duplicate members. Duplicated genes arecalled paralogs. Although they started as identical copies of the samegene, most paralogous pairs code for proteins that diﬀer in structureand function because of mutations that have occurred in at least onemember of the pair.Duplication events have contributed to the emergence of novel func-tions in many species [see the review by Taylor and Raes (2004)]. Forexample, more than 33% of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis genomeis comprised of recently duplicated genes. In a landmark analysis of106 bacterial genomes, Gevers et al. (2004) found that between 7%and 41% of the genes had paralogs within the same genome, and thatthe genome size of a species or strain was strongly correlated with thenumber of paralogous genes it contained. There is strong evidence ofTractable Models of Large Networks 217ancient whole-genome duplication of the budding yeast Saccharomycescerevisiae (Wolfe and Shields, 1997; Kellis et al., 2004), the plant Ara-bidopsis thaliana (Blanc et al., 2000; Vision et al., 2000), ﬁsh (Tayloret al., 2003), and two large-scale duplication events in the vertebratelineage (Larhammer et al., 2002; McLysaght et al., 2002). In yeast, it isestimated that there are 10−3duplication events per gene per millionyears (Lynch and Conery, 2000) and more generally in eukaryotes it isestimated that there is about one whole-genome duplication event ev-ery 100 to 200 million years (Evlampiev and Isambert, 2007). A studyof the human genome sequence by Bailey et al. (2002) concluded thatabout 130.5 million base-pairs of the human genome (out of a total ofjust over 3 billion-base pairs) have been recently duplicated.How does gene duplication manifest itself at the level of network evo-lution? It seems reasonable to assume that duplication of a gene can bemodeled by duplication of the corresponding node on a network, wherenode duplication entails making an identical copy of the original nodeand all of its connections. Thus, we ﬁrst examine the type of networkgrowth that results from the action of such a duplication process byitself, and then consider the implications of duplication (of individualgenes as well as sets of genes) acting in concert with other pro cessesthat model sequence mutations at the network level.7.4.1 Network Growth via Node Duplication AloneConsider a network that evolves only by node duplication, without anyevolutionary divergence between duplicated nodes that may be arisedue to mutations. While such an evolutionary model is unrealistic, weﬁnd that there is an important lesson to be learned from this idealizedmodel, namely that because of the absence of random mutations, thenetwork retains evolutionary memory of its original state (Raval, 2003).We assume that the network under consideration is an undirectedone and has m0nodes at some arbitrary initial time t = 0. At eachtime step, an existing node is picked at random and duplicated, thatis, a new node is added to the network and the new node is connectedto exactly the same set of nodes as an existing, duplicated node. Likethe BA model, the number of nodes increases by one at each time stepso that the total number of nodes in the network at time t is t + m0.Consequently, the theoretical maximum degree in the network at time tis t+m0−1 (where we assume that nodes do not self-connect). Becauseevery node has equal probability of being duplicated at a given time


===== [52/72] chapter-52.html =====

218 Introduction to Biological Networksstep, the probability pnewk,tthat a newly created node has degree k attime t is given bypnewk,t= pk,t−1, (7.31)where pk,t−1is the degree distribution of the network at time step t−1.Furthermore, the probability pndupk,tthat a node of degree k is a neighborof a duplicating node is proportional to its degree, and a node that hasthe maximum possible degree will be a neighbor of a duplicating nodewith probability 1. This givespndupk,t=km0+ t − 1. (7.32)The two equations above enable us to determine the average numberof nodes nk,tthat have degree k at time t in a recursive fashion:nk,t= pnewk,t(nk,t−1− 1)+:1 − pnewk,t;nk,t−1+pndupk−1,tnk−1,t−1−pndupk,tnk,t−1,(7.33)where the ﬁrst two terms represent the contribution to the number ofnodes of degree k by the newly created duplicate node, and the nexttwo terms represent this contribution due to the change in degree ofneighbors of the duplicated node. Noting that pk,t= nk,t/(t + m0), theabove equation may be converted to a simple master equation for pk,t:pk,t− pk,t−1=k − 1t + m0pk−1,t−1−kt + m0pk,t−1. (7.34)The above equation actually holds for all nonisolated nodes (nodeswith degree > 0). If there are isolated nodes in the initial network,their duplicates will also be isolated. Indeed, the proportion of iso-lated nodes in the network remains constant under the pure duplica-tion dynamics envisioned here. Therefore, it is reasonable to considersolving Equation (7.34) with the assumption that the network containsno isolated nodes. In fact, Equation (7.34) represents one of the fewevolving network degree distributions that is analytically solvable forall t (Raval, 2003). The large-time limiting behavior of this solution is,for m01 k 1 t,pk,t∼m0t*m0− 1kmin− 1+*kt+kmin−1pkmin,0, (7.35)where kminis the smallest (non-zero) degree value in the initial network.Thus the degree distribution at late times exhibits power-law behavior,Tractable Models of Large Networks 219albeit one in which there are more nodes with higher degree than nodeswith lower degree. Perhaps more importantly, the degree distribution,unlike in the BA model of preferential attachment, depends on thenature of the initial network.This feature of “initial condition dependence” of the degree distri-bution appears to be characteristic of network evolutionary modelsin which node duplication is the predominant mechanism of networkgrowth. It is tantalizing to imagine the possibility of unambiguouslyinferring aspects of the topology of gene networks as they were mil-lions of years ago from present-day data. However, in order for sucha possibility to be realized, it is necessary to ﬁrst have a systematicprocedure for iteratively constructing and validating large-scale net-work models. It is also interesting to note that, for all genomes thathave been sequenced so far, the fraction of genes having paralogs hasbeen consistently less than 50%, a ﬁnding that would appear to refutethe possibility of gene duplication being the dominant mechanism ofgenome and, consequently, network evolution. In reality, though, thereis no simple and consistent method to infer the probability of node du-plication at the network level from the extent of paralogy, although thetopic is being actively researched. We discuss some aspects of this issuelater in this chapter. In general, reconstruction of ancient networks is animportant ﬁeld of study but in the absence of duplication-dominance, itis only possible with a number of simplifying assumptions (see Section7.5).We now consider an important “mixed” model in which node dupli-cation is not the sole dynamical mechanism of network growth, eventhough it forms an important component of the dynamics.7.4.2 A Duplication–Mutation–Complementation Model ofNetwork GrowthA model proposed by V´azquez et al. (2003) for the evolution of proteininteraction networks is inspired by the idea (Force et al., 1999; Lynchand Force, 2000) that, subsequent to a duplication event, both copies ofa duplicated gene are subject to degenerative mutations and lose somefunctions, but jointly they retain the full set of functions present inthe ancestral gene. This observation can be translated into an evolvingnetwork model that grows according to the following rules at each timestep, as shown in Figure 7.5:(a) Duplication step: A node i is selected at random and duplicated,220 Introduction to Biological NetworksFIGURE 7.5: Network evolution steps in the DMC model. A node is chosenat random and duplicated, then dimerized with probability p. From each pairof duplicated edges, one of the edges is removed with probability q.that is, a new node i#that links to all the neighbors of i is created.With probability p, a link between i and i#is established, repre-senting interaction of a protein with its own copy (dimerization).(b) Divergence and functional complementation step: For each com-mon neighbor j of i and i#, one of the two edges (i, j) and (i#,j)is chosen at random and removed with probability q.Note that step (b) models random functional loss due to mutation bythe mechanism of edge removal, yet ensures that both duplicates takentogether carry the full set of functions of the ancestral gene, modeledby the full set of edges between the two duplicate nodes and theirneighbors. In this minimal model, called the duplication-mutation-complementation (DMC) model, beneﬁcial mutations that lead to theacquisition of novel functions represented by new protein-protein inter-actions are not accounted for, because no new edges are created by theabove rules. It has been estimated (Wagner, 2001) that the probabilityof neofunctionalization, that is, acquisition of a new edge, is relativelysmall for the yeast protein interaction network. Further, V´azquez et al.(2003) found that the inclusion of a small edge creation probability doesnot signiﬁcantly change the overall structure of the resultant network.Tractable Models of Large Networks 221Box 7.2 Zipf’s law.Suppose we have a collection of items (or individuals, or genes, or plants, etc.)of diﬀerent types, and we rank a type according to the number of items of thattype that exist in the collection. Thus, the type that has the largest frequency(f1) of occurrence in the collection gets rank 1, the type with the second-largest frequency (f2) of occurrence gets rank 2, and so on. If the relationshipbetween frequency and rank follows a power law, that is, fn∝ n−γ, thecollection is said to follow Zipf’s law or a Zipﬁan distribution. For reasons thatare beyond the scope of this book, Zipf’s law holds for a number of disparatecollections: frequencies of word occurrences in many languages, cities rankedby population, etc. Zipf’s law is clearly revealed by a straight line in a log-logplot of frequency versus rank. Such a plot is called a Zipf plot.In the DMC model, the parameter that controls the relative impor-tance of the duplication versus the divergence-complementation pro-cesses is q, the probability of edge removal. For q<1/2, the networkdynamics is “duplication-dominated,” that is, predominantly controlledby duplication, and the mean degree of the network in this case is foundto grow without bound, as also occurs in other mixed duplication-mutation models (Raval, 2003). For q>1/2, on the other hand, thedynamics is “divergence-dominated,” and the mean degree settles to astationary value.V´azquez et al. (2003) simulated this model on the computer by start-ing with two nodes connected to each other and repeatedly applyingrules (a) and (b) until they reached a network that had as many nodesas the protein interaction network of yeast. They found reasonableagreement between various topological features, including clusteringcoeﬃcient and average degree, of the yeast protein interaction networkand the model network with p * 0.1 and q * 0.7. In addition, theestimated value of p is in reasonable agreement with the proportionof self-interacting proteins in yeast (∼ 0.04). Finally, Vazquez and co-workers found that Zipf connectivity plots (see Box 7.2) for the yeastnetwork and the model network show very good agreement.The DMC model was found to be the “best-ﬁt” model for theDrosophila melanogaster protein interaction network (Middendorfet al., 2005) among seven diﬀerent types of network evolutionary modelsculled from the literature, including a duplication-mutation scheme inwhich edges from the duplicated node to its neighbors can be removed222 Introduction to Biological NetworksBox 7.3 Gene ﬁssion.Gene ﬁssion is, quite simply, the process by which a single gene is split intotwo separate genes. In Drosophila, the process of gene ﬁssion appears to haveoccurred by duplication followed by partial degeneration of function in thetwo duplicates over the course of evolution in such a manner so as to preservethe full set of functions of the ancestral gene. This is exactly the type ofprocess that is simulated in the DMC model of network evolution.and new edges from the duplicated node to any other existing node canbe created; a preferential attachment scheme; an Erd¨os-Renyi randomnetwork; a small-world network; and a node aging model in which theprobability of a node acquiring a new edge decreases with the age ofthe node. The Drosophila protein interaction network has a relativelyhigh clustering coeﬃcient, a feature that is readily reproduced by theDMC mechanism because of the possibility of a node to connect to itsduplicated copy. The DMC mechanism is also consistent with evidenceof the occurrence of a single gene ﬁssion event (Box 7.3) in Drosophila1 to 2 million years ago (Wang et al., 2004).7.4.3 A Generalized Model of Duplication Followed by Di-vergenceWhile the DMC model incorporates functional divergence between thetwo members of a duplicated pair by edge deletion, the mechanism fordoing so is relatively simple in the sense that a single parameter q thatcontrols the extent of divergence dictates the probability of deletionof all duplicate edges. Furthermore, the process of evolution does notnecessarily preserve the full set of biological functions of an organism,as they are in the DMC model. In recognition of these shortcomings,Evlampiev and Isambert (2008) developed a more general duplication-divergence (GDD) model for protein-protein interaction networks thatincludes partial genome duplications (with single gene duplications andwhole genome duplications as special cases), and in which edge dele-tion probabilities depend on whether the two nodes connected by theedge are nonduplicated nodes, existing nodes that were duplicated, ornew nodes formed as a result of duplication. Like the DMC model,no neofunctionalization occurs in the GDD model. Unlike the DMCmodel, dimerization is not explicitly accounted for in the GDD model,although Evlampiev and Isambert show that the inclusion of dimer-


===== [53/72] chapter-53.html =====

Tractable Models of Large Networks 223FIGURE 7.6: A schematic representation of the duplication and divergencesteps in the GDD model. Each node is duplicated with probability q. Nodes inthe resulting network are labeled depending upon whether they are singletonor nonduplicated nodes (s), old nodes that were duplicated (o), or newlyformed nodes as a result of duplication (n). During the divergence step, anedge (i, j) is removed with probability 1−γij, where γijdepends on the i and jnode labels (i.e., on whether they are s, n, or o). The edge deletion process mayresult in isolated nodes (exempliﬁed by the nonconnected unﬁlled circle in theﬁnal network above) that do not take part in further network dynamics. Therate of change of no de degree of node i after a single duplication-divergencestep is given by Γi= (1 − q)γis+ qγio+ qγin.ization has little eﬀect on network statistics after a large number ofrounds of duplication-divergence.The GDD model is schematically depicted in Figure 7.6. The modelhas seven basic parameters: the probability q of duplicating each nodeduring the duplication step, and six independent probabilities of edgeretention during the divergence step, namely γss,γoo,γnn,γso,γsn, andγon(γsn= γnsetc. because we assume that the network is undirected),where s, o, and n are singleton, old, and new nodes, respectively, asdescribed in the caption of Figure 7.6. Local, partial, and whole genomeduplication in the model is eﬀected by whether q 1 1, q<1, orq = 1, respectively. The rate of increase of node degree of node i isgiven by Γias described in Figure 7.6, with Γi< 1 representing thedecrease in connections to node i and Γi> 1 representing an increasein these connections. It is assumed in the model that old duplicateslose fewer connections than new ones, that is, Γo≥ Γn(this conditionis not restrictive in practice because it can be used as the deﬁningcondition to distinguish between “old” versus “new” duplicated nodes).It turns out that this model displays a rich range of functional and224 Introduction to Biological Networkstopological features of the kind that are expected to occur in naturalprotein-protein interaction networks, depending upon the values thatthe various parameters take.Consider, for example, the competition between two eﬀective pa-rameters: the edge growth rate Γ = (1 − q)Γs+ qΓo+ qΓn, and therate of growth of the most conserved (i.e., older) duplicate lineageM = (1 − q)Γs+ qΓo. By deﬁnition, M<Γ. There are three pos-sibilities:• M<Γ < 1. In this case, the network decreases in size and even-tually vanishes. This case is therefore not biologically relevant.• M<1 < Γ. The network grows with time; but because M<1,individual nodes (proteins) are not conserved in time and quicklydrop out of the network as they lose all their connections. Tokeep the network growing, they are replaced by newly duplicatedproteins. In this scenario, the network after a large number ofduplication-divergence steps is populated mainly by newly formedproteins and retains little evolutionary memory. Proteins in asingle network realization are therefore more similar to each otherthan proteins across diﬀerent network realizations that start fromthe same seed network. This case, too, does not appear to bebiologically relevant because of the widespread protein similarity(orthology) that is known to exist across diﬀerent species.• 1 < M < Γ. This case appears to be the most biologically plau-sible one, because it describes growing networks in which mostproteins are conserved and do not “drop out” of the network. Asnapshot of such a network at late times should contain a largeproportion of old proteins in its core, corresponding roughly tothe empirical evidence6.Given that 1 < M < Γ appears to be a constraint dictated by thebiological observation of orthology across species, we can explore thediﬀerent types of network dynamics that are possible under this con-straint. Evlampiev and Isambert (2008) show that another eﬀectiveparameter controls the topology of the evolved network. This parame-ter is M#= maxi(Γi), which is the largest rate of edge growth among6Note that the case of pure duplication in the language of the GDD model corre-sp onds to γij= 1 for all i, j. In this limit, Γi= 1 + q for all i and M = 1 + q>1Thus, as expected, the pure duplication model also retains evolutionary memory.Tractable Models of Large Networks 225the three diﬀerent node types. Note that, because M is a weighted av-erage of two edge growth rates, it must be true that M < M#. It isfound that M#< 1 (which necessarily corresponds to the biologicallyuninteresting case M<1) leads to networks whose degree distributiondecays exponentially, pk∝ e−µk, while for M#> 1 a number of inter-esting behaviors are possible. In summary, some of the salient ﬁndingsare• In the local duplication-divergence limit (q 1 1 and γss= 1,corresponding to complete retention of edges connecting non-duplicated nodes), and when γsois close to 1, the network ap-proaches a power-law degree distribution with exponent between1 and 3, depending upon detailed parameter values.• In the whole-genome duplication-divergence limit (q = 1), thenetwork approaches an exponentially decaying degree distribu-tion if M<1 (with M#> 1). If M>1, a number of regimes ofpower-law distributions are possible if γoo&= γnn(asymmetric di-vergence between old and new duplicates). However, if M>1 andγoo= γnn, one obtains nonstationary solutions that are highlydense networks whose mean degree grows as the network grows.Such networks do not appear to be biologically relevant.• In general, if the seven fundamental parameters are allowed tovary over the course of evolution, networks with M>1 alwayshave power-law distributions (or are dense) in the GDD model,while networks with exponentially decaying distributions alwayshave M ≤ M#< 1.• For M>1, although individual proteins are conserved, networkmotifs containing two or more proteins are not conserved. Thus,sequence or structure similarity at the level of individual proteinsin diﬀerent organisms does not necessarily translate to functionalsimilarity, if function is deﬁned in terms of the set of interactionsof the protein.• The GDD model can be ﬁtted well to the the yeast protein-proteininteraction network in terms of both the standard degree distri-bution as well as the distribution of average degree of the ﬁrstneighbor of a randomly chosen node.226 Introduction to Biological Networks7.5 Reconstruction of Ancient Networks from ModernOnesIt is important to keep in mind that the fundamental timesteps in thenetwork evolution models that we have studied in reality represent hugeleaps in time because events such as duplications and mutations thatare ﬁxed in the population occur over evolutionary timescales, and notevery such event leads to rewiring of the network. For example, the av-erage protein-protein interaction network rewiring rate since the timeof species divergence between the human and the fruit ﬂy (approxi-mately 800 million years ago) is estimated at 10−6per edge per millionyears (Shou et al., 2011). Thus, in a network comprising about 100,000interactions, a single edge would be rewired every 10 million years onaverage. Being able to infer what networks looked like many timestepsback would therefore allow us to reconstruct very ancient events.Reconstruction of ancient networks from modern ones is also an acidtest of the network evolution model, as the reconstructed data can beconfronted with phylogenetic estimates of the ages of proteins. It is ingeneral a very diﬃcult computational problem, but signiﬁcant advancesthat were aided by a few simplifying assumptions were made in the workof Navlakha and Kingsford (2011).The basic methodology of network reconstruction, given a networkevolution model M, proceeds as follows. Suppose we have a snapshotof the network Gtat time t and would like to infer the network at timet − ∆t. A natural procedure is to ﬁnd the most probable network attime t − ∆t given M and the network at time t:G∗t−∆t= argmaxGt−∆tP (Gt−∆t| Gt, M), (7.36)where P (·) is the probability of the ancient network given the presentone, and the “argmax” operation corresponds to ﬁnding the most prob-able network at time t − ∆t given the network at time t.Typically, the space of ancient networks grows exponentially as wetry to infer networks further back in time, that is, with increasing ∆t.It is therefore not feasible to search this space and directly computeG∗t−∆tfor an arbitrary ∆t. A more feasible procedure is to computethe most probable network only for a single backward timestep of theevolutionary model, that is, ∆t = 1, and then assume that the mostprobable network at timestep t − 2 can be reconstructed from the mostprobable network at timestep t−1, and so on. This simplifying assump-Tractable Models of Large Networks 227tion avoids the exponential blow-up in the search space as one proceedsbackward in time. Equation (7.36) with ∆t = 1 can be expressed in amore tractable form using Bayes’ rule:G∗t−1= argmaxGt−1P (Gt−1| Gt, M),= argmaxGt−1P (Gt| Gt−1, M)P (Gt−1|M)P (Gt|M),= argmaxGt−1P (Gt| Gt−1, M)P (Gt−1|M), (7.37)where the last equality follows because the “argmax” operation runsonly over networks at time t − 1, not networks at time t. A furthersimpliﬁcation avoids the problem of computing the “prior” probabilityP (Gt−1|M) by assuming that this probability is the same for allnetworks that can be realized by the model M. In reality, the problem ofﬁnding frequencies of occurrence of every possible network of a certainsize that can be realized by a network dynamics model from any initialseed network is not easily solved.With the additional simpliﬁcation mentioned above, the most proba-ble reconstructed network one timestep back can be expressed entirelyin terms of forward probabilities:G∗t−1= argmaxGt−1P (Gt| Gt−1, M). (7.38)Note that the forward probability P (Gt| Gt−1, M) is readily com-putable from the dynamics of the network model under consideration.7.5.1 Network Reconstruction Based on the DMC ModelIn the previous section, we discussed the DMC model where a networkgrows by node duplication followed by possible dimerization and di-vergence. Using this model as an example, we now outline the steps inthe computation of the forward probability P (Gt| Gt−1, M) so that wecan reconstruct the network one timestep back. Assuming that some,as yet unknown, node was duplicated at time t, let us consider arbi-trary nodes u and v in the network Gtand assume that v is a newlycreated duplicate of u. Then the appropriate forward probability canbe written asP (Gt| Gt−1, M)=puvn'N(u)∩N (v)(1 − q)'N(u)$N (v)q2, (7.39)


===== [54/72] chapter-54.html =====

228 Introduction to Biological Networkswhere puv= p if u and v are directly connected (i.e., dimerization hasoccurred) and puv=1− p otherwise. The set N (u) ∩ N(v) representsthe set of common neighbors of u and v—these are interactions thathave not been deleted, a phenomenon which occurs in the DMC modelwith probability 1−q for each edge. The set N(u)3N (v) represents theset of nodes that are either neighbors of u or of v but not both—theseare interactions in which one of the duplicate edges has been lost inthe divergence step, a phenomenon that occurs with probability q/2 foreach edge (the factor of 1/2 occurs because only one of the duplicateedges is selected at random and removed).Network reconstruction is carried out by computing the right-handside of Equation (7.39) exhaustively for all pairs of nodes u, v in thenetwork Gtand ﬁnding the pair that maximizes P (Gt| Gt−1, M).Once this pair is found, the edges that connect to u and the edgesthat connect to v are together assigned to u (these edges would haveconnected to u before divergence occurred), and the node v is deleted.This process yields the reconstructed network one timestep back. Theentire process can be iterated to reconstruct networks in the distantpast.A number of interesting results arise in the reconstruction of ancientnetworks from present ones using the DMC and other models (Navlakhaand Kingsford, 2011). As mentioned above, one of the predictions fromnetwork reconstruction is the relative ages of various nodes in the net-work. Using the present-day yeast protein interaction network as astarting point for backward reconstruction, Navlakha and Kingsfordshowed that the DMC model best repro duced relative ages of proteinsas compared to other models that are more appropriate for the descrip-tion of social networks, like preferential attachment. The DMC modelparameters that provided the best prediction of relative ages corre-spond to high p and low q, in broad agreement with a variety of datasources. Pairs of duplicates identiﬁed by the reconstruction procedurealso shared signiﬁcantly higher average sequence identity than expectedby chance (although sequence information was not used to guide thereconstruction), and were found to be likely to participate in the sameprotein complex.Tractable Models of Large Networks 2297.6 Large-Scale Biophysics-Inspired Models for ProteinInteraction NetworksThe large-scale network models we have considered so far fall intotwo main classes: static, “non-biological” random models (Erd¨os-Renyi,conﬁguration, and small-world models) and dynamical models thatattempt to distill basic principles of social or biological evolutioninto rules for network modiﬁcation (preferential attachment-based andduplication-based models).A parallel line of investigation makes use of the biophysical descrip-tion of molecular interactions to build networks rather than relying ongeneral growth principles based on the evolution of genomes. One ofthe most important models of protein-protein interactions that repre-sents this area of network biology research is the so-called MpK modelby Deeds et al. (2006). This model was shown to reproduce topologicalfeatures of high-throughput protein interaction network data in yeast.As discussed below, the MpK model also serves as an important nullmodel against which real protein interaction networks can be compared.It was one of the ﬁrst models to directly use the hydrophobicity of pro-tein surface patches in large-scale binding propensity calculations. Twoother models that we outline here use abstracted versions of this ideain interesting ways.7.6.1 The MpK ModelThe motivation for the MpK model rests on two principal observations.First, as we already know, the yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) experiment formeasuring protein-protein interactions in a high-throughput fashion israther inaccurate and leads to “noisy” interaction networks. For exam-ple, when the results of two major Y2H screens in yeast (Uetz et al.,2000; Ito et al., 2001) are compared, only about 150 of the thousandsof interactions identiﬁed in each experiment are recovered in the otherexperiment (Deane et al., 2002). Further, as shown by Deeds et al.(2006), the degree of a protein node in one experiment is only veryweakly correlated with the degree of the same protein in the other ex-periment7. Even so, both sets of experimental data lead to a power-lawdegree distribution, with similar exponents of about 2.7Similar disagreements exist in the high-throughput protein interaction networks ofDrosophila melanogaster (Formstecher et al., 2005).230 Introduction to Biological NetworksThe second observation is that two diﬀerent Y2H experiments onthe same set of proteins will generally give diﬀerent results because ofa nonspeciﬁc component of the process of protein-protein interaction:proteins that contain a large number of surface hydrophobic residueswill tend to have a greater propensity to bind with other proteins alongthe portion of the surface that contains these hydrophobic residues,regardless of the nature of the other protein. Note that hydrophobicresidues should generally not occur on a portion of protein surface thatis exposed to water, and therefore there is a greater tendency for suchsurfaces to function as binding interfaces to other proteins. The watermolecules will elute from such a binding interface, thus stabilizing it.Deeds et al. (2006) posit that this nonspeciﬁc binding is essentiallysuﬃcient to explain both the disagreement between independent Y2Hexperiments on the same set of proteins as well as their agreement withregard to the power-law degree distribution and some other topologicalcharacteristics.The MpK model fundamentally involves three parameters M, p, andK that are computed for each protein in the model. For a given pro-tein, p is the proportion of amino acid residues residing on the pro-tein surface that is hydrophobic, M is the number of exposed residuesthat are involved in binding to other proteins, and K is the numberof residues counted in M that are hydrophobic. Generally, M is notthe total number of exposed residues as not all exposed residues willbe involved in binding. Given p and M, the probability of ﬁnding Khydrophobic residues within the set of M exposed residues involved inbinding follows a binomial distribution:p(K)=*MK+pK(1 − p)M−K. (7.40)Thus, given p and M for an individual protein, we can sample valuesof K for it from the above distribution. We discuss below how p and Mcan be estimated for each protein. For now, let us assume that p and Mare known for each protein, and that therefore a (random) value of Kcan be assigned to the protein according to the binomial distributionabove.Next, the model assumes that the free energy Fijof binding of pro-teins i and j is additive in the total number of hydrophobic residuesavailable for binding. In appropriate units, therefore, Fijis simply mi-nus the sum of the K values, that is, Fij= −(Ki+ Kj). Thus, twoproteins with a large total numb er of hydrophobic exposed residuesTractable Models of Large Networks 231FIGURE 7.7: The MpK model for protein interaction networks. Binding be-tween two proteins results in the burial of hydrophobic groups and is thereforedetermined by the number of exposed hydrophobic residues. Reproduced withpermission from Deeds et al. (2006). [c+2006 National Academy of Sciences,U.S.A.]that are involved in binding will tend to have a low free energy of bind-ing. This is because the binding of these two proteins will result in thethermodynamically favorable burial of a large number of hydrophobicgroups: Kij= Ki+ Kj(Figure 7.7). The actual binding aﬃnity Aijbe-tween the two proteins is given by statistical mechanical considerationsas the exponential of minus the free energy:Aij∼ e−Fij= eKi+Kj. (7.41)The ﬁnal ingredient of the model is to specify a cutoﬀ aﬃnity valueACsuch that only protein pairs with Aij≥ ACwill be detected inan experiment as interacting proteins. The cutoﬀ therefore models thesensitivity of the experiment.To recapitulate the basic features of the model, if p and M are knownfor each protein, one can sample values of K for each protein and usethem to ﬁnd binding aﬃnities Aijfor each pair of proteins. A modelnetwork is constructed by assigning an interaction edge to the pair (i, j)if the binding aﬃnity of the pair exceeds the chosen cutoﬀ value. A ﬁnalmodiﬁcation to the model network consists of adding random noise bylinking a number of isolated nodes in the network to other randomlychosen no des in such a manner that the total number of nonisolatednodes in the model network agrees with that found in the real yeastnetwork.232 Introduction to Biological NetworksProperties of the resulting model network can then be studied and becompared to those of real protein interaction networks. Note that, apartfrom the ﬁnal noise addition step, the MpK model has an inherentlyrandom feature because diﬀerent realizations of the model network willdiﬀer in the K values that are sampled, even if the two realizationshave the same set of p and M values. Thus, diﬀerent realizations maybe said to model diﬀerent Y2H experiments.We now turn to the issue of estimating the parameters p and M ,and the cutoﬀ aﬃnity AC. Deeds et al. (2006) assume that all proteinsin the model have the same value of M. They also ﬁnd that there is atrade-oﬀ between the value of M and the value of AC: any change in Mcan be compensated for by a corresponding change in AC. For example,increasing M would increase the number of exposed residues availablefor binding and thus sytematically increase sampled values of K andthe pairwise binding aﬃnities. This can be compensated for by makingthe aﬃnity cutoﬀ more stringent (increasing AC), thus allowing fewerpairs to be modeled as “interacting” proteins. Because of this trade-oﬀ, Deeds et al. kept the value of M ﬁxed at M = 100 in all theirsimulations.The value of p for each yeast protein is found by calculating theproportion of exposed residues that are hydrophobic from the three-dimensional structure of the protein, or, when the structure is unknown,inferring this proportion by homology to other proteins of known struc-ture. These values taken together are found to be normally distributedto good approximation. Values of p are then sampled from this nor-mal distribution and used in the model. Thus, the only remaining freeparameter in the model is the cutoﬀ aﬃnity AC.It is found that the MpK model generates networks with power-lawdegree distributions for values of ACin the range of ∼1025to 1040with values of the power-law exponent increasing as ACis increased,and ranging from ∼1.25 to 3.5. In particular, the exponent of about 2found in the Y2H experiments in yeast is well modeled by an appropri-ate choice of AC. Figure 7.8 shows a comparison of the model networkdegree distribution with its Y2H counterpart. The model is also foundto correctly predict the heirarchical structure of the Y2H network, de-ﬁned as the power-law scaling of clustering coeﬃcient with degree.It further makes a number of testable predictions regarding the cor-relation between protein connectivity and its surface hydrophobicity,and suggests that the data found in high-throughput protein interac-


===== [55/72] chapter-55.html =====

Tractable Models of Large Networks 233FIGURE 7.8: Comparison of degree distributions of the yeast protein inter-action network [from Ito et al. (2001)] and a realization of the MpK modelnetwork. The straight line represents a power law with an exponent of 2. Re-produced with permission from Deeds et al. (2006). [c+2006 National Academyof Sciences, U.S.A.]tion studies is largely dominated by nonspeciﬁc interactions arising outof the inherent “stickiness” of a protein attributed to its surface hy-drophobicity. This observation clearly shows that results from singlehigh-throughput protein interaction experiments cannot be used reli-ably but rather in conjunction with other data sources to produce “highconﬁdence” networks [see, for example, Han et al. (2004); Reguly et al.(2006)], as we have discussed in Chapter 5. Finally, it may sometimesbe more appropriate to assess the signiﬁcance of topological featuresfound in real protein interaction networks by comparing them to anMpK-like biophysics-based model networks rather than conﬁgurationmodel networks, because the former incorporates features that arise outof nonspeciﬁcity of real protein interactions8. We now discuss anothermodel based on protein stickiness that underscores this idea.8Note, however, that these types of models only make sense for physical interactionnetworks but not for the more abstract metabolic and genetic interactions. For thelatter networks, the conﬁguration model and its variants continue to be useful nullmo dels.234 Introduction to Biological Networks7.6.2 A Conﬁguration-Like Model Based on Protein “Stick-iness”The idea of using surface hydrophobicity information to determine non-speciﬁc binding propensity and therefore to model nonspeciﬁc interac-tion networks can be turned around to ask to what extent real proteininteraction networks can be described by a combination of nonspeciﬁcbinding propensities or “stickiness” indices (Przulj and Higham, 2006).This type of construction is an alternative to the standard conﬁgura-tion model. Here, as opposed to directly using the degree sequence ofa real network to generate a random network model, a set of stickinessindices derived from the degree sequence is used. The basic assump-tions in this formulation are: (1) proteins of high degree have a largepropensity for nonspeciﬁc binding to other proteins—thus the bindingpropensity (or stickiness index) of a protein is a nondecreasing functionof its degree; and (2) the probability of interaction of two proteins isproportional to the product of their stickiness indices.Given the two assumptions above, combined with the constraint thatthe mean degree of protein i in the model network should be equal toits degree in the real interaction network, it can be shown (Przulj andHigham, 2006) that the stickiness index of protein i can be uniquelyrepresented asθi=ki#"jkj, (7.42)where kiis the degree of protein i in the real network. The algorithm forconstructing the stickiness-based random network is as follows. First,we compute stickiness indices for all nodes in the network using thedegree information. Then, given two nodes i and j, we connect themwith probability θiθj. (On the computer, this is achieved by generatinga random number uniformly between 0 and 1. If this number is lessthan θiθj, we connect the no des i and j by an edge; otherwise, we donot connect them). This process is repeated for all pairs of nodes in thenetwork.It is found that random networks generated using the stickiness modelmimic features of real protein-protein interaction networks to higheraccuracy than standard conﬁguration models and preferential attach-ment mo dels. Like the conﬁguration model, the stickiness frameworkhas no additional parameters once the degree sequence is speciﬁed.This ﬁnding suggests that the topological structure of protein-proteininteraction networks has a strong biophysical basis.Tractable Models of Large Networks 2357.6.3 Growing Crystals on Evolutionary TimescalesThe biophysical notion that the limited availability of protein bindingsurface restricts binding to multiple proteins is the basis of an edge con-nection mechanism that may be termed “Anti-Preferential attachment”(AP), in which a new node preferentially attaches to nodes that havefew connections as opposed to many connections. While this mechanismdoes not, by itself, produce networks that have features in common withreal protein-protein interaction networks, it serves as a biophysical ba-sis for a dynamical network model in which AP is combined with thepropensity of proteins to form complexes over the course of evolution.This model is aptly termed the Crystal Growth (CG) model becausethe network growth dynamics in this model is similar to that of crystalsgrowing in solution (Kim and Marcotte, 2008), albeit the latter growthoccurs over far shorter timescales than the former! The model uses theconcept of modules, which we ﬁrst encountered in Chapter 5. Mo dulesare approximately deﬁned as densely connected regions of the networkwhose nodes have far more intra-module connections than inter-moduleconnections. There are various ways to deﬁne modules more precisely,as we shall see in the next chapter. Here, it is suﬃcient to retain thequalitative notion that a module is a densely connected sub-network ina much larger network.In the CG model, at each timestep a new node with a ﬁxed numberm of edges is introduced. With some small probability pnew, the nodebecomes a seed for a new module and connects in accordance with theAP rule to existing nodes in the network. However, with a much largerprobability 1 − pnew, the node picks an existing module at random,connects one of its edges to an existing node in the module in accor-dance with AP, and connects the rest of its edges only to neighbors ofthe existing node to which it is already connected (these are typically,but not always, other nodes in the same module). If protein interac-tion modules are thought of as crystals, it is easy to imagine that thesedynamics mimic the growth of crystals in solution. Over evolutionarytimescales, they model the growth and origin of protein complexes.When proteins are classiﬁed into diﬀerent age groups and thesegroups are mapped onto the experimentally found protein-protein in-teraction networks in yeast, a remarkable age dependency of interac-tions is observed: proteins are more likely to connect to close ancestorsrather than distant ancestors. Perhaps equally remarkable, standardpreferential attachment and duplication-divergence models do not re-236 Introduction to Biological Networksproduce this feature. A pure AP model does reproduce the observedage dependency but fails to reproduce the correct degree distributionsand clustering behavior. Among the set of models studied by Kim andMarcotte (2008), the CG model was unique in its ability to reproducetopological features of real protein-protein interaction networks as wellas the age dependency of interactions. It also accurately repro ducestwo other features of yeast protein interaction networks, namely thatmembers of the same protein complex are likely to belong to similarage groups, and that homodimers (proteins that interact with copiesof themselves) occur with higher frequency among older proteins thanyounger ones.


===== [56/72] chapter-56.html =====

Chapter 8Network Modularity and RobustnessIn previous chapters of this book, our emphasis has been mainly onmodeling biomolecular networks by experimental, theoretical and com-putational means, and on the validation and ﬁltering of these models.We have, to a rather limited extent, discussed the use of network infor-mation for the inference of biological function and to help clarify diseasestates. Furthermore, we have barely touched upon how knowledge of in-teractions and of their evolution can help illuminate deeper issues suchas the modularity of biological organization and organismal robustness.These questions are addressed in greater depth in this chapter and theone following it. We are now in a position to ask how network data canbe systematically used to advance biology and medicine.A key concept central to the usefulness of the network approachto biology or medicine is that of modularity. The modular organiza-tion of biological networks has received much attention in recent years,primarily because the modularity of connection patterns is intimatelyconnected to the modularity of biological function. The complexity ofbiological function can best be understood in terms of components thatretain some of the biological prop erties of interest. Hence it is desir-able to reduce complexity down to structural or functional units: themodules. Understanding modularity at the network level allows one toform a basis for understanding the evolution of modularity at the func-tional level, the links between diﬀerent functions, and the correlation oftheir phenotypes. Furthermore, the existence of network modules thatare densely interconnected among themselves while being sparsely con-nected to the rest of the network hints at a type of robustness: targetinga component of a module is likely to degrade the function(s) associatedwith the sp eciﬁc module while not seriously aﬀecting other modules orthe whole organism. We therefore study the topics of modularity androbustness, as they manifest themselves at the network level, togetherin this chapter. We begin with a classic example in biology: segmen-tal patterning in the embryonic stage of development of the fruit ﬂy237238 Introduction to Biological NetworksDrosophila melanogaster. Following this, we discuss deﬁnitions of mod-ularity in larger networks and their functional signiﬁcance. Finally, weaddress dynamical and topological robustness in networks.8.1 Mo dularity Implies Robustness in the Drosophila Seg-ment Polarity NetworkThe outer layer of cells in an organized tissue is called the epidermis.Pattern formation in the epidermis of the Drosophila embryo is oftenconsidered one of the prime examples of developmental organizationthat is amenable to detailed study at the molecular level. Like all in-sects (and, more generally, arthropods: invertebrate animals that havea segmented body and jointed appendages), the fruit ﬂy body is seg-mented. It is composed of fourteen segments: three that make up thehead, including antennae and mouth, three that make up the thorax—the anterior portion of the body (each thoracic segment supports apair of legs), and eight abdominal segments. The process of segmen-tation begins very early in development; the body plan is laid by theformation of gradients of maternally derived mRNA molecules (madefrom a set of maternal eﬀect genes) along the Drosophila egg. Follow-ing fertilization of the haploid egg by the haploid sperm, the process ofnuclear division of the diploid cell or zygote (mitosis) begins. However,nuclear division is not accompanied by division of the cytoplasm (calledcytokinesis). Instead, the early Drosophila embryo is a multinucleatecell, called a syncytium, which consists of a swarm of nuclei ﬂoatingin a shared cytoplasm. These nuclei migrate to the periphery of theembryo at the tenth nuclear division; at the thirteenth division theyare partitioned into separate cells all located at the periphery. This isthe cellular blastoderm1.The peripheral cells in the blastoderm encounter diﬀerent levels ofcertain crucial maternal mRNA molecules, depending on the location ofthe cells. The cells, in response to these maternal mRNAs, show distinctperiodic patterns of mRNA and protein expression of their own thatgovern the eventual diﬀerentiation into physiological segments in theadult ﬂy. Thus, the process of segmentation begins well before the egg1For a detailed description, the reader should refer to a modern developmental bi-ology textbook, such as Gilbert (2000).Network Modularity and Robustness 239HeadThoraxAbdomenT1T2T3A1A2A3A4A5A6A7A8Egg Syncytial embryo Cellular Embryo Larva AdultHh Wg EnFIGURE 8.1: Stages in Drosophila development from egg to fully maturedadult. The egg cytoplasm contains gradients of maternal mRNA concentrationestablished along both axes: anteroposterior and dorsoventral. The dark circlesrepresent nuclei. The inset in the middle of the ﬁgure shows two successiveparasegments (whose boundaries are set oﬀ by horizontal lines), with thenuclei expressing Hh, Wg, or En as indicated by the ﬁlled circles (an emptycircle signals the absence of expression of the corresponding gene). Thus thetopmost cell in the inset expresses Hh, Wg, and En; the second cell expressesHh and En; and so on. These combinatorial expression patterns, coupled withthe positional information provided by the maternal mRNA gradient, areresponsible for setting up the segment identity of the larva, and ultimately ofthe adult ﬂy.is fertilized, and is initiated by the expression gradients of the maternaleﬀect genes: most importantly, the bicoid and hunchback genes whosemRNA and protein gradients determine the patterning of the head andthorax (the anterior portion of the body), and the nanos and caudalgenes whose expression gradients determine the eventual segmentationof the abdomen (the posterior portion of the b ody). Note that thesegradients are established while the embryo is still a syncytium (Fig-ure 8.1).The expression gradients of the maternal eﬀect genes trigger the ac-tivity and expression gradient formation of the segmentation genes(whose mRNA molecules are transcribed from embryo cells, not thematernal cells), which, in turn, consist of three major typ es that areactivated in sequence: the gap genes, the pair-rule genes, and the seg-ment polarity genes. Broadly speaking, the expression gradients of thegap genes subdivide the syncytium into major segments, those of thepair-rule genes establish periodic pairs of segments at the blastoderm240 Introduction to Biological NetworksFIGURE 8.2: Expression of the main segment polarity genes and delin-eation of parasegments and segments in Drosophila. Hexagons denote individ-ual cells, and gene labels within a cell indicate the genes that are dominantlyexpressed within that cell. The expression pattern shown is the one that isstably maintained by segment polarity genes in the wild-type fruit ﬂy. Notethat parasegments are the boundaries across which diﬀusion of the secretedsignaling proteins, namely Hh and Wg, occurs. Anatomical segments in theadult ﬂy are oﬀset from the parasegments. “A” and “P” denote Anterior andPosterior positions along the ﬂy body, respectively. Adapted with permissionfrom Ingolia (2004).stage, and those of the segment polarity genes establish the antero-posterior orientation within each segment. Taken together, the expres-sion gradients of the segmentation genes along the cells comprising theblastoderm specify fourteen parasegments that are closely related tothe ﬁnal anatomical segments (Figures 8.2 and 8.3). Further down thecascade, the segmentation genes regulate yet another family of devel-opment control genes, the homeotic selector genes. The genes involvedin early Drosophila development thus form a transcriptional cascade,with each set of genes eﬀecting the transcription of the next set of genesat a later point in time.Our focus here is on the maintenance of the expression pattern ofthe segment polarity genes. While most of the genes mentioned aboveare activated in a transient fashion, stable pattern formation in theform of parasegments is maintained by the segment polarity genes viatheir interactions across cells belonging to adjacent parasegments. TheNetwork Modularity and Robustness 241segment polarity genes are also strongly evolutionarily conserved: theirhomologs have been identiﬁed even in vertebrates, including humans. Invertebrates, these genes, among other roles, are crucial for laying downthe patterns of brain and spinal cord segmentation. Three segment po-larity genes play a distinctive role in the maintenance of parasegments:the wingless (wg), the engrailed (en), and the hedgehog (hh) genes2.Astable parasegment in the blastoderm is a row of four cells, with thecell at the anterior position expressing en and hh, the middle two cellsnot expressing any of the three genes, and the cell at the posterior posi-tion expressing wg. The four cells also display characteristic expressionpatterns of the other segment polarity genes, but we do not discussthose here. As shown in Figure 8.2, segment boundaries between theanatomical segments in the adult ﬂy are oﬀset from the parasegmentboundaries.Regulatory interactions among the segment polarity genes can becombined to construct a core segment polarity network (Figure 8.3),which is a small network responsible for the maintenance of the paraseg-mental expression pattern of wg, en, and hh. While the protein productsof wg and hh are secreted outside the cell, the protein corresponding toen is a transcription factor responsible for the transcription and regu-lation of the gene hh. As is clear from Figure 8.3, the diﬀusion of theWg protein from a cell can maintain a high level of En (and thereforeof Hh) in a neighboring cell, and conversely, the diﬀusion of Hh from aneighbor, via reduction of expression of the Cn protein, can maintaina high level of Wg.The core Drosophila network is also consistent with the observed lowexpression of wg, en, and hh genes in half the cells of the parasegment.The reason that wg, en, and hh can each exist in two expression statesdepending on the cell (one where they have high expression and theother where they have negligible expression) can be traced to the directauto-activation of wg and that of en (via the inhibition of the sloppypaired gene, slp). While we do not discuss the details here, it is wellknown that systems with auto-activation (or positive feedback) exhibitbistability, that is, such systems can exist in any one of two diﬀerent2Like many other genes, the names of genes involved in Drosophila developmentare based on the phenotype of the organism that results from a mutation of thecorresponding gene. Thus, loss of function mutation of the wg gene leads to winglessﬂies, and loss of function mutation of the hh gene leads to ﬂy larvae that have ahedgehog-like appearance.


===== [57/72] chapter-57.html =====

242 Introduction to Biological Networksstable steady states, with one of the two steady states corresponding tolow activity and the other one to high activity [see, for example, Ferrell(2002); Smits et al. (2006)]. The eventual adoption of the ﬁnal statedepends on the initial conditions of the system. Thus, auto-activationleads to bistability, which in turn allows for the existence of diﬀerentpatterns of expression among the four cells of the parasegment.The functional roles of components of the core segment polarity net-work can be abstracted to form the simpliﬁed network shown in thelower panel of Figure 8.3. This simpliﬁcation is possible because we aremainly interested in the steady-state behavior of the core network andnot on the transient expression of the segment polarity genes. First, wecan clearly combine all mRNA nodes with their protein counterpartsbecause the core network does not involve post-transcriptional regula-tion of the mRNA. Next, all the hedgehog and engrailed nodes can bemerged because the expression of hedgehog is a monotonic function ofthat of engrailed and depends solely upon it. Thus, a single node labeled“E” denotes the state of both engrailed and hedgehog in the simpliﬁednetwork. Furthermore, since the action of extracellular Hh is to ulti-mately activate wg and the action of extracellular Wg is to activate en,these activations are shown as direct but dashed activated interactionsin the simpliﬁed network. Lastly, the interactions between “E” and thenode “S” representing the mRNA and protein corresponding to the slpgene are repressing and are represented as such—as pointed out above,the two repressing interactions lead to bistability in “E” and “S.”Every regulatory interaction in the segment polarity network can bemodeled in terms of a diﬀerential equation describing the rate of for-mation of each entity, similar to the reactions that we encountered inChapter 6. While the mathematical forms of these diﬀerential equa-tions are not important here, it is important to note that the equationscontain parameters whose values must be known in order to model orsimulate the segment polarity network. These parameters include rateconstants that specify the speed of transcription, diﬀusion constantsthat specify the rate at which secreted proteins diﬀuse from one cellto the next, and Michaelis-Menten parameters (see Box 8.1) that spec-ify the binding aﬃnity between enzyme and substrate. The segmentpolarity network contains nearly ﬁfty such parameters that must bespeciﬁed for modeling it. While the values of some of these parame-ters are known from in vitro experiments, the values of most of theparameters are unknown.Network Modularity and Robustness 243ESWhh HhWg en EnSlpslpWgwgCn CiciHhAnterior PosteriorFIGURE 8.3: The core segment polarity network in Drosophila (Ma et al.,2006). Ellipses represent mRNAs and rectangles represent proteins. Lines end-ing with an arrow and a bar denote activation and repression, respectively.Dashed lines indicate proteins secreted by the cell, which diﬀuse to neighb oringcells. The auto-activation of wingless, denoted by a gray line, is not supportedby direct biological evidence but is consistent with the maintenance of a stablestationary expression pattern in the parasegments. The displayed regulatoryinteractions imply that elevated levels of Hh in a neighboring cell can lead toelevated levels of Wg protein, while elevated levels of Wg in a neighboring cellcan lead to elevated levels of En (and therefore of Hh) protein. Other thanthe genes encountered in the text, this network introduces the following: thesloppy paired gene (slp), which is a pair-rule gene that is activated before thesegment polarity genes but expressed constitutively thereafter; the cubitus in-terruptus gene (ci); and a fragment of ci’s protein product, Cn, that repressesthe activation of wg. The bottom diagram is a simpliﬁed version of the topdiagram, where E represents En, S represents Slp, and W represents Wg.244 Introduction to Biological NetworksBox 8.1 The Michaelis-Menten equation.The Michaelis-Menten equation describes the rate of formation of a chemicalspecies whose production is catalyzed by an enzyme. Consider an enzyme Ebinding to a substrate S to form an enzyme-substrate complex ES that isconverted to free enzyme plus a product P . This reaction may b e representedasE + Skf!krESkc−→ E + P,where kfand krare rate constants for the association and disassociation ofthe complex, respectively, and kcis the rate constant for the formation of theproduct from the complex. The rates of formation of complex and productare thus given byd[ES]dt= kf[E][S] − (kr+ kc)[ES], (8.1)d[P ]dt= kc[ES], (8.2)where [E], [S], and [ES] are the concentrations of enzyme, substrate, andcomplex, respectively, and [P ] is the concentration of product. Because theenzyme acts as a catalyst and is not depleted over the course of the reaction,it must be that the total concentration of enzyme (free + bound to substrate)remains constant. Thus, we have the relation [E]+[ES] = [E]0, where [E]0is the initial enzyme concentration.Furthermore, we may assume the existence of a quasi-steady state, in whichboth free and bound forms of the enzyme are separately constant, and theonly change occurring is that the amount of substrate is depleted while theamount of product increases. In this quasi-steady state, d[ES]/dt = 0, yielding[from Equation (8.1)] [ES]=kf[E][S]/(kr+ kc). The further substitution[E] = [E]0− [ES] leads to the following relation:[ES]=[E]0[S]Km+[S],where Km=(kr+ kc)/kf. Substituting the above expression back into Equa-tion (8.2) yieldsd[P ]dt=Vmax[S]Km+[S],where Vmax= kc[E]0. The above equation is called the Michaelis-Mentenequation, and Vmand Kmare the Michaelis-Menten parameters. It shows thatthe rate of formation of a product in an enzyme-catalyzed reaction increasesas a function of the substrate concentration up to a maximum rate Vmaxthatis limited by the enzyme concentration.Network Modularity and Robustness 245Remarkably, the steady-state behavior of the segment polarity net-work model is insensitive to the values of the underlying parameters.In a detailed robustness analysis, von Dassow et al. (2000) searchedfor parameter sets that maintained the expression pattern of segmentpolarity genes in parasegments. Starting from a set of parameters thatmaintained this pattern, they individually varied each parameter inturn and found that the steady-state expression pattern was insensitiveto tenfold or more variation in the values of most parameters. Further-more, they found that a randomly chosen set of parameters maintainsthe correct expression pattern with a probability of 0.5%. While thisnumber may appear to be low, it is actually very large consideringthat the parameter space is a very high-dimensional space; at the levelof a single parameter, it corresponds to a probability of 90% that arandomly chosen single parameter value is capable of maintaining thecorrect expression pattern, because 0.950* 0.005. This remarkable ro-bustness to parameter values in fact allows one to model the networkin a “parameter-free” manner: Albert and Othmer (2003) modeled thesegment polarity network as a Boolean regulatory network in whicheach entity is either turned ON (i.e., has high expression) or OFF (lowexpression) and the interactions between entities are governed by simplelogical relationships rather than by diﬀerential equations with parame-ters. They essentially found that the Boolean segment polarity networkcorrectly models parasegmental expression and also predicts the eﬀectof mutations of various segment polarity genes. Furthermore, it turnsout that the segment polarity network is robust to the choice of initialconditions. While the function of the segment polarity network is tomaintain the correct parasegmental expression pattern and not cre-ate it, in practice the starting pattern can be signiﬁcantly perturbedwithout destroying the ﬁnal steady state (von Dassow et al., 2000).What is the cause of the impressive robustness of the segment po-larity network? By comparing the steady states of networks with andwithout auto-activation of wg and en, Ingolia (2004) showed that thisrobust behavior is suﬃciently explained by the occurrence of bistability.This question was investigated exhaustively by Ma et al. (2006) usingthe simpliﬁed network shown in the lower panel of Figure 8.3. They an-alyzed the robustness properties of all possible topologies involving thethree meta-nodes shown there, and unearthed the topological featurescommon to robust networks. Because every meta-node in the simpliﬁednetwork may regulate itself and two other nodes, both intracellularly246 Introduction to Biological Networksand intercellularly, 3 × 3 × 2 = 18 links are possible. Each link cansignify positive regulation, negative regulation, or be absent, resultingin three possibilities for each link. Thus, the total number of possi-ble networks involving three meta-nodes is 318= 387,420,489, a verylarge number! Ma et al. (2006) narrowed their analysis to topologiesin which at most two of the three nodes can signal outside the cell,thus restricting the number of possible topologies to 315= 14,348,907.These topologies include networks in which the “S” meta-node is notconnected to any other meta-node and is therefore eﬀectively absentfrom the network. For each of the more than 14 million networks, theymeasured robustness by choosing 100 parameter sets at random andﬁnding the proportion of these that could maintain correct paraseg-mental expression. If a speciﬁc topology could maintain the requiredexpression pattern for more than 10% of the chosen parameter sets, itwas considered a robust topology.It was found that every robust topology could be constructed fromthe basic topological and functional modules shown in Figure 8.4, thatis, every robust topology consisted of at least one E module, at leastone B module, and at least one W module, although not every topologyconstructed out of at least one of each type of module was robust. Thethree module types, while topologically distinct, also correspond tothree functional classes: the E modules give rise to bistability in E, theW modules give rise to bistability in W, and the B modules representintercellular control between E and W that is required to delineateparasegment boundaries. Thus, the observed remarkable robustness ofthe segment polarity network is a direct consequence of its speciﬁcmodular topology and modular functions.8.2 Topological and Functional Aspects of NetworkModularityWe have seen that the segment polarity network can be decomposedinto modules, that is, smaller sub-networks that can be combined toproduce the larger network by the addition of very few links or edges. Inaddition to this topological feature, the hallmark of the deﬁned modulesis that each module has a functional role that can be clearly delineated.In general, the existence of sub-networks that “look like” modules atthe level of the connectivity pattern or topology, yet have well-deﬁned


===== [58/72] chapter-58.html =====

Network Modularity and Robustness 247EWESWESWESWESWESWESWB modulesEE modulesEESESESESESESWW modulesWWSWSWSWSWSWSFIGURE 8.4: The three types of modules that constitute robust topologiesfor the segment polarity network (Ma et al., 2006). The E and W modules leadto bistability in E and W, respectively, while the B modules ensure mutualintercellular regulation of E by W, and vice versa. Arrows are depicted ina similar manner to those in Figure 8.3. The modules that are shaded grayaccomplish their function without the S meta-node.248 Introduction to Biological Networksfunctional roles, is a nontrivial phenomenon. Even so, such modules areubiquitous in biomolecular networks. It is therefore important to un-derstand how to discover modules within networks and then to examinetheir biological functions.8.2.1 Newman–Girvan ModularityGiven a large undirected network, such as a protein interaction net-work, how does one discover modules within it with no other informa-tion except its connectivity pattern (topology)? The answer, which mayappear circular at ﬁrst, is to partition the network into sub-networksor groups of nodes that maximize the modularity of the entire network.These sub-networks are the requisite modules. There are several deﬁni-tions of modularity. In the speciﬁc case of protein interaction networks,we have already encountered the Markov clustering procedure in Chap-ter 5 to decipher protein complexes, which are a type of module. Wenow introduce a widely used and general deﬁnition of modularity dueto Newman and Girvan (2004). This notion of modularity builds uponthe intuitive idea that a network is modular if it contains sub-networksor groups (these groups are the putative modules) such that there area large number of intra-group connections and a small number of inter-group connections; the larger the density of intra-group connections andthe smaller the density of inter-group connections, the larger should bethe modularity of the entire network.Let us assume that we are given a partitioning of the undirectednetwork into known groups or sub-networks, which are our putativemodules. The modularity of this collection of modules is deﬁned byNewman and Girvan in terms of the number of within-module edgesminus the number of such edges expected in a random network withthe same degree sequence. Suppose nklis the number of edges betweenmodule k and module l, and nk= nkk+"l'=knkl/2 is the total numberof edges that connect to nodes in module k (the factor of 1/2 arisesbecause edges that connect nodes in module k with nodes in othermodules are counted twice in the sum). Then ekl= nkl/m is the fractionof the total number of edges in the network (which is here taken tobe m) that connect module k to l, and ak= nk/m is the fractionthat connect to module k. Also, note that the sum of degrees of allnodes in the entire network is twice the total number of edges, thatis,"iki=2m, because each edge is counted twice in the sum, andfor similar reasons the sum of degrees of all nodes in module k is givenNetwork Modularity and Robustness 249Box 8.2 Adjacency and Laplacian matrices.The adjacency matrix A of an undirected network containing n nodes is ann × n matrix of 0s and 1s, in which Aij= 1 if there is an edge connectingnodes i and j, and Aij= 0 otherwise. The adjacency matrix thus provides acomplete mathematical representation of the network. For directed networks,the adjacency matrix is an asymmetric matrix in which Aij= 1 only if thereis a directed edge from i to j.A closely related matrix is the Laplacian matrix L, deﬁned as D − A, whereD is a diagonal n × n matrix with node degrees along the main diagonal,that is, Dii= ki. The Laplacian and adjacency matrices have a number ofapplications in the study of random walks on networks, which, in turn, haveapplications in the discovery of clusters and modules.by dk="i∈kki=2nk. Using these relationships, the Newman–Girvanmodularity Q of the network can be expressed in a number of equivalentways as follows:Q =!l(ell− a2l) (8.3)=!l%nllm−3nlm42&(8.4)=!l8nllm−*dl2m+29(8.5)=12m!l!i,j∈l%Aij−kikj2m&, (8.6)where i, j ∈ l is shorthand notation which says that node i and nodej belong to module l, and Aijis the adjacency matrix of the network(Box 8.2). The reader should convince herself that the Newman–Girvanmodularity of an unpartitioned network (or equivalently, a network inwhich all nodes belong to the same module) is zero.The above deﬁnition of modularity assumes, of course, that the net-work has already been partitioned into modules. But how do we dis-cover this partitioning in the ﬁrst place? As stated above, the modulesare themselves discovered by ﬁnding the partition that maximizes themodularity. While there are various algorithms to do this, one approach250 Introduction to Biological Networksdue to Newman (2006) that works eﬃciently and accurately even forlarge networks is to carry out the partitioning in a hierarchical man-ner: the network is ﬁrst partitioned into two sub-networks; then eachsub-network is further partitioned into two, and so on. This processis halted when subsequent partitioning of any sub-network does notincrease the total modularity of the entire network. The algorithm tocarry out the optimal partitioning at each stage is brieﬂy outlined inBox 8.3.There are various extensions and variants of Newman–Girvan mod-ularity and the associated module-ﬁnding algorithm as well as othermethods to ﬁnd modules that have been applied to biological net-works. The basic modularity measure can be modiﬁed for directed net-works (Guimera et al., 2007) and networks with edge weights (Newman,2004). A related measure that is particularly appropriate for networkswith power-law degree distributions has been proposed by Fernandez(2007), and the unrelated procedure of Markov clustering that we previ-ously encountered is simple, fast, and commonly used to analyze proteininteraction networks. These, and many other methods to characterizemodules, are exhaustively surveyed in the review by Fortunato (2010).Now that we have discussed how to deﬁne and discover modules,let us explore some uses of module discovery. For example, can theNewman–Girvan procedure accurately discover modules correspond-ing to diﬀerent biological functions? Protein interaction networks arenatural candidates for the application of module-ﬁnding procedures.In an analysis of the eﬃcacy of Newman–Girvan modules at discrim-inating between sets of proteins with diﬀerent functions in yeast andhuman protein interaction networks, it was found that the discoveredmodules largely correspond to active protein complexes, consisting ofgroups of proteins that are known to cooperate to perform commonfunctions (Dunn et al., 2005). The module detection method is insensi-tive to the addition and deletion of up to ∼20% of random edges, thusconﬁrming the robustness to false positive and false negative errors.The fact that modules can be detected robustly is a consequence ofthe inherent modular topology of protein interaction networks. More-over, the fact that the detected modules correspond to protein groupsof homogenous function is likely a consequence of protein interactionnetworks having evolved in such a way as to ensure that topologicalmodules are also functional modules.If protein interaction networks have evolved to be modular, should itNetwork Modularity and Robustness 251Box 8.3 Newman’s module discovery algorithm.Suppose we wish to initially partition an unpartitioned network in two par-titions or modules in such a way so that the modularity of the partitioningis maximal. Based on Equation (8.6), we can deﬁne the so-called modularitymatrix B, as Bij= Aij− kikj/(2m). Given a partitioning of the networkinto two modules, we can also deﬁne an indicator vector s, where si= 1 ifnode i belongs to module 1 and si= −1 if node i belongs to module 2. Thenthe modularity measure of Equation (8.6) can be expressed in matrix form asQ = sTBs/(4m), where T denotes the transpose operation. The matrix B canbe expressed in terms of the so-called spectral expansion, that is, in terms ofits normalized eigenvectors ui, i =1, . . . , n, as B ="ni=1βiuiuiT, where βiare the eigenvalues of B, arranged in decreasing order for convenience. Thus,the modularity Q can be written asQ =14mn!i=1βi:uiT· s;2. (8.7)The objective is to ﬁnd the partitioning vector s for which the modularity Qis maximal. While this is a diﬃcult problem to solve exactly, an approximatesolution can be found by assuming that the sum in Equation (8.7) isdominated by the largest eigenvalue β1. The eigenvector corresponding to thelargest eigenvalue, u1, is called the principal eigenvector of the modularitymatrix. An approximate solution to maximizing the modularity is then toﬁnd the vector s such that the dot product u1T· s is maximal. Because theentries of s are constrained to be ±1, the dot product is maximized if onechooses si= 1 whenever the entry u1iis positive and si= −1 whenever theentry u1iis negative. This choice deﬁnes the optimal initial partitioning ofthe network into two partitions.Further partitioning can be carried out in a similar manner by treating each ofthe initial partitions as independent networks, ﬁnding the principal eigenvec-tors of each modularity matrix, and choosing the sub-partitions based on thesigns of the entries of these principal eigenvectors. The only caveat is that nowthe nodes in a partition g have intra- as well as inter-partition connections,and this feature leads to a modiﬁed modularity matrix B%whose principaleigenvector must be found. In terms of the original modularity matrix, theelements of this modiﬁed matrix are given by B%ij= Bij− δij"l∈gBil, wherethe additional term modiﬁes the diagonal entries of the modularity matrixand involves a sum over all nodes within the partition g.In this manner, the network can be recursively partitioned into modules. Ateach step, an existing partition is potentially subdivided into two partitionsthat are determined by the principal eigenvector of the appropriate B%matrix.The recursive procedure is halted when all entries of the principal eigenvectorof a modiﬁed modularity matrix have the same sign. At that point, furtherpartitioning cannot increase the modularity.


===== [59/72] chapter-59.html =====

252 Introduction to Biological Networksnot be the case that ancient networks were less modular? Indeed, thisappears to be true. Fernandez (2007) divided yeast proteins into ﬁve“age classes” based on their extent of sequence similarity with proteinsin various kingdoms of life. In this division, yeast proteins that are ho-mologous to proteins in the oldest life forms are classiﬁed as the oldestproteins, and so on. He then successively reconstructed more ancientnetworks by removing “young” nodes. For each reconstructed network,he computed its modularity. The modularity is found to steadily in-crease from a value of about 0.40 for the most ancient network (one inwhich all nodes have homologs in all ancestral groups) to ab out 0.55 forthe present-day yeast network. The increase in modularity is accom-panied by a progressive enrichment in intramodular hub proteins thatpreferentially do not connect to each other. Thus, although the most an-cient protein interaction network has a power-law degree distribution,it possesses a high probability of connection between nodes of similardegree (and therefore between hubs) as compared to the present-daynetwork, in which hubs tend to lie at the centers of modules and tend toconnect to other nodes in the same module rather than to other hubs.The avoidance of hub-hub connections in the present network impartsto it a robustness to hub removal, as removal of a hub will disruptthe module that the hub is associated with rather than impact otherhubs (and other modules). Because modularity is, in turn, connectedto function, directed attack on a speciﬁc hub will impair the functionassociated with that hub rather than impair a host of functions. Again,we see the interplay between modularity and robustness at work.Homogeneity of biological function within topologically discov-ered modules is not restricted to protein interaction networks alone.Metabolic networks also tend to be topologically and functionally mod-ular, with the two sets of modules having high overlap. In a study ofthe metabolic networks of twelve diﬀerent organisms, it was found thatthe overwhelming majority of modules discovered using the Newman–Girvan modularity measure contain metabolites mostly from one ma-jor pathway (Guimera and Amaral, 2005). Furthermore, in an analysisof intra- versus inter-module connections of each metabolite, it wasfound that non-hub metabolites whose few links were spread acrossdiﬀerent modules tend to be far more evolutinarily conserved than hubmetabolites whose links are mostly conﬁned within a single module.However, in general, hub metabolites are more conserved than non-hub metabolites. This is another example of evolutionary robustness:Network Modularity and Robustness 253non-hub metabolites that link to diﬀerent modules are more importantbecause disruption in their function would impair several cellular func-tions. By contrast, disruption of hub metabolites whose links lie withina single module would only lead to disruption of a single function. Evo-lution appears to have preferentially selected for organisms that carryfunctional forms of the former metabolite.8.2.2 Functional Modules from Expression DataFunctionally relevant mo dules in networks are often discovered usingother biological information in addition to connectivity data. A clas-sic example consists of overlaying expression data on the yeast proteininteraction network to reveal a model of organized modularity (Hanet al., 2004). It was found that hub nodes in the yeast protein inter-action network could be divided into two classes (Figure 8.5): thosewhose expression proﬁle is strongly correlated with the expression pro-ﬁles of their interacting partners (these hubs are termed party hubs),and those whose expression proﬁle is only weakly correlated with theexpression proﬁles of their interacting partners (these hubs are termeddate hubs). Date hubs tend to have very diﬀerent characteristics fromthose of party hubs: their interacting partners are expressed in a broaddistribution of cellular conditions. The expression of interacting part-ners of party hubs are mostly conﬁned to the same cellular conditions.The network rapidly fragments into smaller components when datehubs are systematically removed from it; party hub removal does notresult in such a rapid fragmentation of the network. There are roughlytwice as many genetic interactions involving date hubs as those thatinvolve party hubs, suggesting that date hubs play a more centralfunctional role than party hubs. When all date hubs are removed, theprotein interaction network fragments into distinct sub-networks thatcan be interpreted as modules. These modules turn out to be function-ally homogenous and correspond to components as diverse as proteincomplexes, molecular machines, and regulatory pathways (Box 8.4).Thus, the yeast protein interaction network may be said to follow amodel of organized modularity in which functional modules are dis-tinct topological units ruled by the party hubs, while date hubs linkthe modules to each other and therefore mediate the crosstalk betweendiﬀerent functions.Just as data integration has been an important theme in many topicsdiscussed in this book, so it is with the discovery and analysis of func-254 Introduction to Biological NetworksabcdFIGURE 8.5: Party and date hubs. Protein nodes in the network shownabove are shaded by their expression proﬁles: proteins having similar expres-sion proﬁles are shaded in the same way. Of the four hub nodes (a, b, c, d),nodes b, c and d are party hubs because their expression proﬁles correlatestrongly with those of their neighbors, while node a is a date hub becauseits expression proﬁle is, on average, only weakly correlated with those of itsneighbors.tional modules. The above example of organized modularity involvesintegration of connectivity data and expression data to yield functionalmodules. In another example, expression data and knowledge of regu-latory interactions was overlaid on protein interaction modules to ﬁndtranscriptional factors that coregulate genes in two or more separatemodules (Petti and Church, 2005), which is reminiscent of the dataintegration pro cedures used to predict protein-protein interactions inChapter 3. The analysis of Petti and Church yielded a “super-network”in which nodes are modules and two modules are connected if they areco-regulated by at least one transcription factor. By combining pro-tein interaction networks with expression and localization data, it ispossible to discriminate between mo dules that correspond to proteincomplexes and functional modules in which all proteins participate inthe same cellular process (Lu et al., 2006).Network Modularity and Robustness 255Box 8.4 Complexes, machines, and pathways.By a protein complex, we generally mean an experimentally observed associa-tion of multiple proteins regardless of their biological functions. A molecularmachine is a protein complex whose member proteins have experimentallyobserved biochemical functions that are highly orchestrated as a series ofcatalytic steps. For example, the eukaryotic RNA polymerase II is composedof approximately seventy-ﬁve proteins. The functions of these proteins includeDNA sequence recognition, DNA strand unwinding, RNA synthesis, DNAstrand rewinding, and protein movement along the DNA template, amongmany others. A second example of a molecular machine is the ribosome,which contains a number of diﬀerent proteins as well as non-coding RNAmolecules.A regulatory pathway is a set of proteins that may or may not form a complex,yet the components together control the magnitude of a speciﬁc biologicalresponse, such as signal transduction or gene expression. The signal transduc-tion pathways shown in Figure 1.2 are all regulatory pathways. One of themdescribes the following process: pheromone binding to a membrane receptortriggers a cascade of enzyme-catalyzed protein phosphorylation events ulti-mately leading to transport of an activated transcription factor protein intothe nucleus where it causes global changes in gene expression. A second exam-ple that we encountered in Chapter 5 is the activation of the p53 transcriptionfactor by a DNA damage-induced signal. As in the previous example, activatedp53 enters the nucleus and causes global changes in gene expression.8.3 Robustness Implications of Topology of BiologicalNetworksRobustness is the ability of a complex system to continue function-ing despite signiﬁcant perturbations to its components. At the networklevel, robustness can manifest itself in two diﬀerent ways. Robustnesscan correspond to some phenotype of the system remaining approxi-mately constant despite changes to system parameters or the additionof noise without changing its wiring diagram or connectivity pattern.By contrast, robustness can also correspond to the phenotype remain-ing constant despite structural changes in the wiring diagram that de-ﬁnes the system. We have encountered both types of robustness in thesegment polarity network: the parasegmental expression pattern is ro-bust to parameter changes in the diﬀerential equations underlying the256 Introduction to Biological Networksdynamics of expression, and it is also robust to changes in the wiringdiagram as long as the wiring diagram retains some fundamental func-tional modules. It is important to note that both kinds of changes—changes in parameters and changes in the wiring diagram—correspondto epigenetic3or genetic perturbations rather than physiological ﬂuc-tuations.With regard to robustness against perturbations of the wiring di-agram itself, we have seen the implications of random or systematicperturbations of networks with diﬀerent topologies. In Chapter 1, wediscussed how power-law networks are robust to random removal ofnodes but sensitive to directed attack on the hub nodes. In the previoussection, we observed that the organized modularity model of proteininteraction networks predicts that sensitivity of power-law networks todirected attack on hubs can be accounted for by the sensitivity to di-rected attack on the date hubs alone, while directed attack on partyhubs does not signiﬁcantly inﬂuence network topology. These studiesprobe the static robustness of a network, that is, they explore how thestructure of the network responds to the perturbations such as node oredge removal.The above conclusions make intuitive sense in light of how biologi-cal systems evolve. For example, physiological adaptation to changesin environmental conditions must necessarily entail a readjustment ofnetwork components to retain internal homeostasis (stability). Exter-nal variables such as temperature would likely aﬀect the structure andstability of numerous proteins in a manner analogous to a randomperturbation process. Likewise, a power-law degree distribution of theprotein-protein interaction network ought to make such a network moreresistant to disintegration than if the interaction network were to havesome other degree distribution. This is because there are few proteinswith high degrees and numerous proteins with low degrees in a power-law network, which ensures that random perturbations such as nodeor edge removal would more likely aﬀect the low-degree proteins, withrelatively little impact on the overall function of the network.The problem with a power-law topology, however, is its relative sen-3Epigenetic perturbations are changes in gene expression levels or phenotype thatare not caused by changes in the DNA sequence. An example of an epigenetic per-turbation is DNA methylation, which is the addition of methyl groups to DNA.Highly methylated areas of DNA are generally transcribed to RNA at lower ratesthan nonmethylated regions, although there are some exceptions to this rule.


===== [60/72] chapter-60.html =====

Network Modularity and Robustness 257sitivity to other biological agents that can evolve to target the morevulnerable nodes, such as the date hubs. Certain bacterial viruses (e.g.,the T7 bacteriophage) infect and rapidly reproduce within the host cellto make numerous copies of the virus, then reemerge by killing the hostcell. Such viruses often inactivate certain host proteins (e.g., T7 inhibitsthe host-encoded RNA polymerase) that are protein-protein interac-tion network hubs (Nechaev and Severinov, 1998). Similarly, certainhuman viruses inactivate the p53 protein that is a hub in the humanprotein-protein interaction network (Portis et al., 2001). In fact, ro-bustness analysis of the human protein-protein interaction sub-networkcentered around the p53 protein, whose function is adversely aﬀectedin over 75% of all cancers due to mutations in the gene that encodesit, indeed shows the sub-network to be robust to random edge removalbut not to targeted edge removal (Dartnell et al., 2005).Intracellular pathogens of higher plants elicit immune response by thehost upon invading the host plant. The protein-protein interaction net-work of the immune system of the plant Arabidopsis thaliana (Mukhtaret al., 2011) consists of 926 protein nodes and 1,358 interactions. Plantpathogens encode some 20 to 30 proteins (called eﬀectors) that ma-nipulate the host cell immune system. Strikingly, the eﬀector proteinsof two diﬀerent plant pathogens attack an overlapping set of proteinsin the plant immune response network, and the targeted set of im-mune response proteins is signiﬁcantly enriched for hubs (Figure 8.6).Thus, in a manner reminiscent of T7 bacteriophage inactivating thehighly connected RNA polymerase of its host (see above) or phagelambda modifying the host RNA polymerase (discussed in Chapter 6),the plant pathogens also target “hub” proteins in the plant immunenetwork. Here again we see an example of parallel evolution of the hostand the pathogen, where the pathogens evolved to target the most vul-nerable components of the network, thus compromising the robustnessproperties of the host.8.4 Robustness and Network DynamicsWe have seen, here and in Chapter 6, that biological networks, suchas the segment polarity network, the lambda gene expression network,and the protein interaction network of yeast cell cycle, are dynamic onphysiological timescales because of time-varying expression levels of the258 Introduction to Biological Networks406080 100 120 140Total number of edges among effector targets00.020.040.060.08Frequency020RandomsimulationsObservedFIGURE 8.6: Pathogens target highly connected proteins in the immunenetwork of Arabidopsis thaliana. The total number of direct edges that connecthost proteins that are the targets of eﬀector proteins encoded by pathogens areshown in this schematic ﬁgure. The black arrow on the right corresponds tothe observed number of edges among the targeted host proteins in Arabidop-sis, while the curve on the left is the distribution of this number assumingrandom connections among the host proteins. This distribution was generatedempirically on the computer by randomly shuﬄing the edges between nodes,keeping the degree distribution of host proteins intact and identical to theexperimentally determined one. A total of 15,000 diﬀerent random networkswere generated by the shuﬄing process, each of which had a diﬀerent totalnumber of edges among the eﬀector targets. The ﬁgure shows that the observednumber of edges among eﬀector targets is far higher than that expected bychance. Adapted with permission from Mukhtar et al. (2011).mRNA and proteins. To what extent can the robustness of biologicalnetworks be attributed to the dynamical properties of the networksthemselves?Unlike the computer simulations performed to address robustness ofthe segment polarity network, the question of dynamical robustness togenetic perturbations has been addressed experimentally in the case ofbacteriophage lambda, where it was found that the switch from the lyticto the lysogenic cycle (see Chapter 6) is highly robust to mutations inthe operator region OR that is occupied by the two regulatory proteinsNetwork Modularity and Robustness 259cI and Cro (Little and Shepley, 2006), a property that is crucial tothe lysis-lysogeny switch. Despite signiﬁcant mutational changes thatare predicted to alter the binding eﬃciencies of cI and Cro proteinsby one to three orders of magnitude, the signiﬁcance of these changesto the viral biology was minimally disruptive, varying at most by afactor of three. A conclusion from this study was that the lambdagene regulatory network is not delicately poised at the edge of chaoticbehavior but is highly optimized and robust to random mutations inits important components.The source of the observed genetic robustness of the phage lambdaregulatory circuit was later examined by constructing a mathemati-cal model. This model incorporated stochastic white noise componentsinto a system of coupled diﬀerential equations that described the con-centrations of cI and Cro proteins in the bound and unbound stateson the operators, and their mutual interactions. It was concluded thata crucially important factor for the observed robustness is the posi-tive feedback of cI protein on transcription of the cI gene, which isenhanced by the cooperative binding of the cI proteins to the operatorsequences (Zhu et al., 2004). This is very similar to the robustness en-countered in the segment polarity network, where positive feedback onthe engrailed and wingless genes plays a crucial role.The above discussion points to the importance of examining thegeneral dynamical properties of biological interaction networks as thesource of genetic robustness. While the existence of positive feedbackor auto-activation loops is crucial for the robustness of small metabolicand regulatory networks, this observation does not clarify the topolog-ical features that contribute to the robustness of larger networks. Wenow describe how the power-law nature of the degree distribution oflarge biological networks contributes to the dynamical robustness ofnetwork properties.As a simple approximation, imagine a large network with N nodes,each of which can exist in one of two states: the ON or “Activated”state, and the OFF or “Inactivated” state. This is a dynamical Booleannetwork of the type we have already encountered. The state of a nodeat a certain time point is determined in a stochastic manner by thestate at the previous time point of all nodes connecting to it. Denotingthe state of node i at time t by σi(t), the dynamics can be expressedasσi(t + 1) = fi3σi1(t),σi2(t), . . . , σiki(t)4, (8.8)260 Introduction to Biological Networkswhere fiis a diﬀerent random Boolean function of its inputs for everynode i, and kiis the degree of node i. Thus, there are 2kipossible inputstates for the function fiand the function outputs a value of 0 (OFF) or1 (ON) for each state, with the choice determined in a random manner.However, once the choice of a 0 or 1 output value for each input stateis made, it remains constant for all time.The state dynamics of a Boolean network eventually settle to cyclicalbehavior, where a cycle consists of a set of states that is visited period-ically. In the biological context, a cycle corresponds to a set of gene ex-pression patterns corresponding to intracellular tasks. Typically, thesecyclical dynamics have two regimes: a chaotic regime in which even theperturbation of the state of a single node can make the system jumpfrom one cycle to another, and a robust regime in which perturbationsdie out over time. The robust regime is therefore insensitive to initialconditions.What parameters dictate whether the network is in a chaotic or ro-bust regime? The relevant parameters that characterize a Boolean net-work are a parameter ρ that corresponds to the overall probabilitythat the Boolean functions fioutput a value of 1 (thus, 1 − ρ is theprobability that they output a value of 0), and a second parameterthat characterizes the topology or wiring diagram of the network. Ifthe network is a random network, a meaningful choice of this secondparameter is the average node degree K. On the other hand, if the net-work is a power-law network with exponent γ (in which the varianceof the degree is inﬁnite for γ ≤ 3), the more meaningful choice of thetopological parameter is the power-law exponent γ. Aldana and Cluzel(2003) found that while most choices of ρ and K for random graphslead to chaotic dynamics (in particular, for a mean connectivity valueof K = 20—which is representative of the human regulatory network—robust b ehavior is attained only for ∼5% of values of ρ), a large rangeof choice of ρ and γ lead to robust behavior for power-law networks. Inparticular, every choice of ρ for γ> 2.5 in power-law networks leadsto robust dynamics. However, it is also true that every choice of ρ forγ< 2.0 leads to chaotic behavior in power-law networks. Thus valuesof γ between 2.0 and 2.5 correspond to a critical regime in which ro-bustness is dependent on the precise value of ρ. Interestingly, it turnsout that the power-law exponents of most real networks (not just bi-ological ones) lie between 2.0 and 2.5. In the robust regime, it turnsout that robustness to perturbations is strongly dependent on the nodeNetwork Modularity and Robustness 261that is perturbed. Perturbations of high-degree nodes spread throughthe network and in fact lead to chaotic behavior, while perturbationsof the states of low-degree nodes die out. Because a power-law networkpossesses many more low-degree nodes than high-degree nodes, thisphenomenon is consistent with the overall robustness and is also consis-tent with the ﬁnding that power-law networks are topologically robustto random node removal while being sensitive to directed removal ofhigh-degree nodes. If we assume that Boolean dynamics approximatethe true dynamics of expression to some degree, these results show thatpower-law networks are not just topologically robust to random attack,but also dynamically robust.8.5 Network Robustness by RewiringWe have so far discussed mechanisms of evolutionary adaptation of in-teraction networks to selection pressure, and have seen that both net-work topology and network dynamics are important for the evolution ofrobust features. It app ears that selection pressure on the functionalityof network components constrains the network topology feature-spaceto a relatively narrow feature, approximating a power-law degree dis-tribution. This however leaves an important question unanswered: Isit possible that embedded within an extant interaction network are al-ternate pathways that appear under severe stress to the network? Themotivation for raising this question comes from an anthropomorphicanalogy to contingency plans in the face of unforeseen perturbations,which are often embedded in human social networks. Take, for instance,the backup plan for communication networks in the event of large nat-ural disasters. Such backup networks are generally not in continuoususe, but their very existence is designed to impart robustness. Are thereequivalent backup networks of interaction in the cells that come intooperation at times of severe threats to survival?To address this question, one needs to ﬁrst work out an interac-tion network that is operative under normal conditions of growth, thenperturb or stress the organism and work out the interaction networkunder the perturbed condition. Indeed, this was done for the networkof genetic interactions in yeast when grown under normal conditionsand under conditions of acute stress produced by adding a chemicalthat causes damage to the DNA (Bandyopadhyay et al., 2010). Recall


===== [61/72] chapter-61.html =====

262 Introduction to Biological NetworksARP8IES3NHP10HIR1HIR3HIR2DCC1CTF8 CTF18ARP8IES3NHP10HIR1HIR3HIR2DCC1CTF8 CTF18(a) (b)FIGURE 8.7: Rewiring of a genetic interaction network under stress. (a)In the absence of extensive DNA damage, there was no evidence of geneticinteractions among the nine genes represented as circles. However, they formthree modules of protein-protein interactions (thin lines). (b) In the presenceof extensive damage to the DNA (as occurs, for example, when yeast cellsare grown in the presence of a chemical that causes DNA breaks in yeast), anumber of genetic interactions appeared (thick lines). Adapted and simpliﬁedfrom Bandyopadhyay et al. (2010).that a genetic interaction network can b e constructed out of diﬀerenttypes of gene-gene interactions. The speciﬁc interaction type used inthis study was that of epistasis interaction, in which when a pair ofgenes is simultaneously deleted, their combined eﬀect is either more(positive epistasis) or less (negative epistasis) than the combination oftheir individual eﬀects (see Chapter 2).Strikingly, it was found that many of the epistatic pairs changed whenthey were tested in the presence of the chemical. However, many novelepistatic pairs emerged in the presence of the chemical. It appears thatthe genetic interaction network is rewired in the presence of the chemi-cal that is expected to cause severe damage to the DNA. An alternate,albeit trivial, interpretation of this result is that the chemical causednumerous mutations in the background, some of them suppressors ofsynthetic lethal pairs and others causing novel lethal mutations. Thisinterpretation was not credible given the high frequency at which suchspeciﬁc interactions (or lack thereof) were exhibited. In fact, many ofthe novel interactions made sense in terms of DNA repair pathways re-quired for handing damages to the DNA by the chemical (Figure 8.7).There is a diﬃculty with the above view, however. Because it is widelythought that evolution selects the maintenance of genes having a spe-Network Modularity and Robustness 263ciﬁc adaptive value, genes that participate in “contingency plans”—that is, those that have alternate functions—would appear to have noselective advantage for such alternate functional specialization. Onecan argue against this by assuming that the perturbing factors, in thiscase damage to the DNA, are fairly frequent and occur naturally overthe course of evolution, causing frequent lethal impact during normalcellular growth processes, such that the contingency plans are regularlyutilized and therefore contribute to survival frequently in the popula-tion. Yet another argument for the existence of “contingency” genes isthat the alternate functions actually arise out of the emergent behaviorof collections of genes, utilizing remnants of ancestral functions that arenot yet lost through mutational erosion.


===== [62/72] chapter-62.html =====

Chapter 9Networks and DiseaseOne of the most important advances in understanding the molecularbasis of diseases and the promise of novel therapeutic discoveries hasbeen the use of network data as well as network paradigms. As weshow in this chapter, these approaches are leading to the identiﬁcationof important genes that are implicated in various diseases, the under-standing of common origins of disparate diseases, disease comorbidity,prediction of patient response to disease states, and the design of noveltreatment methods.Before we embark on an exploration of the connections between net-work biology and disease, we must ﬁrst understand the concept of a dis-ease gene. A disease gene is a gene in which speciﬁc mutations, or whoseabnormal expression, cause the disease in question. A disease may haveone or more disease genes associated with it. The abnormal proteinsometimes coded by the disease gene is often termed a disease-causingprotein. There is growing realization that susceptibility to nearly allhuman diseases, including infectious diseases, may have at least somegenetic component. A comprehensive atlas of genetic diseases and thegenes associated with them is provided by the Online Mendelian In-heritance in Man (OMIM) database (http://www.omim.org). As ofAugust 2012, the OMIM database contained over 21,000 entries. Insome instances, diﬀerent sets of mutations in the same gene may giverise to diﬀerent disorders, just as most disorders are polygenic (i.e.,caused by mutations in more than one gene). This “multi-gene-multi-disease” association immediately suggests a network-like paradigm forunderstanding the relationships among human diseases. Before we delvedeeper into this paradigm, however, it is instructive to further under-stand how a disease can be caused by single gene mutations. Suchdiseases are termed Mendelian diseases. Examples are the so-calledin-born errors of metabolism, such as phenylketonuria (PKU). In thisdisease, the aﬀected patients cannot metabolize a particular amino acideﬀectively, leading to toxic accumulation of a degradation product and265266 Introduction to Biological Networksconsequent disorders. Other examples are sickle-cell anemia, which iscaused by a mutation that produces an aberrant hemoglobin molecule(that is unable to carry suﬃcient oxygen) in the red blood cells, andhemophilia, which causes a blood clotting disorder.Genetic diseases can be due to a dominant or a recessive mutation,depending on whether one or both copies, respectively, of the diseasegene (one inherited from the mother and one inherited from the fa-ther) are required for the individual to be aﬄicted with the disease.Mendelian diseases are further classiﬁed as autosomal diseases if theirdisease gene resides on one of the twenty-two non-sex chromosomes, X-linked if their disease gene resides on the X-chromosome, and Y-linkedif their disease gene resides on the Y -chromosome. Thus, autosomal re-cessive diseases are those in which both copies of the disease gene (thatresides on the two homologous non-sex chromosomes) must be mutatedfor the individual to be aﬀected. In such diseases, it is possible that twoparents, each possessing one copy of the disease gene (and therefore,not aﬄicted by the disease) can have a child who has two copies of thedisease gene and is therefore aﬄicted. Examples of autosomal reces-sive diseases include cystic ﬁbrosis and sickle-cell anemia. In autosomaldominant diseases, on the other hand, one copy of the mutated geneis suﬃcient for the disease to be expressed. It is therefore not possiblefor an individual to be aﬄicted with an autosomal dominant diseaseunless at least one of his/her parents is aﬄicted with it1. Huntington’sdisease is an autosomal dominant disease.X-linked recessive diseases are only expressed in females if they carrytwo copies of the disease gene, one on each chromosome. Only one copyof the disease gene is suﬃcient for the disease to be expressed in males,because males carry only one X chromosome. Thus, X-linked recessivediseases occur more frequently in males than in females. Hemophiliaand color blindness are examples of X-linked recessive diseases. Y -linked diseases occur exclusively in males and are passed from fatherto son. Because there is only one Y chromosome (which exists onlyin males), the notions of recessive and dominant forms do not usu-1It should be noted, however, that some autosomal dominant diseases have lowpenetrance, which means that not all individuals w ho carry the mutated form ofthe disease gene are aﬄicted by the disease. In rare cases, an autosomal dominantmutation can arise in the germline or within the ﬁrst few cell divisions of the embryo.In such cases, the parents of the aﬄicted child may not carry the disease-causingmutation.Networks and Disease 267ally apply to Y -linked diseases. The most well known Y -linked diseasesare those associated with mutations of the SRY (Sex-determining Re-gion Y) gene. This gene codes for a protein that initiates male sexdetermination. Thus, mutations in this gene in men lead to an exter-nally female-like appearance with under-develop ed gonads, a conditionknown as Swyer syndrome.9.1 Disease Loci Identiﬁcation and MappingAs the above examples show, Mendelian diseases are relatively simpleto identify because they are inherited in precisely predicted patternsin the human lineage, or pedigree. To know that a gene is responsiblefor a Mendelian disease is therefore straightforward in principle, but toidentify the causal gene mutation is another matter. The identiﬁcationof the sickle-cell hemoglobin gene as the carrier of the causal genemutation in sickle-cell anemia required a large body of work in humanphysiology relating the anemic condition and the peculiar shape of thered blood cells (the classic “sickle” shape) in the diseased individualto the variant hemoglobin protein. Final conﬁrmation of the causalgene mutation required sequencing the hemoglobin proteins puriﬁedfrom normal and sickle-cell patients, and demonstration of the singleamino acid changes in the variant hemoglobin proteins in patients withspeciﬁc mutations. Such successes were rarely possible for Mendeliandisease genes until progress in molecular biology techniques such as theability to amplify segments of DNA from the genome by polymerasechain reaction (PCR) and subsequent sequencing of these ampliﬁedDNA molecules was carried out. Nowadays it is possible to sequence theentire genome of family members with identical and nonidentical twinsin which a Mendelian disease has occurred and thus ﬁnd the singlegene mutation that is responsible for the disease. One such diseasegene that was identiﬁed by this method by a team of scientists ledby D. Galas (Roach et al., 2010) causes Miller’s syndrome, which ischaracterized by abnormal facial and limb features. As of this writing,there are over 2,600 genes currently known in which mutations areknown to cause a disease.For many diseases, however, it is diﬃcult to track down the responsi-ble DNA sequence variants. A common reason for this is that multiplegene variants make incremental contributions to a disease. Moreover,268 Introduction to Biological Networksthere may be variants in other genes that could potentially mask orsuppress the deleterious eﬀects of a disease-causing variant gene in amanner analogous to that of suppressor mutations or epistasis eﬀectsdiscussed in Chapter 2. In these cases, it is important to track downthe regions (loci) of the DNA that are closely linked to the inheritancepattern of the diseased phenotype.Even in the case of Mendelian diseases, it is sometimes hard to nar-row the search for the disease gene to a small group of genes because oflack of information on altered protein function or biochemical or phys-iological disease mechanisms. In such cases, knowledge of the diseaselocus on the chromosome without speciﬁc knowledge of the disease genecan still provide crucial information.In a classic example, two methods were used in parallel to track downa key risk factor gene for human colorectal cancer. To begin with, familypedigree studies indicated that there might be a gene variant runningin certain families that increased the likelihood for a speciﬁc type of col-orectal cancer, but it was not a clear-cut case of Mendelian inheritance.It was found that in susceptible patients with tumors, many of whichdeveloped into cancers, the genome was somewhat unstable: there werehigh-frequency mutations of DNA sequences with short repeated se-quence stretches—this is the so-called micro-satellite instability in thegenome. Tumors with such instability appeared to arise among individ-uals with a tendency to inherit a short stretch of a particular chromo-somal DNA segment. This was possible to ﬁgure out because humanchromosomes contain numerous diﬀerences in DNA sequence betweenthe two sets of homologous chromosomes inherited from the motherand the father. These sequence diﬀerences are called markers, becausethey deﬁne “markings” on the chromosomes that can be mapped withrespect to one another. In the respective parents germline cells (i.e.,precursor cells of the egg or the sperm), the homologous chromosomesexchange parts by the process of recombination. Thus, the closer a pairof markers is, the less frequently the region of DNA between the markerpair is exchanged.If a disease gene is located between a given pair of markers, then aparent who carries the disease-causing mutation on one chromosomewould harbor some egg or sperm cells in which the marker pairs ﬂank-ing the disease gene have exchanged (or recombined) and other cells inwhich they have not, at a frequency depending on the separation be-tween the markers. It can be shown (Box 9.1 and Figure 9.1) that if theNetworks and Disease 269Box 9.1 Dependence of recombination frequency on distancebetween genetic markers.Suppose a is a disease-causing mutation (its wild-type allele is denoted by“+” in Figure 9.1), and b is a marker allele (with wild-type version B) locateda distance d from a. Assuming that crossover exchanges are randomly anduniformly distributed across the chromosomes, the larger the separation d,the higher the probability of a crossover exchange occurring between the twoloci a and b during meiotic cell division. Assuming further that crossovers areindependent events (i.e., one exchange does not interfere with another) andthat the mean number of exchanges between the two loci are small, then thenumber of exchanges between loci that are a distance d apart can be modeledby a Poisson process with mean d. That is, the probability of n crossoverexchanges occurring within the distance d is dnexp(−d)/n!. Because recom-bination can only occur if the number of exchanges is odd, the probability orfrequency of recombination is given byr =!n odddnexp(−d)n!= d exp(−d)+d3exp(−d)3!+d5exp(−d)5!+ ...= exp(−d) sinh(d)=12(1 − exp(−2d)) . (9.2)frequency of recombination is small (typically less than 20% per cell)and the exchange p oints are randomly distributed, then the distanceof separation d between the pair of markers is related to recombinationfrequency r, asr =1231 − e−2d4. (9.1)Therefore, the closer a disease gene is to a marker, the greater is thechance that the disease causing mutation will be co-inherited with onespeciﬁc version of the marker. By observing the frequency of inheritanceof many such markers, in which the distance between two markerscan in principle be made arbitrarily small (up to the limit of the twomarkers being adjacent DNA bases), one can map all such intervalsbetween the markers. Therefore, the disease-causing mutant varietiescan be located close to one or more such markers. This way of geneticmapping was employed over a pedigree of individuals in a family tomap the disease-causing mutation for colorectal cancer to a region onhuman chromosome 2.


===== [63/72] chapter-63.html =====

270 Introduction to Biological Networksab+Bd+BabParental+baBRecombinantsFIGURE 9.1: Marker separation and recombination. The chromosomeshown on top contains wild-type alleles + and B while the bottom one con-tains their mutants a and b prior to recombination. After recombination, thestrands are partially exchanged, leading to +b on the top chromosome and aBon the bottom chromosome, as indicated on the right. The intra-chromosomaldistance between the markers is denoted by d.From another direction, research on mechanisms by which DNA basepair mismatches are corrected had pointed out a crucial gene in Es-cherichia coli called mutS that is required for the repair of DNAbase-pair mismatches that arise due to errors in DNA replication. Re-searchers led by R. Kolodner (Fishel et al., 1993) also identiﬁed ho-mologs of mutS in yeast, and ultimately in humans. In yeast, mutationsin two genes that are mutS homologs, called MutSHomolog1 (MSH1 )and likewise MSH2, were discovered to cause micro-satellite instabilityin yeast, reﬂecting a similar mechanism of DNA sequence instability inboth yeast and human colorectal tumors. Very soon it was discoveredthat the human version of MSH1, or hMSH1, mapped to the same re-gion of chromosome 2 where the susceptibility gene to colorectal cancerswas originally mapped. It remained for the Kolodner group to conﬁrmby amplifying a bit of tumor DNA and sequencing the hMSH1 generesiding there that there was indeed a mutation in the hMSH1 genein such cells. This was the ﬁrst-ever cancer susceptibility gene to beidentiﬁed.The above account contains two important messages. The ﬁrst is thathuman disease genes can be mapped with respect to DNA sequencelandmarks on chromosomes. This is known as mapping of the diseasegene locus. The second is that it is important to know something aboutthe function of the gene to enable the identiﬁcation of a disease gene be-cause numerous genes may exist within the mapped interval of humanchromosomes, many perhaps with DNA sequence variants that may ormay not be causal to the disease. This is precisely one of the advantagesNetworks and Disease 271of establishing an interaction network of human genes or proteins. If ahuman gene or protein with an unknown function is shown to interactwith a set of other genes or proteins, then the function of this genecan be inferred from the functions of its interacting partners (“guilt byassociation”).9.2 Network as a Paradigm for Linking Diseases and Dis-ease GenesA global view of human genetic diseases and the genes that cause themcan be constructed in network form using the data in OMIM (Goh et al.,2007) to reveal interesting disease-gene associations. In its basic form,this network is a bipartite network, which is a network with two typesof nodes such that nodes of one type only connect to nodes of the othertype. Here, the two types of nodes are disease nodes and gene nodes.A gene node is connected to a disease node if the gene in question isknown to be a disease gene for the disease in question. This networkconsisted of 1,777 disease genes and 1,284 diseases. It is possible toproject this bipartite network to obtain two “unipartite” networks: ahuman disease network (HDN) in which no des are diseases and twodiseases are linked if they share at least one disease gene, and a diseasegene network (DGN) in which nodes are genes and two genes are linkedif they are disease genes for the same disease. It turns out that both ofthese networks display very interesting clustering properties.Independently of the network construction procedure, the diseasesin OMIM were separately grouped into twenty-two separate disorderclasses based on the physiological system aﬀected by the disease. Itturns out, perhaps not suprisingly, that both the DGN and HDN natu-rally possess clusters that correspond approximately to disorder classes,although there are a number of inter-class links that might suggest hy-potheses about the related origins of disparate diseases or about rela-tionships between disease genes. This local functional clustering leadsto a global network topology in which the largest connected comp o-nent is smaller than what one would expect for a random network.Furthermore, diﬀerent disorder classes cluster in diﬀerent ways. Oneof the most densely connected clusters in the HDN turns out to bethe cancer cluster (Figure 9.2) due to the many genes associated withmultiple cancer types. On the other hand, diseases associated with the272 Introduction to Biological Networksbreakdown of metabolism do not form a distinct cluster in the HDNbecause of their low genetic heterogeneity. Nonobvious connections be-tween genes in the DGN could uncover novel similarities between genesthat have no apparent similarity at the sequence, protein structure, orknown function levels. Similar conclusions hold for diseases; for exam-ple, obesity is linked in the HDN to seven other diseases, including thewell-known link to diabetes, but also to asthma, lipodystrophy, andglioblastoma (Barab´asi, 2007).Goh et al. (2007) further examined the issue of robustness of the HDNand the DGN by adding data from the OMIM where disease phenotypeis mapped more weakly to speciﬁc genes. In this broader dataset thatnow has 2,765 genes, while certain genes are known to be implicated incertain diseases, speciﬁc mutations that are causative of disease are notknown in general. It turns out that the overall clustering and connectiv-ity properties of the larger networks do not change upon enlargement,indicating that the qualitative conclusions about the structure of theHDN and DGN are robust.A particularly important sub-network of the HDN is the so-calledmitochondrial disease network. In the context of the discussion of thecellular basis of life in Chapter 1, we touched upon the evolution ofmitochondria by mutualism between two or three diﬀerent kinds of or-ganisms, and made the point that cellular components exhibit intricatelevels of interaction. When some of these interactions go awry, mal-function of these parts causes diseases with complex manifestations. Inhumans, a large number of diseases occur due to malfunction of the mi-tochondria. In Figure 9.3, a section of the mitochondrial disease-geneassociation network is shown, in which a number of human diseasesthat are caused by genes that control mitochondrial function, some ofthem even encoded by mitochondrial genes, are linked to one anothervia these causative genes. In this network, a gene node is connected toa disease node only if it is known to cause the disease and the geneis known to be related to mitochondrial function (or encoded by themitochondrial genome). This particular network reveals a cluster ofdisorders sharing causative genes, all of which encode proteins that areknown to help other proteins to fold under physiological conditions.MELAS syndrome, Leigh syndrome, and MERRF syndrome particu-larly appear to share more of the causative genes than other diseases. Itwould be interesting to analyze the types of genetic interactions sharedby these causative genes, and how these interactions become defec-Networks and Disease 273FIGURE 9.2: A portion of the Human Disease Network. The cancer cluster is at the lower left corner, in light gray. Nodesizes are based on the number of genes implicated in the disease, as shown on the right. Reproduced with permission fromGoh et al. (2007). [c+2007 National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A.]274 Introduction to Biological Networkstive in individuals that carry mutations in these genes. A majority ofmitochondrial disorders aﬀect individuals at a very young age, even ininfancy, and are vastly debilitating. There is also a high probability thatthe causative genes might be essential genes considering the severity ofthe clinical presentation of the diseases they cause. These questions arelargely open at the time of writing.Thinking about human diseases using the network paradigm is evenmore valuable when one overlays disease networks with the molecularnetworks that we have discussed in this book, such as protein-proteinand metabolic networks. Protein-protein interaction networks, for ex-ample, help broaden the concept of a disease gene and may revealassociated genes that have important roles to play in disease. Thisphenomenon is discussed in greater detail in the following section. Fur-thermore, protein interaction networks can be viewed as a substrate foranalyzing relationships between disease genes and other types of genes.By overlaying disease genes and aging genes (these are genes known toregulate the aging process) on protein interaction networks, Wang et al.(2009) found that the set of disease genes has greater overlap with theset of aging genes than expected by chance, and that disease genes aresigniﬁcantly closer to aging genes in protein interaction networks thanexpected by chance. This typ e of network-based analysis helps pave theway for the generation of novel hypotheses concerning the relationshipbetween phenotypes such as aging and disease.Perhaps surprisingly, new insights may be available by the analysisof disease networks and molecular networks in conjunction with socialnetworks. As pointed out by Barab´asi (2007), obesity, for example, hasa social component in addition to a genetic one. It is more likely for aperson to be obese if his friends are, a phenomenon that causes obesityto be clustered among social communities. A simultaneous understand-ing of the interplay b etween molecular, disease, and social networks islikely to lead to important advances in medicine. While we do not dis-cuss social networks in this book, this chapter elucidates ways in whichdiseases and disease networks can be overlayed with other molecularnetworks to yield fresh insights into the nature of disease.It turns out that most network-based analyses of diseases employprotein interaction networks. As we discussed in Chapters 1 and 7,protein interaction networks, at least in baker’s yeast, have propertiesthat relate to phenotype in a simple way: hub proteins in protein in-teraction networks are enriched for proteins that are essential for life,


===== [64/72] chapter-64.html =====

Networks and Disease 275FIGURE 9.3: A p ortion of the mitochondrial gene-disease association network. The largest connected component of thisbipartite network is shown. Unﬁlled nodes represent mitochondrial disorders, while ﬁlled nodes represent their causativegenes. The causative genes are speciﬁcally associated with protein folding. Courtesy of S. Talele.276 Introduction to Biological Networksand it is possible to predict synthetic genetic interactions from proteininteraction data with reasonable accuracy. These considerations can beextended to address the following questions that are based on humanprotein interaction networks. Can topological properties of a protein ina protein interaction network be used to characterize the correspondinggene as a disease gene? What more can we learn about diseases anddisease genes by analyzing the network properties of the correspond-ing proteins? These are the questions we address in the following twosections.9.3 Network-Based Prediction of Disease GenesThe idea of using human protein interaction data to predict diseasegenes stems from the observation in baker’s yeast that proteins thatare members of the same complex tend to produce similar phenotypesupon knockout of their corresponding genes. While there are a numberof disease gene prediction methods that use protein interaction data,all of them, to degrees of varying sophistication, build upon this basicobservation. Here, we describe some of the representative predictionmethods. These fall into two broad categories: methods that use thenetwork properties of known disease genes to predict new ones, and abinitio methods that combine data from diﬀerential expression studieswith network properties to predict new disease genes.9.3.1 Predicting Disease Genes from Known Disease GenesOti et al. (2006) used known disease genes culled from the OMIMdatabase in combination with protein interaction data to predict un-known disease genes. To do so, they culled disease data from the OMIMfor diseases that have at least one known disease gene and at least onedisease locus lacking an identiﬁed disease gene. The disease loci studiedby Oti et al. contained a median of 88 genes per locus, and 383 diseasessatisﬁed their criteria at the time the study was carried out, with 1,195disease loci having identiﬁed disease genes and 432 loci lacking iden-tiﬁed disease genes. Next, they generated a human protein interactionnetwork (HPIN) by combining individual protein-protein interactionsculled from the literature, high-throughput experiments, and inferredprotein-protein interactions by homology to the corresponding proteinsin other eukaryotes, namely, the fruit ﬂy, baker’s yeast, and the worm.Networks and Disease 277This combined data were used to predict new disease genes for a spe-ciﬁc disease in the following manner:• For each known disease gene, protein interaction partners in theHPIN of the corresponding disease protein are found.• The chromosomal locations of the genes coding for the interactionpartners are determined using gene location data.• These chromosomal locations are checked to see if they fall withina disease locus of the disease in question.• Genes corresponding to interacting proteins that fall within adisease locus that lacks other disease genes (for the same disease)are predicted to be disease genes.The success of this relatively simple method to predict disease genesdepends crucially on the quality of the underlying protein interactiondata. Among the various protein interaction datasets that Oti et al.(2006) used, the most reliable one was the set consisting of individualhuman protein-protein interactions manually curated from the litera-ture. In this dataset alone, it turns out that nearly 60% of interactorsof a disease gene correspond to genes that fall in a disease locus ofthe disease in question. This number falls to 9% when protein-proteininteractions inferred from high-throughput interactions in the wormalone are used. Interestingly, the success rate is higher when using in-teractors inferred from yeast high-throughput experiments than fromhuman high-throughput experiments. The reason for this is not com-pletely understood, but may be related to high false negative rates inhuman interaction two-hybrid data.The results of Oti et al. (2006) led to a landmark study by Fraserand Plotkin (2007), who generalized the notion of predicting diseasegenes to predicting genes that, upon knockout or mutation, shared asimilar phenotype to other genes whose knockout/mutation phenotypewas known. Their study was therefore about the prediction of pheno-type pairs, that is, pairs of genes that share a similar phenotype uponmutation/knockout. In this study, initially carried out in yeast becauseof the availability of a large amount of genome-scale, high-throughputdata, they examined the question of ﬁnding the best predictor of phe-notype pairs among a large set of potential predictors that includedgenetic interactions, shared protein domains, shared transcription fac-tors, co-expression of mRNA under diﬀerent conditions, similarity of278 Introduction to Biological Networksphylogenetic proﬁles, and several datasets of protein-protein interac-tions and protein complexes. Remarkably, they found that, when eachpredictor was considered separately for its predictive value, the bestpredictor of phenotype pairs was participation of the two proteins inthe same protein complex. The other top predictors all correspondedto protein-protein interactions between members of the pair. Further-more, it turns out that the predictive accuracy of every predictor otherthan shared protein complexes increases when the predictor data areintersected with co-expression data. Because we know that intersectionwith co-expression decreases the false positive rates in protein inter-action data, these results clearly show that phenotypical similarity isbest predicted by accurate protein interaction data, as exempliﬁed byprotein complexes, and the prediction accuracy increases as the qualityof the protein interaction data increases.Fraser and Plotkin (2007) used the lessons they learned from yeastdata analysis to predict disease genes in humans by intersecting co-expression data with error-prone protein interaction data. Using man-ually curated protein interaction data culled from the literature, forexample, they found twice as much enrichment for disease gene pairsamong physically interacting proteins when these interactions were ﬁl-tered by co-expression data (with a co-expression correlation cutoﬀ of0.3) as compared to the case where no such ﬁltering was done.Insights from the above-mentioned studies were further extended byWu et al. (2008) and used to construct a prediction framework fordisease genes that is based on the notion that phenotypic similar-ity between diseases is strongly correlated with closeness between thecausative genes on a protein interaction network. Thus, given a diseaseand a gene, the method involves the computation of a disease pheno-type similarity proﬁle and a gene closeness proﬁle. If these two proﬁlesare strongly correlated, the gene is predicted to be a disease gene forthe disease in question.How are the two proﬁles deﬁned? We brieﬂy outline the steps here.Given a disease phenotype p and a gene g, the disease phenotype sim-ilarity proﬁle Spis a numerical vector of similarities between p and allother disease phenotypes:Sp=(Spp1,Spp2, . . . , Sppn), (9.3)where the similarities Spp!between two phenotypes p and p#are com-puted by appropriately assigning numerical values to phenotypes [whileNetworks and Disease 279the procedure of assigning numbers to phenotypes is somewhat cum-bersome and beyond the scope of this book, see, for example, van Drielet al. (2006)]. In an analogous manner, the gene closeness proﬁle Cgisa numerical vector that quantiﬁes closeness between g and all diseasephenotypes using path lengths on a protein interaction network. Sup-pose the set of all known disease genes for the phenotype p is denotedby G(p), and suppose that Lgg!denotes the distance (e.g., shortest pathlength) in a protein interaction network between the proteins that genesg and g#code for. Then the gene closeness proﬁle is deﬁned asCg=(Cgp1,Cgp2, . . . , Cgpn), (9.4)where the closeness between a gene and a phenotype is further ex-pressed in terms of the closeness between the gene and all other genesresponsible for the phenotype on a protein interaction network:Cgp=!g!∈G(p)e−Lgg!. (9.5)The correlation between the vectors Spand Cgis predicted to be ameasure of the propensity for gene g to be a disease gene responsiblefor the phenotype p. Given a phenotype p, it is possible to evaluate thisprediction method by computing the requisite correlations between Spand the closeness proﬁles of all known disease genes and subsequentlyranking genes on the basis of the strength of their correlation withSp. The method can be judged as successful if the correct disease geneappears as the top-ranked gene in this procedure. While the detailedperformance statistics depend upon how one deﬁnes network distanceand on the correlation cutoﬀ that stipulates a rank 1 prediction to besigniﬁcant, this is overall a promising method to predict new diseasegenes. Moreover, it nicely illustrates and exploits the correspondencebetween phenotypic closeness and closeness on a protein interactionnetwork.The notion of protein interaction network closeness can be deﬁned ina more global manner rather than by considering only direct interac-tions and shortest paths between a candidate gene and a known diseasegene in a protein interaction network. For example, K¨ohler et al. (2008)constructed a random walk through the human protein interaction net-work that was constrained to stay in the vicinity of disease genes withhigh probability. The most frequently visited nodes (proteins) in thisrandom walk were then predicted to correspond to new disease genes.


===== [65/72] chapter-65.html =====

280 Introduction to Biological NetworksSpeciﬁcally, the random walk was constructed to begin with equalprobability at any of the known disease-causing proteins for a particu-lar disease. Subsequently, the walk could either jump to a protein thatdirectly interacts with the starting protein (with probability 1 − r) orto any of the known disease-causing proteins (with probability r). Thisprocess was repeated until convergence. Given the column-normalizedadjacency matrix A of the protein interaction network (where the el-ements Aijof the adjacency matrix equal 1/kjif i and j are directlyinteracting, and equal 0 otherwise, with kjbeing the degree of node j),the equation underlying this walk is given byp(t+1)i= (1 − r)!jAijp(t)j+ rp(0)i, (9.6)where p(t)iis the probability that the walk arrives at protein i at timet, and starting probabilities p(0)iare equal for all the disease-causingproteins. The second term on the right-hand-side of the above equationensures that the walk remains conﬁned to the vicinity of the disease-causing proteins and does not drift too far. Suppose the walk is declaredto be converged at time T . The nodes in the protein interaction networkare then ranked in decreasing order of p(T )i. It turns out that such globalmethods of search for proteins related to disease-causing proteins ona protein interaction network signiﬁcantly outperform local methodsbased on direct interactions or shortest paths, especially for identifyingdisease genes for complex polygenic disorders and cancers.The correspondence between phenotypic closeness and closenessalong a protein interaction network was beautifully exploited to predictnew disease genes for human inherited ataxias (Lim et al., 2006). Atax-ias are neurodegenerative disorders characterized by loss of balanceand coordination. To elucidate the local protein interaction networkfor ataxia, Lim et al. started with twenty-three known ataxia-causingproteins, and extended this list by incorporating thirty-one additionalproteins that are known to interact with the twenty-three original pro-teins or are paralogs of these proteins. These ﬁfty-four proteins wereused as bait proteins for a yeast two-hybrid experiment to ﬁnd all otherproteins in the human proteome that interact with the bait proteins.This experiment revealed 770 interactions among the 54 baits and 561identiﬁed preys. This network was further extended by incorporatingmanually curated interactions from the literature that involved eitherbaits or preys and interactions inferred by orthology to other organ-Networks and Disease 281isms. These eﬀorts resulted in a large “ataxia network” consisting of6,972 protein interactions among 3,607 proteins, such that every pro-tein node in the network has either ﬁrst-, second-, or third-order in-teractions with the original set of twenty-three ataxia-causing proteins.This network was mined in various ways to reveal insights into the com-mon mechanisms behind various ataxias (where common mechanismsare revealed by direct or indirect protein-protein interactions betweenataxia-causing proteins associated with diﬀerent ataxias), and was alsoused to predict new ataxia-causing proteins based on their interactionswith known ataxia-causing proteins.Just as the list of ataxia-causing proteins was expanded by consid-ering interacting proteins, entire disease pathways can be extended bytaking into account the network neighborhood of the pathway underconsideration. Earlier, we encountered signaling or signal transductionpathways, which are sets of proteins that sequentially transmit a signalfrom the cell surface to the nucleus (for this reason, a signaling path-way is also termed a cascade of proteins). Mutation of any one of thecorresponding genes in the pathway can lead to a disease state becauseof lack of transmission of the signal. For example, many signals lead toinhibition of cell growth; thus disruption of the corresponding pathwaycan lead to cancer. Because disruption can occur by mutations in anyof the genes in the pathway, all of those genes are disease genes. Newdisease-causing genes can be identiﬁed by extending pathways via sys-tematic incorporation of proteins that interact with pathway proteins.For example, Glaab et al. (2010) augmented known disease pathwaysby adding proteins that satisﬁed certain conditions in terms of thenumber of “within-pathway” and “outside-pathway” interactions theyhave. This augmented network reveals a number of new disease genes.9.3.2 Predicting Disease Genes ab initioWhile the disease gene prediction methods just discussed employ infor-mation in protein interaction networks, they also rely on the availabilityof known disease genes. It is, however, possible to carry out new diseasegene prediction without knowledge of other disease genes. These ab ini-tio methods make use of the fact that disease genes occur as membersof diﬀerentially expressed modules or complexes in protein interactionnetworks.The use of diﬀerential expression to identify genes involved in diseaseactually predates the incorporation of protein interaction data. Using282 Introduction to Biological Networksmicroarrays, it is possible to carry out genome-wide scans for mRNAexpression in both normal and diseased states, and compare the twomRNA expression proﬁles to identify genes that are signiﬁcantly dif-ferentially expressed in the two conditions. This process typically leadsto a large number of identiﬁed genes, not all of which may be directlyimplicated in the disease. These latter genes are false positives. The mi-croarray method is also capable of producing false negative errors: truedisease genes that are not in fact diﬀerentially expressed but may diﬀer-ently regulate the expression of other genes or whose protein productsmay interact with other diﬀerentially expressed proteins. In compar-ison, the process of identifying disease genes by looking for them asmembers of diﬀerentially expressed protein interaction modules is farless error-prone.Strategies that combine expression and network data to predict newdisease genes mostly diﬀer in the method by which a candidate proteinis identiﬁed as one that is surrounded by diﬀerentially expressed pro-teins. Modern methods to identify these node neighborhoods use globalinformation that includes indirect interactions and paths rather thandirect interactions alone. For example, even if a protein node j doesnot directly interact with node i, there may be a very large number ofshortest paths connecting j to i, thus making j a valid candidate tobelong in the neighborhood of i. Methods to identify such global neigh-borhoods make use of a mathematical construct called a kernel matrixthat can b e computed from the adjacency matrix. Loosely speaking, akernel matrix K on a network with n nodes is an n × n symmetric ma-trix that quantiﬁes, in some sense, the closeness or similarity betweentwo nodes in the network. A concrete example of a kernel matrix is theLaplacian exponential diﬀusion kernel deﬁned below. In general, thekernel matrix can be deﬁned in various ways, depending on the notionof closeness that is most relevant to the particular problem. A givenkernel matrix can be used to deﬁne a distance function d(i, j) betweennodes i and j:d(i, j)=Kii+ Kjj− 2Kij. (9.7)This distance function can, in turn, be used to deﬁne the neighbor-hood of a gene/protein (as, say, all nodes within a certain distance ofthe protein of interest) in a protein interaction network. The proteinsbelonging to the neighborhood can then be examined for diﬀerentialexpression in a disease state as compared to the normal state. If theproteins in the neighborhood collectively exhibit signiﬁcant diﬀerentialNetworks and Disease 283expression, the protein in question is predicted to be a disease-causingprotein. Thus, in these methods, knowledge of disease proteins is re-placed by knowledge of expression levels.As a concrete example, Nitsch et al. (2009) used as a starting point ahuman protein interaction network derived from the STRING databasethat we ﬁrst encountered in Chapter 3 as a database that facilitatesthe prediction of protein-protein interactions using gene neighborhoodanalysis. From the derived or predicted human protein interaction net-work, Nitsch et al. computed the elements of a Laplacian exponentialdiﬀusion kernel matrix, deﬁned asK = eβL, (9.8)where L is the Laplacian matrix of the network (see Box 8.2). Theyused the Laplacian exponential diﬀusion kernel to obtain a distancefunction between nodes, as stated above. Instead of explicitly deﬁningnode neighborhoods, they considered the entire network as belongingto the neighborhood of a node, but down-weighted the diﬀerential ex-pression of distant nodes by their distance from the node in question.The score or propensity of a candidate protein to be a disease proteinwas deﬁned as the maximum diﬀerence between the diﬀerential expres-sion level of a neighborhood protein (after down-weighting its diﬀeren-tial expression as mentioned) and randomized diﬀerential expression.High-scoring candidate proteins were predicted to cause disease.The same research group later compared kernel-based approaches fornetwork analysis of diﬀerential expression with a naive approach thatrelied on direct interactors alone (Nitsch et al., 2010), and found, in avalidation study, that disease genes were ranked at an average rankingof 8 out of 100 in the best kernel-based approach, relative to an averageranking of 17 out of 100 when only direct interactors were included.This suggests that global positioning of genes relative to a disease genein a protein interaction network is more informative of disease thanlocal or direct interaction alone.9.4 Network Analysis of Disease Mechanisms and Dis-ease ResponseWe have discussed how disease proteins occupy special positions rel-ative to each other in protein interaction networks—disease proteins284 Introduction to Biological Networksthat are causative of the same or similar diseases tend to cluster closeto each other in these networks. This fact enables the prediction of newdisease proteins, as was explained above. Moreover, it suggests that, ingeneral, genetic diseases may be properly ascribed to protein interac-tion modules or clusters rather than to single proteins or genes. Thisway of thinking not only has consequences for the identiﬁcation of newdisease genes/proteins, but also for illuminating disease mechanismsby identifying new relationships among diseases, as we now proceed toexplain.In the beginning of this chapter, we pointed out that construction ofthe Human Disease Network, in which two diseases are linked if theyshare at least one causative disease gene, led to new insights aboutthe relationships between diseases. However, even more interesting re-lationships can be unearthed by the simultaneous incorporation of theprotein interaction network into this paradigm. Consider, for instance,two diseases A and B that may not ordinarily be linked in the HDNbecause they do not share any common disease gene. Suppose that oneof the disease proteins for A has a protein-protein interaction with oneof the disease proteins for B. Because closeness on a protein interactionnetwork is strongly correlated with phenotypic closeness, this suggeststhat diseases A and B have a common mechanism. Incorporation of pro-tein interaction data thus provides higher-order structure to the HDN.For example, by constructing a large protein interaction network viadata integration from disparate sources, Wu et al. (2010) showed thatcancer genes were clustered in a number of network modules that arecommon to diﬀerent cancers. One of the modules found correspondsto proteins involved in cell cycle regulation, DNA repair, and othernuclear processes, while a second common module corresponds to sig-nal transduction events in the plasma membrane and the cytoplasm.This suggests that the development of cancerous cells generally requiresmutations in both nuclear and cytoplasmic/plasma membrane-basedpathways.Other studies that throw light on the evolution of disease states fo-cus on the global positioning of disease proteins in protein interactionnetworks. Goh et al. (2007) classiﬁed human disease genes into “essen-tial” and “nonessential” categories, where essential genes were thosewhose disruption would result in embryonic or postnatal lethality, thatis, the individual hosting the disrupted gene would die before attain-ing maturity. Interestingly, and in analogy with baker’s yeast, they


===== [66/72] chapter-66.html =====

Networks and Disease 285found that essential proteins were enriched for hubs, while nonessen-tial disease proteins showed no such tendency. Furthermore, essentialgenes were found to display high average co-expression with other geneswhile nonessential disease genes showed the opposite eﬀect, having ex-pression patterns that either uncorrelated or anti-correlated with othergenes. These diﬀerences between essential and nonessential disease pro-teins can be explained by the fact that mutations in topologically andfunctionally central proteins are more likely to lead to lethality thanmutations in peripheral proteins. Thus, nonessential disease proteinsevolve to o ccupy peripheral positions (i.e., have low degree and lowcentrality) in interaction networks so that mutations in these proteinscan still allow the host cell to be viable, because disease genes canbe inherited only if the person harboring the disease can survive tomaturity and be viable.The above argument does not hold true for diseases that result fromsomatic mutations. Somatic mutations are mutations that occur in thegenomes of non-germ cells (in humans, the sperm and egg cells are thegerm cells) and are therefore not transmitted to the next generation.Disease genes that undergo somatic mutations are not under evolution-ary pressure to code for proteins that are positioned at the peripheriesof protein interaction networks. Indeed, at least two independent stud-ies have found that somatic cancer genes are more likely to encode hubsand more likely to show high co-expression with all other genes in thecell (Jonsson and Bates, 2006; Goh et al., 2007).There are other diseases that have a large number of disease genes inthe sense that the DNA sequences of these genes are altered in at leastsome members of the population carrying the disease; however, the setof these genes varies across diﬀerent populations so that no one geneor one set of genes can be said to be a disease gene/set for the diseasein all individuals. These genes are not true disease genes because theyare not surely implicated in every occurrence of the disease but speciﬁcsequence variants of these genes may constitute “risk” factors for cer-tain diseases. How does network biology impact our understanding ofsuch diseases, and how does one get around the fact that the conceptof the disease gene is somewhat “fuzzy” in these cases? One strategythat we encountered in the previous section is to replace the notion ofa disease gene by that of a gene that is diﬀerentially expressed betweennormal and diseased individuals. In other words, the gene itself maynot be mutated but its expression level might be altered, perhaps due286 Introduction to Biological Networksto epigenetic modiﬁcations.One example of a disease of the above type is asthma, which is a com-plex polygenic disease that is also multifactorial, that is, it arises outof the interaction between genetic propensity and environmental fac-tors. The subject of identifying disease genes associated with asthmais a ﬁeld of ongoing research, with new disease genes still being discov-ered in diﬀerent populations. Rather than dealing with a dynamic setof putative disease genes, it perhaps makes more sense to identify thegenes that are diﬀerentially expressed in a speciﬁc instance of the dis-ease state and then analyze the network properties of the diﬀerentiallyexpressed genes. This is exactly what Lu et al. (2007) did in a networkanalysis of diﬀerentially expressed genes in asthmatic mice.Lu et al. (2007) studied two types of mice, one wild-type and an-other that was deﬁcient in recombinase-activating genes (RAG). Thesegenes are responsible for generating the wide spectrum of antibodiesin response to foreign antigens. When the RAG genes are knocked out(mutated), the immune system does not generate the requisite antibod-ies. Thus, when these two types of mice were exposed to an asthma-inducing allergen such as ovalbumin, wild-type mice generated an im-mune response characterized by hyper-responsiveness of the airway,increased serum Immunoglobulin E levels, and other such signatures ofthe asthmatic response. On the other hand, RAG-deﬁcient mice gen-erated no such immune response. RNA extracts from the lung tissueof these two mice typ es were than analyzed by microarrays to identifyover 700 genes that are diﬀerentially expressed among the two types ofmice.When analyzing the protein interaction network properties of the pro-teins corresponding to these 700 diﬀerentially expressed genes, Lu et al.(2007) found that hub proteins (deﬁned in this study as proteins withdegree >5) exhibited very low diﬀerential expression as compared to pe-ripheral proteins that were far more highly diﬀerentially expressed. Fur-thermore, when the network of shortest paths connecting hub proteinswas analyzed, it was found that this network contained “superhubs”:proteins with degree >5 in the shortest path network; these super-hubs had even lower diﬀerential expression than the other hubs. Theseﬁndings are consistent with the idea that high diﬀerential expressionin hubs and superhubs would be disruptive across the entire proteininteraction network, and exposure to allergen would therefore causegreater harm to the individual. By relegating high diﬀerential expres-Networks and Disease 287sion to peripheral proteins, the immune response is more manageable.This study paves the way for the prediction of gene expression modula-tion in immune response to allergens purely by analysis of the networkconnectivity. Moreover, it shows that hub proteins that have low, albeitstatistically signiﬁcant level of modulation may be completely missedby expression analysis protocols that look for large changes in expres-sion, even though these proteins might well have an important role inthe disease.While diﬀerential expression of individual genes yields insight intodisease mechanisms when these genes are overlayed on interaction net-works, analysis of the global patterns of diﬀerential expression is alsorevealing. For example, similar to the dynamic modularity encounteredin the yeast interactome (as discussed in the previous chapter), thehuman protein interaction network also contains two kinds of hub pro-teins: those that have strong co-expression with their interacting part-ners (intramodular hubs or party hubs), and those that have weakco-expression with their interacting partners (intermodular hubs ordate hubs). Because we know that cancer proteins occupy highly cen-tral positions in protein interaction networks, it is not surprising thatthese proteins have higher propensity to be intermodular hubs than in-tramodular ones. The division of hub proteins into two classes dependscrucially on the global expression pattern of yeast proteins. Becausethe expression pattern changes during disease progression, one wouldexpect this division also to change. The manner in which this classiﬁ-cation is altered during disease progression turns out to be revealing.A speciﬁc example of this kind of alteration is breast cancer, in whichhubs whose correlation of expression with their interacting partnersvaries signiﬁcantly, depending upon the nature of progression of thedisease, can be readily identiﬁed. Thus, one can pinpoint hubs whosecorrelated expression is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent in breast cancer patientswho eventually became disease-free and survived (“good outcome” pa-tients) relative to patients who died of the disease (“poor outcome”patients). In an analysis of this type carried out by Taylor et al. (2009),256 hubs were identiﬁed whose correlation of expression with their in-teracting partners was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent between good and pooroutcome patients. Loosely speaking, these 256 hubs have diﬀerent iden-tities in the two groups of patients: intramodular hubs in one group areintermodular in the other, and vice versa. The expression correlation ofthese hubs is therefore a signature of disease outcome and can be used288 Introduction to Biological Networksto predict prognosis. Remarkably, prediction accuracy for the proba-bility of ten-year survival using this method (about 71%) comparesfavorably with that using commercially available genomic breast can-cer diagnostic kits, and presumably this accuracy would only increaseif the methods were to be combined in some way.Even the expression correlation of certain individual genes is highlypredictive of breast cancer outcome. For example, the protein codedby the gene BRCA1 is an intramodular hub in tumors from patientswho eventually survive but an intermodular hub in tumors from pooroutcome patients.9.5 Network-Based Prediction of Disease ComorbidityToward the beginning of this chapter, we discussed the constructionof the HDN, in which two diseases are linked if they share at leastone common disease gene, and we stated that diseases in the HDNare clustered naturally according to disorder classes. This fact suggeststhat grouping diseases by the common identity of the genes that causethem uncovers the natural phenotypic groups to which these diseasesbelong. One can probe the functional relevance of the HDN a bit fur-ther and ask to what extent, and in what manner, the HDN clariﬁesfunctional relationships between diseases. A physiologically importantquantity is the extent to which two diseases will tend to co-occur inthe same individual. This propensity is termed the comorbidity of thetwo diseases, and it is natural to ask whether connections in the HDNreveal comorbidity patterns.While comorbidity between a pair of diseases can be quantiﬁed invarious ways, it is most simply deﬁned as the frequency with which thetwo diseases actually occur within the same individual over a certaintime period, divided by the frequency with which they would be ex-pected to occur by chance in the same time period. The incidence of adisease is the expected number of new cases diagnosed with the diseaseover a sp eciﬁed period of time, divided by the population that is atrisk for the disease. Thus, the incidence Iiis the expected frequencyof occurrence of new cases of disease i among the population withina speciﬁed time period. A simple measure of comorbidity can then beNetworks and Disease 289expressed asC =fijIiIj, (9.9)where fijis the proportion of members of the population who developboth disease i and disease j within the time period studied. Note thatC>1 would imply that the two diseases in question are more likely tooccur in the same individual than can be explained by chance alone.Returning to the relationship between comorbidity and the HDN, itis indeed found that diseases that are directly linked in the HDN haveaverage comorbidity that is two- to four-fold higher than the averagecomorbidity between all pairs of diseases (Park et al., 2009) (see Ta-ble 9.1), and that furthermore, the average comorbidity increases withthe number of shared disease genes among the two diseases in ques-tion. A possible explanation for this eﬀect is as follows: two diseasesare linked in the HDN if they have the same disease gene, that is, mu-tations in the same gene can cause both diseases. Thus, an individualwho has one of the diseases likely has a mutated version of the genecausing the disease, which in turn is likely to cause the other diseaseto also occur. However, by this line of reasoning, the high observedcomorbidity among diseases linked in the HDN should not occur ifthe mutations that cause them lie on separate functional parts of thegene, or equivalently, on separate domains of the corresponding pro-tein. In such cases, an individual who suﬀers from one of the diseasesharbors a protein with one disrupted functional domain, but with therest of the domains perfectly functional. Such an individual does nothave enhanced propensity to develop the other disease. As shown inTable 9.1, this line of reasoning also holds true: disease pairs that arelinked in the HDN and have causative mutations that lie on diﬀerentprotein domains (“non-domain sharing”) have lower average comorbid-ity than the overall average comorbidity of linked diseases, while thosewhose causative mutations lie on the same domain (“domain sharing”)have higher average comorbidity than the overall average comorbidityof linked diseases.Is linkage or “closeness” in the HDN the best predictor of diseasecomorbidity? Strictly speaking, this is an open question at the time ofwriting, although Park et al. (2009) compared linkage in the HDN withtwo other predictors of comorbidity, namely the existence of a protein-protein interaction between two proteins that are respectively causativeof the two diseases, and correlation in expression of the disease-causing


===== [67/72] chapter-67.html =====

290 Introduction to Biological NetworksTABLE 9.1: Average Comorbidity of Disease Pairs SatisfyingVarious CriteriaCriteria Number of Pairs Average ComorbidityAll diseases 83, 924 1.92Linked in the HDN 658 4.35Domain sharing, 182 5.98linked in the HDNNon-domain sharing, 476 3.73linked in the HDNPP interaction 1, 873 2.35Correlated expression 215 2.79Source: Park et al. (2009).genes of the two diseases. It turns out that neither of these two fea-tures is a very good predictor of comorbidity: Table 9.1 shows thatthe average comorbidity of disease pairs that have underlying protein-protein interactions or correlated expression is not appreciably higherthan the average comorbidity of all pairs of diseases. However, the pre-dictive power of protein-protein interactions for comorbidity is signif-icantly enhanced when coupled with protein localization information:two diseases whose causative proteins are “close” in the human proteininteraction network and localized in the same cellular compartment arelikely to display high levels of comorbidity (Park et al., 2011). Inter-estingly, the fact that the average comorbidity of all disease pairs islarger than 1 reﬂects the observation that most people who suﬀer fromat least one disease are likely to develop several other aﬄictions.One problem with using linkage in the HDN to infer comorbidityarises due to the fact that the most disconnected class of diseases in theHDN are the metabolic diseases. Thus, direct linkage in the HDN is nota good predictor of comorbidity among metabolic diseases. However,it may be that some type of higher-order linkage correlates well withcomorbidity. For example, Lee et al. (2008a) found that two metabolicdiseases caused by loss of function of metabolic enzymes that catalyzeadjacent reactions (adjacent reactions process a common metabolite)Networks and Disease 291in a metabolic pathway are likely to have high comorbidity. They con-structed a metabolic disease network such that two diseases in this net-work are linked if their causative enzymes process the same metabolite,and further found that the propensity for comorbidity of two diseasesincreases as diseases get closer to each other in the metabolic diseasenetwork. Studies such as this suggest that deeper mining of diseasenetworks should be fruitful for the elucidation of disease comorbidity.9.6 Cancer and Synthetic LethalityOne of the most promising applications of the discovery of syntheticlethal relationships between genes is toward novel strategies for thetreatment of cancer. The genetic basis of cancer suggests that, in the-ory, it should be possible to treat cancer by designing drugs that targetknown disease genes for cancer. This strategy fails in practice becauseof the side eﬀects associated with the artiﬁcial regulation of the samegenes in normal cells, and also because many cancer-related proteinsare “undruggable” for very simple reasons. Drugs that are ultimatelyapproved for medicinal use fall into two major structural classes: eitherthey are small molecules that require the presence of a “hydrophobicpocket” in a protein in order to bind to it, or they are “biologics,” thatis, proteins that require a relatively ﬂat contact surface (not necessarilyhighly hydrophobic) on another protein in order to bind to it. Biolog-ics, however, have a limitation: because of their large size, they cannottraverse mammalian cell membranes and can therefore only target ex-tracellular proteins. To summarize, these characteristics of availabledrug types imply that a “druggable” protein must be extracellular orpossess a hydrophobic pocket (or both). Unfortunately, of the ∼25,000human proteins known, only about 3,000 possess a hydrophobic pocketthat is suitable for tight binding of small molecules, and less than 10%are extracellular. This leaves 75% to 80% of human proteins beyond thereach of established types of drugs. Unfortunately, most cancer proteinsfall squarely within this large class: they are expressed within the celland, because they function primarily via protein-protein interactions,possess extended ﬂat surfaces but no hydrophobic pocket.These are some of the challenges that underlie putative therapies forcancer, but they are potentially resolvable, at least in theory, by theexploitation of synthetic lethal relationships between cancer genes and292 Introduction to Biological Networksother genes. Suppose we know of a cancer gene C, that is, a gene thatexists in mutated form in cancerous cells, and also another gene S thathas a synthetic lethal relationship with C, that is, human cells functionnormally when either S or C loses function, but die when they bothlose function. Suppose further that the protein coded by S is druggable.Then a drug that targets the protein coded by S will cause loss offunction in S in every cell. Because C has not lost function in normalcells, normal cells will not be aﬀected by the drug. However, because Chas lost function in a cancerous cell, the simultaneous loss of functionof S eﬀected by the drug in the cell will cause the cancerous cell todie. This potential treatment for cancer therefore does not require theprotein product of C to be druggable (although the protein product ofS must be), and should not, in theory, cause side eﬀects because normalcells will remain unaﬀected by the drug. This argument also holds forC that has a gain-of-function or a dominant mutation as long as themutant gene product is restricted to the cancer cells.Certain breast cancer types that are highly resistant to conventionaltreatment strategies such as chemotherapy and radiation include thosethat have a mutated form of the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene, both ofwhich produce proteins that help repair damaged DNA. A separategene PARP1 also has a protein product with the same function andhas a synthetic lethal relationship with these genes. Thus, drugs thattarget PARP1 oﬀer attractive lines of treatment for these cancers andhave led to promising results in clinical trials. Similarly, the discoveryof synthetic lethal relationships between the epidermal growth factorreceptor EGFR (a protein that is overexpressed in a number of can-cers) and other genes using RNAi-based screens (see discussion in Sec-tion 2.6) could be used to design a therapy that simultaneously targetsEGFR and its synthetic lethal partners (Astsaturov et al., 2010). Inanother example, the oncogene KRAS is mutated in a number of can-cers, including pancreatic, lung, and colon, but the protein coded by itis undruggable. The discovery of at least three diﬀerent enzymes thathave synthetic lethal relationships with KRAS should lead to promis-ing treatment strategies (Scholl et al., 2009; Barbie et al., 2009; Luoet al., 2009). An examination of the synthetic lethal interaction be-tween the KRAS gene and nearly half of all identiﬁed genes was carriedout using an inhibitory RNA screen on cancer cells (Luo et al., 2009).The potential therapeutic value of synthetic lethality is therefore ex-pected to inspire the development of new computational and experi-Networks and Disease 293mental methodologies to uncover human synthetic lethal networks atthe genome scale. Such methods will increasingly be used to developthe repertoire of novel approaches to cancer therapies.


===== [68/72] chapter-68.html =====

ReferencesAlbert, R. and Barab´asi, A.-L. Statistical mechanics of complex net-works. Reviews of Modern Physics 74:47 (2002).Albert, R. and Othmer, H. G. The topology of the regulatory inter-actions predicts the expression pattern of the Drosophila segmentpolarity genes. Journal of Theoretical Biology 223:1 (2003).Aldana, M. and Cluzel, P. A natural class of robust networks. Proceed-ings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 100:8710 (2003).Aloy, P. and Russell, R. B. Interrogating protein interaction networksthrough structural biology. Proceedings of the National Academy ofSciences USA 99:5896 (2002).Ashburner, M., Ball, C. A., Blake, J. A., et al. Gene ontology: tool forthe uniﬁcation of biology. Nature Genetics 25:25 (2000).Astsaturov, I., Ratushny, V., Sukhanova, A., et al. Synthetic lethalscreen of an EGFR-centered network to improve targeted therapies.Science Signaling 3:ra67 (2010).Avery, L. and Wasserman, S. Ordering gene function: The interpreta-tion of epistasis in regulatory hierarchies. Trends in Genetics 8:312(1992).Bader, G. D. and Hogue, C. W. V. Analyzing protein-protein inter-action data obtained from diﬀerent sources. Nature Biotechnology20:991 (2002).Bailey, J., Gu, Z., Clark, R., Reinert, K., and Samonte, R. Recent seg-mental duplications in the human genome. Science 297:1003 (2002).Bandyopadhyay, S., Mehta, M., Kuo, D., et al. Rewiring of geneticnetworks in response to DNA damage. Science 330:1385 (2010).Barab´asi, A.-L. Network medicine — from obesity to the “diseasome.”New England Journal of Medicine 357:404 (2007).Barab´asi, A.-L. and Albert, R. Emergence of scaling in random net-295296 Referencesworks. Science 286:509 (1999).Barbie, D. A., Tamayo, P., Boehm, J. S., et al. Systematic RNA inter-ference reveals that oncogenic KRAS -driven cancers require TBK1.Nature 462:108 (2009).Basso, K., Margolin, A., Stolovitzky, G., et al. Reverse engineeringof regulatory networks in human B cells. Nature Genetics 37:382(2005).Beal, M. J., Falciani, F., Ghahramani, Z., Rangel, C., and Wild, D. L.A Bayesian approach to reconstructing genetic regulatory networkswith hidden factors. Bioinformatics 21:349 (2005).Becker, S. A., Feist, A. M., Mo, M. L., et al. Quantitative predictionof cellular metabolism with constraint-based models: The COBRAtoolbox. Nature Protocols 2:727 (2007).Blanc, G., Barakat, A., Guyot, R., Cooke, R., and Delseny, M. Ex-tensive duplication and reshuﬄing in the Arabidopsis genome. PlantCell 12:1093 (2000).Bollob´as, B. Random Graphs. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,2nd ed. (2001).Carter, G. W., Galas, D. J., and Galitski, T. Maximal extraction ofbiological information from genetic interaction data. PLoS Compu-tational Biology 5:e10000347 (2009).Chen, K. C., Calzone, L., Csikasz-Nagy, A., et al. Integrative analysisof cell cycle control in budding yeast. Molecular Biology of the Cell15:3841 (2004).Chung, F. and Lu, L. Complex Graphs and Networks. American Math-ematical Society, Providence, RI (2006).Collins, S. R., Schuldiner, M., Krogan, N. J., and Weismann, J. S.A strategy for extracting and analyzing large-scale quantitativeepistatic interaction data. Genome Biology 7:R63 (2006).Cooper, G. M. The Cell: A Molecular Approach. Sunderland, MA:Sinauer Associates, 2nd ed. (2000).Cordell, H. J. Epistasis: What it means, what it doesn’t mean, and sta-tistical methods to detect it in humans. Human Molecular Genetics11:2463 (2002).References 297Court, D. L., Oppenheim, A. B., and Adhya, S. L. A new look atbacteriophage λ genetic networks. Journal of Bacteriology 189:298(2007).Covert, M. W., Schilling, C. H., and Palsson, B. Regulation of gene ex-pression in ﬂux balance models of metabolism. Journal of TheoreticalBiology 213:73 (2001).Dandekar, T., Snel, B., Huynen, M., and Bork, P. Conservation of geneorder: A ﬁngerprint of proteins that physically interact. Trends inBiochemical Sciences 23:324 (1998).Dartnell, L., Simeonidis, E., Hubank, M., et al. Robustness of the p53network and biological hackers. FEBS Letters 579:3037 (2005).Deane, C., Salwinski, L., Xenarios, I., and Eisenberg, D. Protein in-teractions: Two methods for assessment of the reliability of highthroughput observations. Molecular Cell Proteomics 1:349 (2002).Deeds, E., Ashenberg, O., and Shakhnovich, E. A simple physical modelfor scaling in protein-protein interaction networks. Proceedings of theNational Academy of Sciences USA 103:311 (2006).Delbr¨uck, M. A physicist looks at biology. In Phage and the Originsof Molecular Biology, pp. 9. Cold Spring Harbor, NY (1966).Dempster, A. P., Laird, N. M., and Rubin, D. B. Maximum likelihoodestimation from incomplete data via the EM algorithm. Journal ofthe Royal Statistical Society, Series B 39:1 (1977).Deng, M., Mehta, S., Sun, F., and Chen, T. Inferring domain-domaininteractions from protein-protein interactions. Genome Research12:1540 (2002).d’Haeseleer, P. and Church, G. M. Estimating and improving proteininteraction error rates. In Computational Systems Bioinformatics(CSB), pp. 216–223 (2004).Dodd, I. B., Shearwin, K. E., and Egan, J. B. Revisited gene regulationin bacteriophage λ. Current Opinion in Genetics and Development15:145 (2005).Dojer, N., Gambin, A., Mizera, A., Wilczy´nski, B., and Tiuryn, J.Applying dynamic Bayesian networks to perturbed gene expressiondata. BMC Bioinformatics 7:249 (2006).298 ReferencesDorogovtsev, S., Mendes, J., and Samukhin, A. Structure of growingnetworks with preferential linking. Physical Review Letters 85:4633(2000).Dunn, R., Dudbridge, F., and Sanderson, C. M. The use of edge-betweenness clustering to investigate biological function in proteininteraction networks. BMC Bioinformatics 6:39 (2005).Erd¨os, P. and Renyi, A. On random graphs. i. Publicationes Mathe-maticae 6:290 (1959).Erd¨os, P. and Renyi, A. On the evolution of random graphs. Publicationof the Mathematical Institute of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences5:17 (1960).Evlampiev, K. and Isambert, H. Modeling protein network evolutionunder genome duplication and domain shuﬄing. BMC Systems Bi-ology 1:49 (2007).Evlampiev, K. and Isambert, H. Conservation and topology of proteininteraction networks under duplication-divergence evolution. Pro-ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 105:9863 (2008).Faith, J. J., Hayete, B., Thaden, J. T., Mogno, I., and Wierzbowski,J. Large-scale mapping and validation of escherichia coli transcrip-tional regulation from a comp endium of expression proﬁles. PLoSBiology 5:e8 (2007).Fernandez, A. Molecular basis for evolving modularity in the yeastprotein interaction network. PLoS Computational Biology 3:e226(2007).Ferrell, J. E., Jr. Self-perpetuating states in signal transduction: Pos-itive feedback, double-negative feedback and bistability. CurrentOpinion in Cell Biology 14:140 (2002).Fishel, R., Lescoe, M. K., Rao, M. R. S., et al. The human mutatorgene homolog MSH2 and its association with hereditary nonpolypo-sis colon cancer. Cell 75:1027 (1993).Force, A., Lynch, M., Pickett, F., et al. The preservation of duplicategenes by complementary degenerative mutations. Genetics 151:1531(1999).Formstecher, E., Aresta, S., Collura, V., Hamburger, A., and Meil,References 299A. Protein interaction mapping: A Drosophila case study. GenomeResearch 15:376 (2005).Fortunato, S. Community detection in graphs. Physics Reports 486:75(2010).Fraser, H. B. and Plotkin, J. B. Using protein complexes to predictphenotypic eﬀects of gene mutation. Genome Biology 8:R252 (2007).Friedman, N. Learning belief networks in the presence of missing val-ues and hidden variables. In Proceedings of the 14th InternationalConference on Machine Learning, pp. 125–133. Nashville, TN (1997).Friedman, N., Murphy, K., and Russell, S. Learning the structure ofdynamic probabilistic networks. In Proceedings of the FourteenthConf. on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (UAI), pp. 139–147.Morgan Kaufmann (1998).Fuhrman, S. and Somogyi, R. Distributivity, a general information the-oretic network measure, or why the whole is more than the sum of itsparts. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on InformationProcessing in Cells and Tissues (IPCAT) (1997).Gavin, A.-C., B¨osche, M., Krause, R., et al. Functional organizationof the yeast proteome by systematic analysis of protein complexes.Nature 415:141 (2002).Gevers, D., Vandepoele, K., Simillion, C., and van de Peer, Y. Geneduplication and biased functional retention of paralogs in bacterialgenomes. Trends in Microbiology 12:148 (2004).Giacomantonio, C. E. and Goodhill, G. J. A Boolean model of thegene regulatory network underlying mammalian cortical area devel-opment. PLoS Computational Biology 6:e1000936 (2010).Gilbert, S. F. Developmental Biology. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland,MA, 6th ed. (2000).Glaab, E., Baudot, A., Krasnogor, N., and Valencia, A. Extending path-ways and processes using molecular interaction networks to analysecancer genome data. BMC Bioinformatics 11:597 (2010).Goh, K.-I., Cusick, M. E., Valle, D., et al. The human disease net-work. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 104:8685(2007).


===== [69/72] chapter-69.html =====

300 ReferencesGoldberg, D. S. and Roth, F. P. Assessing experimentally derivedinteractions in a small world. Proceedings of the National Academyof Sciences USA 100:4372 (2003).Gray, M. W., Burger, G., and Lang, B. F. Mitochondrial evolution.Science 283:1476 (1999).Green, R. A., Kao, H.-L., Audhya, A., et al. A high-resolution C.elegans essential gene network based on phenotypic proﬁling of acomplex tissue. Cell 145:470 (2011).Guimar˜aes, K. S., Jothi, R., Zotenko, E., and Przytycka, T. M. Pre-dicting domain-domain interactions using a parsimony approach.Genome Biology 7:R104 (2006).Guimera, R. and Amaral, L. A. N. Functional cartography of complexmetabolic networks. Nature 433:895 (2005).Guimera, R., Sales-Pardo, M., and Amaral, L. A. N. Module identiﬁca-tion in bipartite and directed networks. Physical Review E 76:036102(2007).Hahn, M. W. and Kern, A. D. Comparative genomics of centrality andessentiality in three eukaryotic protein-interaction networks. Molec-ular Biology and Evolution 22:803 (2005).Han, J., Bertin, N., Hao, T., Goldberg, D., and Berriz, G. Evidencefor dynamically organized modularity in the yeast protein-proteininteraction network. Nature 430:88 (2004).Hart, G. T., Ramani, A. K., and Marcotte, E. M. How complete arecurrent yeast and human protein-interaction networks? Genome Bi-ology 7:120 (2006).Herrgard, M. J., Swainston, N., Dobson, P., et al. A consensus yeastmetabolic network reconstruction obtained from a community ap-proach to systems biology. Nature Biotechnology 26:1155 (2008).Ho, Y., Gruhler, A., Heilbut, A., et al. Systematic identiﬁcation ofprotein complexes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by mass spectrome-try. Nature 415:123 (2002).Huang, H., Jedynak, B. M., and Bader, J. S. Where have all the interac-tions gone? Estimating the coverage of two-hybrid protein interactionmaps. PLoS Computational Biology 3:e214 (2007).References 301Husmeier, D. Sensitivity and speciﬁcity of inferring genetic regulatoryinteractions from microarray experiments with dynamic Bayesiannetworks. Bioinformatics 19:2271 (2003).Iliopoulos, I., Enright, A. J., Poullet, P., and Ouzounis, C. A. Map-ping functional associations in the entire genome of Drosophilamelanogaster using fusion analysis. Comparative and Functional Ge-nomics 4:337 (2003).Ingolia, N. T. Topology and robustness in the Drosophila segmentpolarity network. PLoS Biology 2:e123 (2004).Ito, T., Chiba, T., Ozawa, R., et al. A comprehensive two-hybrid anal-ysis to explore the yeast protein interactome. Proceedings of theNational Academy of Sciences USA 98:4569 (2001).Jansen, R., Yu, H., Greenbaum, D., et al. A Bayesian networks ap-proach for predicting protein-protein interactions from genomic data.Science 302:449 (2003).Jeong, H., Mason, S., Barab´asi, A.-L., and Oltvai, Z. Lethality andcentrality in protein networks. Nature 411:41 (2001).Jeong, H., Tombor, B., Albert, R., Oltvai, Z., and Barab´asi, A.-L.The large-scale organization of metabolic networks. Nature 407:651(2000).Jones, S. and Thornton, J. M. Analysis of protein-protein interactionsites using surface patches. Journal of Molecular Biology 272:121(1997a).Jones, S. and Thornton, J. M. Prediction of protein-protein interactionsites using patch analysis. Journal of Molecular Biology 272:133(1997b).Jonsson, P. F. and Bates, P. A. Global topological features of cancerproteins in the human interactome. Bioinformatics 22:2291 (2006).Jothi, R., Cherukuri, P. F., Tasneem, A., and Przytycka, T. M. Co-evolutionary analysis of domains in interacting proteins reveals in-sights into domain-domain interactions mediating protein-protein in-teractions. Journal of Molecular Biology 362:861 (2006).Juan, D., Pazos, F., and Valencia, A. High-conﬁdence predictionof global interactomes based on genome-wide coevolutionary net-302 Referencesworks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 105:934(2008).Kaelin, W. G., Jr. The concept of synthetic lethality in the context ofanticancer therapy. Nature Reviews Cancer 5:689 (2005).Kaizu, K., Ghosh, S., Matsuoka, Y., et al. A comprehensive molecularinteraction map of the budding yeast cell cycle. Molecular SystemsBiology 6:415 (2010).Kanehisa, M., Araki, M., Goto, S., et al. KEGG for linking genomesto life and the environment. Nucleic Acids Research 36:480 (2008).Keller, E. Revisiting “scale-free” networks. BioEssays 27:1060 (2005).Kelley, R. and Ideker, T. Systematic interpretation of genetic interac-tions using protein networks. Nature Biotechnology 23:561 (2005).Kellis, M., Birren, B., and Lander, E. Proof and evolutionary analysisof ancient genome duplication in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.Nature 428:617 (2004).Kim, I., Liu, Y., and Zhao, H. Bayesian methods for predicting inter-acting protein pairs using domain information. Biometrics 63:824(2007).Kim, S., Imoto, S., and Miyano, S. Dynamic Bayesian network andnonparametric regression for nonlinear modeling of gene networksfrom time series gene expression data. BioSystems 75:57 (2004).Kim, W. K. and Marcotte, E. M. Age-dependent evolution of the yeastprotein interaction network suggests a limited role of gene duplicationand divergence. PLoS Computational Biology 4:e1000232 (2008).King, O. D. Comment on “Subgraphs in random networks.” PhysicalReview E 70:058101 (2004).Kitano, H. and Oda, K. Self-extending symbiosis: A mechanism for in-creasing robustness through evolution. Biological Theory 1:61 (2006).K¨ohler, S., Bauer, S., Horn, D., and Robinson, P. N. Walking theinteractome for prioritization of candidate disease genes. AmericanJournal of Human Genetics 82:949 (2008).Krastev, D. B., Slabicki, M., Paszkowski-Rogacz, M., et al. A system-atic RNAi synthetic interaction screen reveals a link between p53and snoRNP assembly. Nature Cell Biology 13:809 (2011).References 303Krogan, N. J., Cagney, G., Yu, H., et al. Global landscap e of proteincomplexes in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nature 440:637(2006).Kuntzer, J., Backes, C., Blum, T., et al. BNDB – The biochemicalnetwork database. BMC Bioinformatics 8:367 (2007).Larhammer, D., Lundin, L., and Hallbook, F. The human Hox -bearingchromosome regions did arise by block or chromosome (or evengenome) duplications. Genome Research 12:1910 (2002).Lauritzen, S. L. The EM algorithm for graphical association mod-els with missing data. Computational Statistics and Data Analysis19:191 (1995).Lawrence, M. C. and Colman, P. M. Shape complementarity at pro-tein/protein interfaces. Journal of Molecular Biology 234:946 (2003).Lee, D.-S., Park, J., Kay, K. A., et al. The implications of humanmetabolic network topology for disease comorbidity. Proceedings ofthe National Academy of Sciences USA 105:9880 (2008a).Lee, H., Deng, M., Sun, F., and Chen, T. An integrated approach tothe prediction of domain-domain interactions. BMC Bioinformatics7:269 (2006).Lee, J. M., Gianchandani, E. P., Eddy, J. A., and Papin, J. A. Dynamicanalysis of integrated signaling, metabolic and regulatory networks.PLoS Computational Biology 4:e1000086 (2008b).LeMeur, N. and Gentleman, R. Modeling synthetic lethality. GenomeBiology 9:10 (2008).Li, F., Long, T., Lu, Y., Ouyang, Q., and Tang, C. The yeast cell-cyclenetwork is robustly designed. Proceedings of the National Academyof Sciences USA 101:4781 (2004).Liang, S., Fuhrman, S., and Somogyi, R. REVEAL, a general reverseengineering algorithm for inference of genetic network architectures.Paciﬁc Symposium in Biocomputing 3:18 (1998).Lim, J., Hao, T., Shaw, C., et al. A protein-protein interaction networkfor human inherited ataxias and disorders of Purkinje cell degenera-tion. Cell 125:801 (2006).Lin, N., Wu, B., Jansen, R., Gerstein, M., and Zhao, H. Information304 Referencesassessment on predicting protein-protein interactions. BMC Bioin-formatics 5:154 (2004).Lin, Y. C., Jhunjhunwala, S., Benner, C., et al. A global network oftranscription factors, involving E2A, EBF1 and Foxo1, that orches-trates B cell fate. Nature Immunology 11:635 (2010).Little, J. W. and Shepley, D. P. Integrated analysis of multiple datasources reveals modular structure of biological networks. Biochemicaland Biophysical Research Communications 345:302 (2006).Little, J. W., Shepley, D. P., and Wert, D. W. Robustness of a generegulatory circuit. EMBO Journal 18:4299 (1999).Liu, Y., Kim, I., and Zhao, H. Protein interaction predictions fromdiverse sources. Drug Discovery Today 13:409 (2008).Liu, Y., Liu, N., and Zhao, H. Inferring protein-protein interactionsthrough high-throughput data from diverse organisms. Bioinformat-ics 21:3279 (2005).Lu, H., Shi, B., Wu, G., et al. Integrated analysis of multiple datasources reveals modular structure of biological networks. Biochemicaland Biophysical Research Communications 345:302 (2006).Lu, X., Jain, V., Finn, P. W., and Perkins, D. L. Hubs in biological in-teraction networks exhibit low changes in expression in experimentalasthma. Molecular Systems Biology 3:98 (2007).Luo, J., Emanuele, M. J., Li, D., et al. A genome-wide RNAi screenidentiﬁes multiple synthetic lethal interactions with the Ras onco-gene. Cell 137:835 (2009).Lynch, M. and Conery, J. S. The evolutionary fate and consequencesof duplicate genes. Science 290:1151 (2000).Lynch, M. and Force, A. The probability of duplicate-gene preservationby subfunctionalization. Genetics 154:459 (2000).Ma, W., Lai, L., Ouyang, Q., and Tang, C. Robustness and modu-lar design of the Drosophila segment polarity network. MolecularSystems Biology 2:70 (2006).Margolin, A. A., Basso, K., Wiggins, C., et al. ARACNE: An algorithmfor the reconstruction of gene regulatory networks in a mammaliancellular context. BMC Bioinformatics 7:S7 (2006).


===== [70/72] chapter-70.html =====

References 305Markson, G., Kiel, C., Hyde, R., et al. Analysis of the human E2ubiquitin conjugating enzyme protein interaction network. GenomeResearch 19:1905 (2009).Matthews, L. R., Vaglio, P., Reboul, J., et al. Identiﬁcation of po-tential interaction networks using sequence-based searches for con-served protein-protein interactions or “interologs.” Genome Research11:2120 (2001).McLysaght, A., Hokamp, K., and Wolfe, K. Extensive genomic du-plication during early chordate evolution. Nature Genetics 31:200(2002).Middendorf, M., Ziv, E., and Wiggins, C. Inferring network mech-anisms: The Drosophila melanogaster protein interaction network.Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 102:3192(2005).Miller, G. Information Theory in Psychology II-B, chap. Note on thebias of information estimates, pp. 95–100. Glencoe, IL: Free Press(1955).Milo, R., Shen-Orr, S., Itzkovitz, S., et al. Network motifs: Simplebuilding blocks of complex networks. Science 298:824 (2002).Molloy, M. and Reed, B. A critical point for random graphs with a givendegree sequence. Random Structures and Algorithms 6:161 (1995).Molloy, M. and Reed, B. The size of the giant component of a randomgraph with a given degree sequence. Combinatorics, Probability andComputing 7:295 (1998).Montoya, J. and Sol´e, R. Topological prop erties of food webs: Fromreal data to community assembly models. Oikos 102:614 (2003).Mukhtar, M. S., Carvunis, A.-R., Dreze, M., et al. Independentlyevolved virulence eﬀectors converge onto hubs in a plant immunesystem network. Science 29:596 (2011).Murphy, K. and Mian, S. Modelling Gene Expression Data Using Dy-namic Bayesian Networks. Tech. report, University of California(1999).Navlakha, S. and Kingsford, C. Network archaeology: Uncovering an-cient networks from present-day interactions. PLoS Computational306 ReferencesBiology 7:e1001119 (2011).Nechaev, S. and Severinov, K. Inhibition of Escherichia coli RNApolymerase by bacteriophage T7 gene 2 protein. Journal of MolecularBiology 289:815 (1998).Neidhardt, F. C., Curtiss, R., Ingraham, J. L., et al., Eds. Escherichiacoli and Salmonella: Cellular and Molecular Biology. American So-ciety for Microbiology (1996).Newman, M., Strogatz, S. H., and Watts, D. J. Random graphs witharbitrary degree distributions and their applications. Physical ReviewE 64:026118 (2001).Newman, M. E. J. Analysis of weighted networks. Physical Review E70:056131 (2004).Newman, M. E. J. Modularity and community structure in networks.Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 103:8577(2006).Newman, M. E. J. Random graphs with clustering. Physical ReviewLetters 103:058701 (2009).Newman, M. E. J. and Girvan, M. Finding and evaluating communitystructure in networks. Physical Review E 69:026113 (2004).Nitsch, D., Goncalves, J. P., Ojeda, F., de Moor, B., and Moreau, Y.Candidate gene prioritization by network analysis of diﬀerential ex-pression using machine learning approaches. BMC Bioinformatics11:460 (2010).Nitsch, D., Tranchevent, L.-C., Thienpont, B., et al. Network analy-sis of diﬀerential expression for the identiﬁcation of disease-causinggenes. PLoS ONE 4:e5526 (2009).Oppenheim, A. B., Kobiler, O., Stavans, J., Court, D. L., and Adhya,S. Switches in bacteriophage lambda development. Annual Reviewof Genetics 39:409 (2005).Orth, J. D., Thiele, I., and Palsson, B. O. What is ﬂux balance analysis?Nature Biotechnology 28:245 (2010).Oti, M., Snel, B., Huynen, M. A., and Brunner, H. G. Predicting diseasegenes using protein-protein interactions. Journal of Medical Genetics43:691 (2006).References 307Paladugu, S. R., Zhao, S., Ray, A., and Raval, A. Mining protein net-works for synthetic genetic interactions. BMC Bioinformatics 9:426(2008).Palsson, B. O. Systems Biology: Properties of Reconstructed Networks.Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA (2006).Papp, B., Pal, C., and Hurst, L. D. Dosage sensitivity and the evolutionof gene families in yeast. Nature 424:194 (2003).Park, C. Y., Hess, D. C., Huttenhower, C., and Troyanskaya, O. G.Simultaneous genome-wide inference of physical, genetic, regulatory,and functional pathway components. PLoS Computational Biology6:e1001009 (2010).Park, J., Lee, D.-S., Christakis, N. A., and Barab´asi, A.-L. The im-pact of cellular networks on disease comorbidity. Molecular SystemsBiology 5:262 (2009).Park, S., Yang, J.-S., Shin, Y.-E., et al. Protein localization as a princi-pal feature of the etiology and comorbidity of genetic diseases. Molec-ular Systems Biology 7:494 (2011).Pazos, F. and Valencia, A. In silico two-hybrid system for the selectionof physically interacting protein pairs. Proteins 47:219 (2002).Perrin, B.-E., Ralaivola, L., Mazurie, A., et al. Gene networks inferenceusing dynamic Bayesian networks. Bioinformatics 19, Suppl. 2:ii138(2003).Petti, A. and Church, G. M. A network of transcriptionally coordinatedfunctional modules in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genome Research15:1298 (2005).Polya, G. Probabilities in proofreading. The American MathematicalMonthly 83:42 (1976).Portis, T., Grossman, W. J., Harding, J. C., Hess, J. L., and Ratner, L.Analysis of p53 inactivation in a human T-cell leukemia virus type1 Tax transgenic mouse model. Journal of Virology 75:2185 (2001).Przulj, N. and Higham, D. Modeling protein-protein interaction net-works via a stickiness index. Journal of the Royal Society Interface3:711 (2006).Ptashne, M. Regulation of transcription: From lambda to eukaryotes.308 ReferencesTrends in Biochemical Sciences 30:275 (2005).Qi, Y., Balem, F., Faloutsos, C., Klein-Seetharaman, J., and Bar-Joseph, Z. Protein complex identiﬁcation by supervised graph localclustering. Bioinformatics 24:i250 (2008).Qi, Y., Bar-Joseph, Z., and Klein-Seetharaman, J. Evaluation of dif-ferent biological data and computational classiﬁcation methods foruse in protein interaction prediction. Proteins 63:490 (2006).Rambaldi, D., Georgi, F. M., Capuani, F., Ciliberto, A., and Ciccarelli,F. D. Low duplicability and network fragility of cancer genes. Trendsin Genetics 24:427 (2008).Rangel, C., Angus, J., Ghahramani, Z., et al. Modeling T-cell activationusing gene expression proﬁling and state-space models. Bioinformat-ics 20:1361 (2004).Raval, A. Some asymptotic properties of duplication graphs. PhysicalReview E 68:066119 (2003).Reguly, T., Breitkreutz, A., Boucher, L., and Breitkreutz, B.-J. Com-prehensive curation and analysis of global interaction networks in S.cerevisiae. Journal of Biology 5:11 (2006).Riley, R., Lee, C., Sabatti, C., and Eisenberg, D. Inferring proteindomain interactions from databases of interacting proteins. GenomeBiology 6:R89 (2005).Roach, J. C., Glusman, G., Smit, A. F. A., et al. Analysis of geneticinheritance in a family quartet by whole-genome sequencing. Science328:636 (2010).Sawhill, B. K. Genetic Function Analysis. Santa Fe Institute WorkingPaper (1995).Scholl, C., Fr¨ohling, S., Dunn, I. F., et al. Synthetic lethal interactionbetween oncogenic KRAS dependency and STK33 suppression inhuman cancer cells. Cell 137:821 (2009).Schuldiner, M., Collins, S. R., Thompson, N. J., et al. Exploration ofthe function and organization of the yeast early secretory pathwaythrough an epistatic miniarray proﬁle. Cell 123:507 (2005).Segr´e, D., DeLuna, A., Church, G. M., and Kishony, R. Modular epis-tasis in yeast metabolism. Nature Genetics 37:77 (2005).References 309Segr´e, D., Vitkup, D., and Church, G. M. Analysis of optimality in nat-ural and perturbed metabolic networks. Proceedings of the NationalAcademy of Sciences USA 99:15112 (2002).Shannon, C. E. and Weaver, W. The Mathematical Theory of Commu-nication. University of Illinois Press, Champaign (1963).Sharan, R., Ideker, T., Kelley, B., Shamir, R., and Karp, R. M. Iden-tiﬁcation of protein complexes by comparative analysis of yeast andbacterial protein interaction data. Journal of Computational Biology12:835 (2005).Shou, C., Bhardwaj, N., Lam, H. Y. K., et al. Measuring the evolu-tionary rewiring of biological networks. PLoS Computational Biology7:e1001050 (2011).Skrabanek, L., Saini, H. K., Bader, G. D., and Enright, A. J. Computa-tional prediction of protein-protein interactions. Molecular Biotech-nology 38:1 (2008).Smits, W. K., Kuipers, O. P., and Veening, J.-W. Phenotypic vari-ation in bacteria: The role of feedback regulation. Nature ReviewsMicrobiology 4:259 (2006).Snitkin, E. S. and Segr´e, D. Epistatic interaction maps relative tomultiple metabolic phenotypes. PLoS Genetics 7:e1001294 (2011).Sol´e, R. and Pastor-Satorras, R. Complex networks in genomics andproteomics. In S. Bornholdt and H. G. Schuster, Eds., Handbookof Graphs and Networks: From the Genome to the Internet. Wiley-VCH, Berlin (2003).Stark, C., Breitkreutz, B. J., Reguly, T., et al. BIOGRID: A generalrepository for interaction datasets. Nucleic Acids Research 34:D535(2012).Stelzl, U., Worm, U., Lalowski, M., et al. A human protein-proteininteraction network: A resource for annotating the proteome. Cell122:957 (2005).Taylor, I. W., Linding, R., Warde-Farley, D., et al. Dynamic modular-ity in protein interaction networks predicts breast cancer outcome.Nature Biotechnology 27:199 (2009).Taylor, J., Braasch, I., Frickey, T., Meyer, A., and van de Peer, Y.


===== [71/72] chapter-71.html =====

310 ReferencesGenome duplication, a trait shared by 22,000 species of ray-ﬁnnedﬁsh. Genome Research 13:382 (2003).Taylor, J. and Raes, J. Duplication and divergence: The evolution ofnew genes and old ideas. Annual Reviews in Genetics 38:615 (2004).Tong, A. H. Y., Lesage, G., Bader, G. D., et al. Global mapping of theyeast genetic network. Science 303:808 (2004).Uetz, P., Giot, L., Cagney, G., et al. A comprehensive analysis ofprotein-protein interactions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nature403:623 (2000).van Dongen, S. Graph Clustering by Flow Simulation. Ph.D. thesis,University of Utrecht (2000).van Driel, M. A., Bruggeman, J., Vriend, G., Brunner, H. G., and Le-unissen, J. A. M. A text-mining analysis of the human phenome.European Journal of Human Genetics 14:535 (2006).van Nimwegen, E. Scaling laws in the functional content of genomes.Trends in Genetics 9:479 (2003).Varma, A. and Palsson, B. O. Stoichiometric ﬂux balance models quan-titatively predict growth and metabolic by-product secretion in wild-type Escherichia coli W3110. Applied and Environmental Microbi-ology 60:3724 (1994).V´azquez, A., Flammini, A., Maritan, A., and Vespignani, A. Modelingof protein interaction networks. ComPlexUs 1:38 (2003).Vision, T., Brown, D., and Tanksley, S. The origins of genomic dupli-cation in Arabidopsis. Science 290:2114 (2000).von Dassow, G., Meir, E., Munro, E. M., and Odell, G. M. The segmentpolarity network is a robust developmental module. Nature 406:188(2000).Wagner, A. The yeast protein interaction network evolves rapidly andcontains few redundant duplicate genes. Molecular Biology and Evo-lution 18:1283 (2001).Wagner, A. How the global structure of protein interaction networksevolves. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 270:457 (2003).Walhout, A. J., Sordella, R., Lu, X., et al. Protein interaction mappingin C. elegans using proteins involved in vulval development. ScienceReferences 311287:116 (2000).Wang, J., Zhang, S., Wang, Y., Chen, L., and Zhang, X.-S. Disease-aging network reveals signiﬁcant roles of aging genes in connectinggenetic diseases. PLoS Computational Biology 5:e1000521 (2009).Wang, W., Yu, H., and Long, M. Duplication-degeneration as a mecha-nism of gene ﬁssion and the origin of new genes in Drosophila sp ecies.Nature Genetics 36:523 (2004).Wass, M. N., Fuentes, G., Pons, C., Pazos, F., and Valencia, A. Towardsthe prediction of protein interaction partners using physical docking.Molecular Systems Biology 7:469 (2011).Watts, D. and Strogatz, S. Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’ net-works. Nature 393:440 (1998).Wilks, S. Mathematical Statistics. Wiley, New York (1962).Wolfe, K. and Shields, D. Molecular evidence for an ancient duplicationof the entire yeast genome. Nature 387:708 (1997).Wong, S. L., Zhang, L. V., Tong, A. H. Y., et al. Combining biologicalnetworks to predict genetic interactions. Proceedings of the NationalAcademy of Sciences 101:15682 (2004).Wu, G., Feng, X., and Stein, L. A human functional protein interactionnetwork and its application to cancer data analysis. Genome Biology11:R53 (2010).Wu, X., Jiang, R., Zhang, M. Q., and Li, S. Network-based globalinference of human disease genes. Molecular Systems Biology 4:189(2008).Xia, J., Sun, J., Jia, P., and Zhao, Z. Do cancer proteins really in-teract strongly in the human protein-protein interaction network?Computational Biology and Chemistry 35:121 (2011).Yu, H., Luscombe, N. M., Lu, H. X., et al. Annotation transfer be-tween genomes: Protein-protein interologs and protein-DNA regu-logs. Genome Research 14:1107 (2004).Zhu, X.-M., Yin, L., Hood, L., and Ao, P. Robustness, stability andeﬃciency of phage λ genetic switch: Dynamical structure analysis.Journal of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology 2:785 (2004).Zou, M. and Conzen, S. D. A new dynamic Bayesian network (DBN)312 Referencesapproach for identifying gene regulatory networks from time coursemicroarray data. Bioinformatics 21:71 (2005).


===== [72/72] chapter-72.html =====

C4630“Raval and Ray provide a comprehensive and modern exposition of a rapidly evolving eld: network biology. This text will help biology, mathematics, and computer science students alike to become acquainted with the history and frontiers of research in this exciting area.”—Joshua B. Plotkin, University of Pennsylvania“Finally a book has arrived that describes the basics of biological complexity. Written by leading scientists Raval and Ray, it provides a scholarly account of the concepts of network theory. It describes in great detail the experimental and computational methods for identifying and predicting biological networks and reveals how network analysis can be applied to solve fundamental questions in biology and medicine. Introduction to Biological Networks is easily the best read available on this important and rapidly developing eld.” —Cornelis Murre, University of California, San DiegoFeatures• Provides a conceptual overview of biological interaction networks as a unifying theme in genomics-inspired biology• Explains the biological signicance of interaction networks through numerous examples• Gives a technical introduction to network analysis and the methods by which interaction networks are constructed• Describes relevant biological and mathematical/statistical concepts in separate boxes • Leads readers from very fundamental concepts to the most current research in biology and medicineComputational BiologyINTRODUCTION TO BIOLOGICAL NETWORKSRAVAL RAYINTRODUCTION TOBIOLOGICAL NETWORKSALPAN RAVALANIMESH RAYC4630_Cover.indd 1 3/22/13 10:15 AM