BOOK 9781420087956 | chapters=72 ok=71 empty=1 total_chars=649460



===== [1/72] chapter-01.html =====

“I read this book in one breath—it opens vistas on how the elds of computation and biology can inspire each other. I particularly enjoyed the analogies between immune systems and software that ghts computer viruses.”—Uri Alon, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel, and author of An Introduction to Systems Biology: Design Principles of Biological Circuits“The book by Lamm and Unger methodically covers exciting developments in biological computation, offering for the rst time a broad perspective of this important cutting-edge eld of research.”—Ehud Shapiro, The Harry Weinrebe Professorial Chair of Computer Science and Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel“This is a wonderful treatise on bio-inspired computation, written from a computer science perspective. The authors are extremely knowledgeable about their subject, and the material they cover is both broad and deep. The book should benet anyone interested in the connection between computer science and biology, a connection that is poised to become dramatically central to the science of the 21st century.”—David Harel, The William Sussman Professorial Chair, Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, IsraelA unied overview of computer science ideas inspired by biology, Biological Computation presents the most fundamental and signicant concepts in this area. In the book, readers discover that bacteria communicate, that DNA can be used for performing computations, how evolution solves optimization problems, that the way ants organize their nests can be applied to solve clustering problems, and what the human immune system can teach us about protecting computer networks. The text focuses on cellular automata, evolutionary computation, neural networks, and molecular computation. Each chapter explores the biological background, describes the computational techniques, gives examples of applications, discusses possible variants of the techniques, and includes exercises and solutions.C7959Biological ComputationLamm • UngerComputational Biology/BioinformaticsC7959_Cover.indd 1 12/14/10 2:09 PM
Biological Computation
CHAPMAN & HALL/CRC Mathematical and Computational Biology SeriesAims and scope: This series aims to capture new developments and summarize what is known over the entire spectrum of mathematical and computational biology and medicine. It seeks to encourage the integration of mathematical, statistical, and computational methods into biology by publishing a broad range of textbooks, reference works, and handbooks. The titles included in the series are meant to appeal to students, researchers, and professionals in the mathematical, statistical and computational sciences, fundamental biology and bioengineering, as well as interdisciplinary researchers involved in the eld. The inclusion of concrete examples and applications, and programming techniques and examples, is highly encouraged.Series EditorsN. F. BrittonDepartment of Mathematical SciencesUniversity of BathXihong LinDepartment of BiostatisticsHarvard UniversityHershel M. SaferMaria Victoria SchneiderEuropean Bioinformatics InstituteMona SinghDepartment of Computer SciencePrinceton UniversityAnna TramontanoDepartment of Biochemical SciencesUniversity of Rome La SapienzaProposals for the series should be submitted to one of the series editors above or directly to:CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group4th, Floor, Albert House1-4 Singer StreetLondon EC2A 4BQUK
Published TitlesAlgorithms in Bioinformatics: A Practical IntroductionWing-Kin SungBioinformatics: A Practical ApproachShui Qing YeBiological Computation Ehud Lamm and Ron UngerBiological Sequence Analysis Using the SeqAn C++ LibraryAndreas Gogol-Döring and Knut ReinertCancer Modelling and SimulationLuigi PreziosiCancer Systems BiologyEdwin WangCell Mechanics: From Single Scale-Based Models to Multiscale ModelingArnaud Chauvière, Luigi Preziosi, and Claude VerdierClustering in Bioinformatics and Drug DiscoveryJohn D. MacCuish and Norah E. MacCuishCombinatorial Pattern Matching Algorithms in Computational Biology Using Perl and R Gabriel Valiente Computational Biology: A Statistical Mechanics Perspective Ralf BlosseyComputational Hydrodynamics of Capsules and Biological CellsC. PozrikidisComputational Neuroscience: A Comprehensive Approach Jianfeng FengData Analysis Tools for DNA MicroarraysSorin DraghiciDifferential Equations and Mathematical Biology, Second EditionD.S. Jones, M.J. Plank, and B.D. SleemanEngineering Genetic CircuitsChris J. MyersExactly Solvable Models of Biological Invasion Sergei V. Petrovskii and Bai-Lian LiGene Expression Studies Using Affymetrix MicroarraysHinrich Göhlmann and Willem TalloenGlycome Informatics: Methods and ApplicationsKiyoko F. Aoki-KinoshitaHandbook of Hidden Markov Models in BioinformaticsMartin GolleryIntroduction to BioinformaticsAnna TramontanoIntroduction to Computational ProteomicsGolan YonaAn Introduction to Systems Biology: Design Principles of Biological Circuits Uri AlonKinetic Modelling in Systems BiologyOleg Demin and Igor GoryaninKnowledge Discovery in ProteomicsIgor Jurisica and Dennis WigleMeta-analysis and Combining Information in Genetics and GenomicsRudy Guerra and Darlene R. GoldsteinMethods in Medical Informatics: Fundamentals of Healthcare Programming in Perl, Python, and RubyJules J. BermanModeling and Simulation of Capsules and Biological Cells C. PozrikidisNiche Modeling: Predictions from Statistical DistributionsDavid StockwellNormal Mode Analysis: Theory and Applications to Biological and Chemical SystemsQiang Cui and Ivet BaharOptimal Control Applied to Biological Models Suzanne Lenhart and John T. Workman Pattern Discovery in Bioinformatics: Theory & AlgorithmsLaxmi ParidaPython for BioinformaticsSebastian BassiSpatial EcologyStephen Cantrell, Chris Cosner, and Shigui RuanSpatiotemporal Patterns in Ecology and Epidemiology: Theory, Models, and SimulationHorst Malchow, Sergei V. Petrovskii, and Ezio VenturinoStochastic Modelling for Systems BiologyDarren J. WilkinsonStructural Bioinformatics: An Algorithmic ApproachForbes J. BurkowskiThe Ten Most Wanted Solutions in Protein Bioinformatics Anna Tramontano


===== [2/72] chapter-02.html =====

Biological ComputationEhud LammRon Unger
CRC PressTaylor & Francis Group6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742© 2011 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLCCRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa businessNo claim to original U.S. Government worksVersion Date: 20110719International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4200-8796-3 (eBook - PDF)This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmit-ted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site athttp://www.taylorandfrancis.comand the CRC Press Web site athttp://www.crcpress.com


===== [3/72] chapter-03.html =====

viiTable of ContentsPreface, xvChapter 1  ◾  Introduction and Biological Background  11.1  BIOLOGICAL COMPUTATION  11.2  THE INFLUENCE OF BIOLOGY ON MATHEMATICS—HISTORICAL EXAMPLES  41.3  BIOLOGICAL INTRODUCTION  71.3.1 e Cell and Its Activities 121.3.2 e Structure of DNA 141.3.3 e Genetic Code 161.3.4 Protein Synthesis and Gene Regulation 181.3.5 Reproduction and Heredity 231.4  MODELS AND SIMULATIONS  261.5  SUMMARY  331.6  FURTHER READING  341.7  EXERCISES  341.7.1 Biological Computation 341.7.2 History 351.7.3 Biological Introduction 351.7.4 Models and Simulations 371.8  ANSWERS TO SELECTED EXERCISES  37Chapter 2  ◾  Cellular Automata  392.1  BIOLOGICAL BACKGROUND  39
viii    ◾    Table of Contents2.1.1 Bacteria Basics 392.1.2 Genetic Inheritance—Downward and Sideways 402.1.3 Diversity and the Species Question 412.1.4 Bacteria and Humans 422.1.5 e Sociobiology of Bacteria 422.2  THE “GAME OF LIFE”  442.3  GENERAL DEFINITION OF CELLULAR AUTOMATA  482.4  1-DIMENSIONAL AUTOMATA  502.5  EXAMPLES OF CELLULAR AUTOMATA  542.5.1 Fur Color 542.5.2 Ecological Models 572.5.3 Food Chain 582.6  COMPARISON WITH A CONTINUOUS MATHEMATICAL MODEL  592.7  COMPUTATIONAL UNIVERSALITY  612.7.1 What Is Universality? 612.7.2 Cellular Automata as a Computational Model 652.7.3 How to Prove at a CA Is Universal 672.7.4 Universality of a Two-Dimensional Cellular Automaton—Proof Sketch 682.7.5 Universality of the “Game of Life”—Proof Sketch 712.8  SELF-REPLICATION  732.9  SUMMARY  772.10  PSEUDO-CODE  782.11  FURTHER READING  792.12  EXERCISES  792.12.1 “Game of Life” 792.12.2 Cellular Automata 802.12.3 Computing Using Cellular Automata 822.12.4 Self-Replication 822.12.5 Programming Exercises 83
Table of Contents    ◾    ix2.13  ANSWERS TO SELECTED EXERCISES  84Chapter 3  ◾  Evolutionary Computation  873.1  EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY AND EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION  873.1.1 Natural Selection 873.1.2 Evolutionary Computation 933.2  GENETIC ALGORITHMS  943.2.1 Selection and Fitness 983.2.2 Variations on Fitness Functions 1023.2.3 Genetic Operators and the Representation of Solutions 1043.3  EXAMPLE APPLICATIONS  1083.3.1 Scheduling 1083.3.2 Engineering Optimization 1093.3.3 Pattern Recognition and Classication 1093.3.4 Designing Cellular Automata 1103.3.5 Designing Neural Networks 1103.3.6 Bioinformatics 1103.4  ANALYSIS OF THE BEHAVIOR OF GENETIC ALGORITHMS  1113.4.1 Holland’s Building Blocks Hypothesis 1153.4.2 e Schema eorem 1163.4.3 Corollaries of the Schema eorem 1183.5  LAMARCKIAN EVOLUTION  1193.6  GENETIC PROGRAMMING  1213.7  A SECOND LOOK AT THE EVOLUTIONARY PROCESS  1263.7.1 Mechanisms for the Generation and Inheritance of Variations 1263.7.2 Selection 1293.8  SUMMARY  1303.9  PSEUDO-CODE  1313.10  FURTHER READING  132
x    ◾    Table of Contents3.11  EXERCISES  1323.11.1 Evolutionary Computation 1323.11.2 Genetic Algorithms 1333.11.3 Selection and Fitness 1333.11.4 Genetic Operators and the Representation of Solutions 1343.11.5 Analysis of the Behavior of Genetic Algorithms 1353.11.6 Genetic Programming 1363.11.7 Programming Exercises 1363.12  ANSWERS TO SELECTED EXERCISES  140Chapter 4  ◾  Artiﬁcial Neural Networks  1434.1  BIOLOGICAL BACKGROUND  1434.1.1 Neural Networks as Computational Model 1464.2  LEARNING  1464.3  ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS  1484.3.1 General Structure of Articial Neural Networks 1484.3.2 Training an Articial Neural Network 1514.4  THE PERCEPTRON  1524.4.1 Denition of a Perceptron 1524.4.2 Formal Description of the Behavior of a Perceptron 1564.4.3 e Perceptron Learning Rule 1584.4.4 Proving the Convergence of the Perceptron Learning Algorithm 1594.5  LEARNING IN A MULTILAYERED NETWORK  1624.5.1 e Backpropagation Algorithm 1624.5.2 Analysis of Learning Algorithms 1704.5.3 Network Design 1724.5.4 Examples of Applications 1744.6 ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY  1804.6.1 Biological Memory 1804.6.2 Hopeld Networks 181
Table of Contents    ◾    xi4.6.3 Memorization in a Hopeld Network 1814.6.4 Data Retrieval in a Hopeld Network 1834.6.5 e Convergence of the Process of Updating the Neurons 1854.6.6 Analyzing the Capacity of a Hopeld Network 1864.6.7 Application of a Hopeld Network 1894.6.8 Further Uses of the Hopeld Network 1914.7 UNSUPERVISED LEARNING  1944.7.1 Self-Organizing Maps 1954.7.2 WEBSOM: Example of Using SOMs for Document Text Mining 1984.8 SUMMARY  2004.9 FURTHER READING  2014.10  EXERCISES  2024.10.1 Single-Layer Perceptrons 2024.10.2 Multilayer Networks 2034.10.3 Hopeld Networks 2054.10.4 Self-Organizing Maps 2084.10.5 Summary 2084.11 ANSWERS TO SELECTED EXERCISES  210Chapter 5  ◾  Molecular Computation  2155.1  BIOLOGICAL BACKGROUND  2175.1.1 PCR: Polymerase Chain Reaction 2175.1.2 Gel Electrophoresis 2195.1.3 Restriction Enzymes 2195.1.4 Ligation 2205.2  COMPUTATION USING DNA  2205.2.1 Hamiltonian Paths 2205.2.2 Solving SAT 2305.2.3 DNA Tiling 2335.2.4 DNA Computing—Summary 236


===== [4/72] chapter-04.html =====

xii    ◾    Table of Contents5.3  ENZYMATIC COMPUTATION  2375.3.1 Finite Automata 2385.3.2 Enzymatic Implementation of Finite Automata 2425.4  SUMMARY  2485.5  FURTHER READING  2505.6  EXERCISES  2505.6.1 Biological Background 2505.6.2 Computing with DNA 2505.6.3 Enzymatic Computation 2535.7  ANSWERS TO SELECTED EXERCISES  254Chapter 6  ◾  The Never-Ending Story: Additional Topics at the Interface between Biology and Computation  2596.1  SWARM INTELLIGENCE  2616.1.1 Ant Colony Optimization Algorithms 2626.1.2 Cemetery Organization, Larval Sorting, and Clustering 2646.1.3 Particle Swarm Optimization 2676.2  ARTIFICIAL IMMUNE SYSTEMS  2706.2.1 Identifying Intrusions in a Computer Network 2716.3  ARTIFICIAL LIFE  2736.3.1 Avida 2766.3.2 Evolvable Virtual Creatures 2816.4  SYSTEMS BIOLOGY  2846.4.1 Evolution of Modularity 2876.4.2 Robustness of Biological Systems 2896.4.3 Formal Languages for Describing Biological Systems 2906.5  SUMMARY  2946.6  RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ADDITIONAL READING  2976.6.1 Biological Introduction 297
Table of Contents    ◾    xiii6.6.2 Personal Perspectives 2986.6.3 Modeling Biological Systems 2986.6.4 Biological Computation 2996.6.5 Cellular Automata 2996.6.6 Evolutionary Computation 3006.6.7 Neural Networks 3006.6.8 Molecular Computation 3006.6.9 Swarm Intelligence 3006.6.10 Systems Biology 3016.6.11 Bioinformatics 3016.7  FURTHER READING  3016.8  EXERCISES  3026.8.1 Swarm Intelligence 3026.8.2 Articial Immune Systems 3036.8.3 Articial Life 3056.8.4 Systems Biology 3066.8.5 Programming Exercises 3066.9  ANSWERS TO SELECTED EXERCISES  307


===== [5/72] chapter-05.html =====

xvPrefaceTHE SPIRIT OF THIS BOOKIt is oen said that biology is going to be the science of the 21st century as physics was the science of the 20th. Fascinating discoveries about the liv-ing world around us, as well as about our own bodies, are brought about daily by molecular biology, neuroscience, and other biological disciplines. In addition, biological understanding, whether on the molecular scale or on the ecological level, is fast becoming the foundation of new engineering disciplines, such as nanotechnology and bioengineering, which have the potential to fundamentally change the way we live.Computers, and computer science ideas and techniques, are of course an important part of all these scientic and engineering activities. Computer science and its concepts and methods are not only a servant of biologi-cal research but also provide mental models used by a new generation of biologists, who oen refer to themselves as systems biologists, in think-ing about the living world. Ideas and approaches, however, travel in both directions: reecting on biological ideas has inspired a wide range of com-puter science questions and has led to the development of important new techniques for solving hard computational problems. e result might be called biological computation (or biologically inspired computing) and is the subject of this book.is book is written from the perspective of computer scientists who are fascinated with biology. A large part of the excitement and fun of bio-inspired computing, at least for us, is learning the amazing and quirky details discovered by biologists. Among the biological stories that have informed computer science you will nd discoveries about how bacteria communicate, how ants organize their nests, and the way the immune system learns to recognize pathogens before actually encountering them. All these, and more, are discussed in the chapters to come, along with the 
xvi    ◾    Prefacecomputational techniques they led to. We hope the book manages to con-vey the sense of wonder and fun that we feel about the eld. It goes without saying that it is impossible to go into all details of such varied phenom-ena, and we concentrate on the aspects of the biological phenomena most closely related to the computational approaches we discuss.THE CONTENT OF THE BOOKe term biological computation encompasses quite a few approaches. In this book we focus on the most fundamental and important ideas, and on the clas-sic works in each of the subjects we discuss, in an attempt to give a unied overview of computer science ideas inspired by biology. e four major topics we focus on are cellular automata, evolutionary computation, neural networks, and molecular computation. Each of these topics is the subject of a chapter that begins by exploring the biological background and then moves on to describe the computational techniques, followed by examples of applications and a discussion of possible variants of the basic techniques introduced in the chapter. Each chapter also includes exercises and solutions. Exercises with solutions are marked with bold numbers. Important ideas and techniques are presented through the example applications and exercises. In addition to the chapters discussing these techniques, Chapter 1 provides a general biological background, and Chapter 6 concludes the book by introducing, more briey, some of the new topics that are emerging within the eld.We made a special eort to make our explanation of molecular com-putation accessible to readers who lack a background in molecular biol-ogy, without sacricing the details. In contrast to the other techniques we discuss in the book that can be immediately used by programmers to attack computational challenges, molecular computation is still mostly in its infancy and requires equipment that can be found only in professional laboratories. We feel, however, that thinking about the computational power of molecular events is enlightening, and we predict that computer scientists will enjoy the puzzle-like challenge of trying to represent com-putational problems as sets of interacting molecules. With the possibility of biological hacking and “Do It Yourself Biology” just around the corner, the use of these techniques may become more widespread than can pres-ently be imagined.e topics we focus on, with the exception of molecular computing, are already the subject of several good textbooks, which can be found listed in the Recommendations for Additional Reading section of Chapter 6. Most of these books, however, are dedicated to only one of the subjects we 
Preface    ◾    xviidiscuss or are extremely detailed reference books. Our goal was to present to you, the reader, an overview of the terrain, allowing you to then focus your attention on the techniques that are most relevant for you. Each of the approaches we cover exists in a multitude of variants and is covered by a large amount of theoretical work—it is very easy to get buried in the details. is book attempts to convey in an easily digestible form the gist of each of the major approaches in the eld and to bring you to the point where you can produce a working implementation of each of the basic techniques or to eectively use one of the many existing implementations that can be found online. All the details can be easily found in the lit-erature or by searching online once the basic ideas introduced here are understood.e techniques we discuss reect fundamental principles whose appli-cability goes beyond bio-inspired computing—for example, self-organiza-tion, redundancy, using noise, asynchronicity, nondeterminism, and other methods of parallelism and distributed computing. ese ideas manifest themselves in other areas of computer science and soware engineering, specically in the development of very large-scale distributed systems, of the sort underlying cloud and grid computing. While these elds are not discussed here, we feel that getting acquainted with these fundamental ideas and playing with simple computational models that exhibit them, such as the ones presented throughout this book, can be rewarding.FOR WHOM IS THIS BOOK INTENDED?We wrote this book thinking primarily of readers with a computer sci-ence background and we assume no previous background in biology. For readers who feel they would benet from a deeper understanding of the biological context we provide references to several recommended books in the Further Reading list in Chapter 1. is book is intended to be a gentle introduction to the eld and should be suitable for self-study as well as for use in university courses. We assume the reader is familiar with basic computer science terminology and basic algebra and probability theory but provide detailed explanations of all derivations. ere are program-ming exercises at the end of each chapter, but it is possible to follow the explanations and discussions without programming knowledge. We did not include many formal proofs, but throughout the chapters and exercises we give easy-to-follow examples of several important proof techniques. is should make the book accessible to readers with biological or medical 
xviii    ◾    Prefacebackgrounds—those coming to the eld of bio-inspired computing from biology rather than from computer science.USING THIS BOOK AS A TEXTBOOKWhile the book can be used for self-study, its main purpose is to serve as a textbook for a course on biological computation. Such a course can be given to advanced undergraduate or early graduate students in programs that combine biology and computer science (a double major in computer science and biology or special bioinformatics tracks). For such students a course on biological computation can complement a suite of courses in bioinformatics, algorithms for computational biology, and systems biology.A course based on this book can also be given to students who major in computer science and for whom a course in biological computation can enrich the perspectives about alternative models of computation. e book contains in the rst chapter and in each one of Chapters 2–5 an accessible biological introduction. Nevertheless, it is a good idea for these students to take a basic course in biology prior to a course based on this book or, as was done in Bar-Ilan University, to add lectures and teaching assistant (TA) sessions giving a “crash course” in biology.e material covered in this book can be delivered in a semester (13–14 weeks) with weekly two-hour lectures and weekly TA sessions. us, we devote about three weeks to each one of the four main subjects we cover. From our experience, students gain a lot from homework and especially from the programming exercises, so we provide a good number of those. As the book was written as a textbook, we tried not to overwhelm the readers with footnotes and references. When we designed and delivered this course in the last several years, no suitable textbook was available, and we felt its absence. Our course was well received by students, and we hope that this book will encourage and enable many teachers and universities to oer similar courses.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSWriting a book is a long and complicated process, and we could not have done it without the help and support of many individuals and institutions.e idea to collaborate on a book came to us while we worked on the development of a course on bio-inspired computing for the Open University of Israel. e structure of this book is based on courses taught by Ron Unger at the Weizmann Institute of Science and for many years at 
Preface    ◾    xixBar-Ilan University, and the course developed by the two authors for the Open University of Israel. Our thanks go to these institutions.Special thanks go to Edna Wigderson, who helped us transform a rst dra written in Hebrew into the book before you. Not only did she trans-late our original material, but she also edited the material, pointed out inconsistencies and mistakes, and helped us improve the presentation immeasurably. Without her this book would never be. We thank Assaf Massoud for the artwork resulting in the illuminat-ing illustrations that accompany the text. Working with Assaf was a real pleasure. Both Edna and Assaf had to endure the diculties of dealing with two authors who oen disagreed; not only did both endure this with grace, but their prodding also helped the two authors converge.We also wish to thank all those who read the manuscripts or parts of it, pointed out our mistakes, and made valuable suggestions. First and foremost we thank Yair Horesh, who was involved in the courses in Bar-Ilan and in the Open University and made important contribu-tions to the manuscript. We would also want to recognize the assistance we received from Tania Gottlieb in the biological aspects of the book and Orly Noivirt-Brik, Yochai Gat, Nurit Zer-Kavod, Ariel Azia, Tirza Doniger, Inbal Yomtovian, Ari Yakir, and Ilana Lebenthal for their valu-able comments on the manuscript.As is always the case, the responsibility for whatever errors remain is ours alone.On a personal note, Ron wishes to thank David Harel, Joel L. Sussman, and John Moult, mentors and friends who helped him in his transition from computer scientist to computational biologist, and his colleagues at Bar-Ilan University and especially Elisha Haas and Shula Michaeli. Special thanks go to my family—my parents Zipora and Ozer; my sister Vered, who was so helpful in preparing the book; and my wonderful chil-dren Amir, Ayelet, Hilla, and Inbal. I want to express special thanks to my vibrant wife Tamar. Tami, without your support and love, this book project could not have been undertaken, let alone completed.Ehud wishes to thank Eva Jablonka for intellectual stimulation and biological insight, in addition to friendship and moral support; his many colleagues in the computer science department at the Open University of Israel for encouragement and support; and Dror Bar-Nir and Sara Schwartz for invaluable discussions. I wish to thank my family for their love and support. I am especially grateful to my wife Ayelet whose love and friendship are the greatest gi of all.


===== [6/72] chapter-06.html =====




===== [7/72] chapter-07.html =====

1C h a p t e r 1Introduction and Biological Background1.1  BIOLOGICAL COMPUTATIONis book presents topics on the border between biology and computer science in an attempt to demonstrate how biological insights allow us to deal with complex computational problems and, conversely, how com-puter science insights enhance our understanding of biological processes and help to identify problems worthy of research.Most of the book presents the topics from a computer science perspec-tive and deals with new computational models and techniques based on ideas derived from biological research. Using these techniques, problems are solved in ways that dier from “classical” computer programming, in which programs can usually be described as a linear sequence of instruc-tions. Chapter 2 deals with cellular automata, which are made up of many independently operating cells embedded on a grid, each of which can aect only its neighbors. is resembles a colony of simple organisms (e.g., bac-teria) that can present amazingly complex behaviors or even the structure of simple multicellular creatures that contain many cells working together. Chapter 3 deals with evolutionary computation and demonstrates how to solve optimization and search problems by mimicking the natural evolu-tionary processes whereby organisms adapt to their environment. Chapter 4 presents models of neural networks that attempt to mimic the behavior of the brain. ese systems are capable of learning and generalizing from 
2    ◾    Biological Computationexamples. Chapter 5 deals with molecular computation, in which compu-tational problems are solved by a set of interacting biological molecules. Finally, Chapter 6 presents brief descriptions of several other topics that are on the cusp between computer science and biology, for example, ideas drawn from animal behavior and from the operation of the immune system.We will explore how to apply the models presented to a large variety of computational problems. In particular, some of the problems discussed are believed to be hard (e.g., we will discuss NP-complete problems, which are problems for which no ecient algorithm is believed to exist), but using ideas inspired by biology helps in nding practical solutions for many of their instances.We can consider the use of biological insights to solve computational problems as a “translation” of biological phenomena into formal math-ematical models. Obviously, we will not attempt an exact translation but will merely use certain aspects of the biological phenomena as inspiration for developing mathematical and computational methods. One could also do the converse—develop formal mathematical tools to analyze biologi-cal phenomena. is eld is called theoretical biology and is beyond the scope of this book. e discussion of systems biology in Chapter 6 briey notes how some of the theoretical ideas developed by computer science are being applied to the study of biological systems.As we discuss these new computational models we will naturally focus on the dierences between them and traditional computational models. Table1.1 outlines a few major dierences between the biologically inspired models and traditional, more conventional models. e table demonstrates that nonstandard computational models dier from conventional models in many signicant aspects.Note that, in addition to the biologically inspired computational mod-els, other types of nonstandard computational models have drawn a lot of attention recently. An interesting example is quantum computing, which attempts to use physical properties described by quantum mechanics as a powerful computational mechanism. As we concentrate on biological ideas, these models will not be discussed in this book.ese new approaches to computation are both intellectually exciting and present new engineering approaches to solving complex problems. It almost seems as if the biologically inspired models were designed to deal with diculties and limitations that arise when building complex com-puter systems. e engineering requirements arising from the attempts to build increasingly complex computer systems that have to be reliable 
Introduction and Biological Background    ◾    3TABLE1.1  Biologically Inspired Models versus Standard ModelsConventional Computation Biological ComputationMode of operationMainly sequential, even though there exist parallel computers and it is possible to write parallel code that executes on standard hardware. Usually the number of parallel processes is very small.Mainly parallel. Most biologically inspired models are massively parallel and are based on thousands of local interactions running in parallel.Control ere is a centralized global control of the entire system.Computation is the result of numerous local processes without a global control mechanism.Programming e programmer has to specify in detail the behavior of the system, by, for example, choosing appropriate data structures or algorithms.In the models presented in Chapters 3 and 4 central aspects of the behavior of the system are developed by the system gradually and evolutionarily, without human intervention.Modiability and adaptability Depends on the design of the system but usually requires re-programming.e systems are able to adapt to a wide range of environmental changes and changes in the system itself, without external intervention.Robustness and error toleranceRequires special treatment and usually requires dedicated code or hardware. Usually systems are incapable of dealing with extensive or prolonged failure (e.g., a hardware failure), and such failures usually end in catastrophic behaviors (complete shutdown of the system).e model oen leads to inherent robustness. Some of the models are capable of independent gradual correction of widespread failures.Requirements from componentsIn general, a reliable system needs reliable components, and the system is reliable as the weakest component it includes. Usually, nondeterminism cannot be tolerated.It is possible to build a reliable and fast system using unreliable, slow and noisy components. Nondeterminism at various levels of the system can even contribute to reaching the system’s functional goals.Hardware Electronic, usually silicon based. Usually implemented on standard hardware. Chapter 5 describes using organic (carbon-based) materials for computations. 
4    ◾    Biological Computationand ecient (therefore oen parallel and distributed) and to make use of cheap components to reduce overall costs seem remarkably suited to the properties of nonconventional models. Moreover, throughout the book we will encounter insights gleaned from nonstandard models that can be integrated into more conventional computer systems.It is important to understand that many other techniques are employed when developing complex computer systems to satisfy the aforementioned criteria. Large systems such as those used by Google® and Amazon® have to deal with huge datasets, to satisfy requests from all over the globe, and to be very reliable and highly available. To achieve these goals they deploy several large data centers, each of which houses a large number of clusters of computers. is necessitates synchronizing a large number of serv-ers while, for example, minimizing latency, performing computations in parallel, distributing computations between machines and data cen-ters, and automatically recovering from faults (e.g., using redundancy). Such computing and storage architectures are becoming more and more available to even smaller companies (e.g., Amazon® sells services on its computing “cloud”). e architectural complexity of the system can be hidden from the programmer so that only the infrastructure designers and implementers need to worry about these details and the programmer can concentrate on the details of the applications being developed.In some instances we can nd a similarity between the fundamental principles being used in the development of large distributed systems and the principles underlying biologically inspired computational models, even though the systems themselves dier signicantly. e similar prin-ciples include self-organization, redundancy, use of noise, nondetermin-ism, and other methods of parallelism and distributed computing. We will demonstrate these general principles throughout the book.1.2   THE INFLUENCE OF BIOLOGY ON MATHEMATICS—HISTORICAL EXAMPLESIntellectual disciplines interact with each other in many dierent ways. Some of these interactions have a direct eect on elds of study, while oth-ers are more circumstantial. Examples of the direct interactions include using techniques developed in one eld of study to analyze phenomena in another eld or a research eld splitting up into more specialized sub-elds. e indirect interactions might arise when new ways of thought aect multiple disciplines (e.g., with the rise of statistical thinking), when new research directions open up, or when researchers switch elds.
Introduction and Biological Background    ◾    5It would seem that biology cannot have much of an impact on mathe-matics (and later on computer science), as these disciplines are fundamen-tally so dierent. Mathematics is exact and deals with formal arguments and proofs. Consider, for example, Euclidean geometry developed by Euclid in the book Elements in the third century BCE. Ancient as this mathematical eld is, its results are still valid (and will be valid eternally), as they are logically derived from the axioms Euclid laid down in his clas-sical work. Biological research, on the other hand, evolves constantly. New facts are discovered at a great pace, and a large chunk of our current biological knowledge is derived from recent research. Moreover, biology deals with a vast array of phenomena, which we understand only par-tially and imprecisely, and this understanding also keeps changing and evolving. Despite these diculties, mathematical tools are oen needed for analyzing biological phenomena, and when no appropriate tools exist they need to be developed. is, in turn, leads to the emergence of new mathematical and computational elds. We present in this section some examples of the inuence of biological research on mathematics in the past. e later chapters are indicative of current cross-inuences and hint at future developments.In the years 1827–1828 the Scottish botanist Robert Brown (1773–1858) published his ndings about the motion of pollen in water. Using a micro-scope (an advanced technology for his time), he discovered that the pollen particles swirled about in a motion that could not be explained by the water movement. Initially, aer observing pollen derived from dierent owers, Brown believed that this motion is observable only in particles derived from living matter. is conclusion was in step with accepted bio-logical theories of the time. However, further research established simi-lar behavior in tiny particles of inanimate matter, such as glass. Further study of this “Brownian Motion” revealed its probabilistic nature. Today, it is well known that this phenomenon arises due to the impact generated by the random collisions of the observed particles with the many much lighter water molecules surrounding them (a water molecule’s radius is roughly 1.4 Å (1 Ångström = 10–10 meters), while the radius of a pollen particle is of the order of 10 micrometers (1 micrometer = 10–6 meters)). e mathematical analysis of this phenomenon had a large impact on the development of probability theory (Albert Einstein was one of the con-tributors to this analysis). is theory is heavily used today to analyze a wide array of probabilistic processes that have nothing to do with biology or molecular motion.


===== [8/72] chapter-08.html =====

6    ◾    Biological Computatione Brownian motion example is not unusual. ere is a close link between the development of statistics and the study of probabilistic (or stochastic) processes and the pursuit of biological questions. One of the reasons for this link was the endeavor to collect, tabulate, and analyze human populations (e.g., conducting a census of a state’s population).Adolf Quételet (1796–1874) collected and analyzed height and weight data and was amazed to discover that their distribution was a normal dis-tribution (a “bell curve”). Up to his time normal distributions were used only to explain measuring errors, mainly of astronomical phenomena. Some of Quetelet’s discoveries were that the height of French army recruits was normally distributed, as were the chest measurements of Scottish sol-diers. Quetelet denoted the center of these distributions by the term the average man (“l’homme moyen”) and believed that one can study social phenomena by observing the dierences in distributions among dierent groups of people (e.g., among dierent races).Quetelet’s ideas had a profound inuence on Francis Galton (1822–1911), who was a cousin of Charles Darwin and a polymath. Among his other contributions to statistics, Galton pioneered the use of regression for nding a linear function best describing a set of data and the notion of correlation. He used these tools when investigating the heritability of properties such as height (i.e., the relation between the height of par-ents and their children) and the size of peas. Galton also dealt with the problem of the disappearance of certain family names over time. is research had inuence on the study of stochastic processes, which in turn are used, among many other things, for researching the propagation of diseases (epidemiology).As a last example we’ll mention Karl Pearson (1857–1936), who was a student of Galton. He also dealt with biometrics (measuring biological properties). Among his many contributions is the Pearson correlation coecient, which is used to describe the quality of the correlation between two random variables. Current medical research is based to a large extent on statistical tools, and its quality depends largely on the planning of clin-ical trials and a careful analysis of their results, using the techniques we mentioned among other tools. ese tools form the basis for the modern concept of evidence-based medicine.In 1948, Norbert Wiener (1894–1964) dened the term cybernetics to describe the study of control systems. A central element of regulatory and control systems is feedback, which occurs when two parts of a system interact in a bidirectional fashion so that they inuence each other. For 
Introduction and Biological Background    ◾    7example, think of a system composed of components A and B, such that A inuences B’s behavior and B inuences the behavior of A. e two major kinds of feedback are positive feedback and negative feedback. In a positive feedback loop the system responds to the perturbation by fur-ther changes in the same direction as the perturbation, whereas in nega-tive feedback the system responds in the opposite direction and attempts to revert to the initial state. We will see that feedback mechanisms allow systems to self-organize and adapt to their environment.Living organisms are capable of retaining their internal states in response to a wide range of perturbations in their environment. For instance, internal body temperatures in warm-blooded animals do not change with the temperature of the surroundings (as long as those changes are not too extreme). Similarly, athletes who train at high alti-tudes with lower oxygen concentration develop more red blood cells to maintain the amount of oxygen reaching their cells. is ability to maintain a steady internal state is called homeostasis (homeo = similar, stasis = standing still). Feedback loops play a central role in maintain-ing homeostasis.Wiener dened cybernetics as the science dealing with control and communication in man-made and biological systems and was inu-enced by biological examples. Even though cybernetics is no longer considered an independent research eld, its concepts and the basic problems it dealt with are still used in designing and analyzing dynami-cal systems.Another area that posed major mathematical challenges is demograph-ics, which is the study of populations (human and otherwise). Demographic tools are important for forecasting population sizes and for understand-ing the inuence of habitat changes on populations. e mathematical description of demographic processes uses complex classes of dierential equations. e need to study and solve these equations gave rise to various mathematical developments.1.3  BIOLOGICAL INTRODUCTIONIn this section we present a few topics in biology with the goal of providing the basic vocabulary needed for discussing biological phenomena. We will limit ourselves to discussing general background material necessary for understanding the following chapters, and more specic biological topics will be explained in later chapters.
8    ◾    Biological ComputationBiology deals with living organisms. When encountering an object, we nd it trivial to decide whether it is a living object, but are we capable of dening the dierence between an animate and inanimate object? Can we explain the basis of the dierences? e answer cannot be found at the physical level since living organisms are composed of the same building blocks as all other matter: atoms, which are made up of protons, electrons, and neutrons. e atoms are combined to create larger building blocks called molecules. For instance, a water molecule contains two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. Living organisms contain carbon based mol-ecules, known as organic molecules. Organic molecules are encountered almost exclusively in living objects and as products of living organisms. e main types of organic molecules are proteins, carbohydrates (sug-ars), lipids (fats), and nucleic acids—ribonucleic acid (RNA) and deoxy-ribonucleic acid (DNA). ese molecules play a major role in almost all processes occurring in any living organism.e basic unit of living organisms is the cell. Organic molecules are created by cells, are used for cellular activities, and make up cells. Even simple single-cell organisms such as bacteria and yeast display a large spectrum of types and behaviors: for example, some survive better at high temperatures; some prefer colder environments; some require oxy-gen, and others do not; they have dierent nutrient requirements. More complex organisms made up of more than one cell are called multicel-lular organisms.One of the rst tools needed to understand and research living organ-isms is the ability to systematically group and categorize organisms. e classication system is based on observing similarities between dierent organisms. For instance, cats are more similar to each other than they are to dogs; cats, lions, and tigers present many similarities to each other and are dierent from dogs and wolves. erefore, it is reasonable to impose a hierarchical structure on these animals: all cats belong to the “cat” group, which is a subset of the “feline” group that also contains tigers and lions, and so on. e biological disciplines of systematics and taxonomy deal with these classication problems.A species is the lowest rung of the biological hierarchy. A species is commonly dened as a group of organisms capable of interbreeding and producing fertile ospring. Cats raised as pets (“house cats”) all belong to one species, while all the feline species share various similar charac-teristics. For example, here are the main categories used to scientically identify house cats:
Introduction and Biological Background    ◾    9Kingdom: Animalia (animals) Phylum: Chordata Sub-Phylum: Vertebrata (vertebrates) Class: Mammalia (mammals) Order: Carnivora (carnivores) Family: Felidae Genus: Felis Species: Felis catusTigers and lions, like the house cat, belong to the Felidae family but not to the Felis genus. Organisms that are more similar to the house cat such as the jungle cat (Felis chaus) do belong to the Felis genus.Every species and every higher-order class contains organisms with similar characteristics, and researchers specializing in each group can recite a large body of scientic knowledge about the particular proper-ties unique to each group. In our discussion here we will be mostly con-cerned with universal characteristics that apply to all organisms or at least to a large set of species. is chapter will describe some of these univer-sal characteristics. In Chapter 4 we will discuss neural networks that are inspired by general principles observed in the nervous systems of highly developed organisms. Chapter 6 discusses computational models inspired by the immune system, which is found only in a subset of species, and by the behavior of social insects.Similar characteristics may indicate either that dierent species evolved from a common ancestor or that they had to deal with similar environ-mental challenges. For example, bats and bees have wings used for ying, but their wings do not come from a common ancestor. e term anal-ogy is used to describe organs or structures with an identical function, while a similarity due to shared common ancestry is called homology. Homologous structures may dier signicantly in function and shape. For instance, the limbs of whales, bats, and humans are homologous. Another interesting example is the homology between the inner ear bone structure in mammals and the jaw bones of sh. e source of the univer-sal characteristics of all living organisms with which we will deal in this book is very early in the evolution of life.It is now accepted that each living organism belongs to one of three domains. A basic distinction is between organisms with cells that have a nucleus, called eukaryotes, and those that do not. A nucleus is a com-ponent in the cell that contains most of the cell’s genetic material, or 
10    ◾    Biological Computationgenome (we will discuss the cell structure in greater detail in the next section.) is distinction has been known for a long while as it is oen possible to observe the nucleus using a simple light microscope. With the advance of technology and molecular tools it became evident that two types of cells do not have nuclei—Bacteria and Archaea. e evolu-tionary distance between Bacteria and Archaea is large and it is wrong to view them as two subsets of the family of all nucleus-less cells. Rather than that, they are two separate classes at the same hierarchical level: Bacteria and Archaea are the domains of the prokaryotes (nucleus-less cells), whereas all organisms whose cells have a nucleus belong to the Eukarya domain. Multicellular organisms, including the species of Animalia, belong to Eukarya, but there are also eukaryotic single-cell organisms.You might have wondered where viruses fall into according to this clas-sication. Remember that we discussed the classication of organisms made of cells, but viruses are not cells and do not have all the mechanisms that allow a cell to use energy, to manufacture proteins, and to reproduce. Lacking these capabilities, it is debatable whether viruses should be con-sidered living organisms. Viruses contain only genetic material and repro-duce by penetrating a cell and reprogramming it to execute the instructions contained in the genetic material of the virus. As such, viruses may be considered the ultimate parasites.Single-cell organisms (whether they are eukaryotes or lack a nucleus) need not live in isolation. Bacteria form colonies that may be millions strong. e bacteria in a colony not only live in proximity but also assist each other by creating organized sheets of cells, which make it easier for the bacteria to attach to the surface on which they live. For instance, dental plaque is made up of bacteria that form a biolm. Bacteria colonies can even behave in an organized manner as can be seen when an obstacle is put in the way of bacteria in a petri dish and the colony circumvents it (we discuss this topic again in Chapter 2, where you will nd photographs showing this remarkable process). Dictyostelium discoideum is a particularly interesting example of cooperation among single-cell organisms. It is composed of soil amoebae that usually live and reproduce independently. When their living conditions deteriorate—for example, when there is a food shortage—they become organized into a complex multicellular structure that can contain up to 100,000 cells and is surrounded by an extracellular skeleton. is slug-like structure can react to temperature changes and move as a single entity. In the next chapter we will discuss a computational model that can


===== [9/72] chapter-09.html =====

Introduction and Biological Background    ◾    11be compared to a colony of simple organisms and will show how systems exhibiting complex collective behavior can be created within the colony.A fundamental dierence between a multicellular organism and a col-ony of single-cell organisms is the dierentiation of the cells into dier-ent cell types, each of which has unique properties and well-dened roles in the system. Dierentiation is mainly a unidirectional process, whereby dierentiated cells cannot change into a dierent kind of cell and can sur-vive only within the multicellular organism. For example, a neuron cannot turn into a muscle cell. Only the genetic material existing in specialized cells (the gametes or germ cells) is used in the reproduction of the multi-cellular organism, while all other cells forego independent reproduction. Some cells (e.g., the human red blood cells) do not even contain a nucleus and genetic material. Stem cells exist in many tissues and in contrast with other cells have the capability to reproduce and dierentiate into dier-ent types of cells and therefore have obvious medical potential. ey have been heavily researched in recent years.When observing the organization and division of labor within mul-ticellular organisms, it is evident that there are many levels of organiza-tion, from the single cell up to the whole organism. Cells are organized in tissues, which have specic functions. For instance, muscle cells can contract and thereby allow the organism to convert energy into motion, allowing it to operate, for example, the respiratory muscles and the heart. Neurons are used for internal communication and also make up the central nervous system (brain) in organisms that have one. Blood cells (notice that blood is considered a tissue) are used to transport oxy-gen and nutrients to the cells and to support the immune system and also have other functions. Fat cells are used to store energy for times of need.Cells belonging to dierent tissues are organized in organs, which have a specic function in the organism such as the heart, lungs, or brain. Organs that interact with each other closely to perform a certain function essential for the organism’s survival are called a system, such as the respiratory system, the nervous system, the immune system, and the reproduction system. Finally, the systems build up the whole multi-cellular organism. e origin of such a modular organization is a central topic in our attempts to understand life (we will see in the next section that even a single cell has a modular structure with dierent compo-nents responsible for fullling specic tasks). We return to this issue in the last chapter.
12    ◾    Biological Computation1.3.1  The Cell and Its Activitiese cell is the basic unit of life, both structurally and functionally. Its activities include the absorption of nutrients, energy production from the nutrients (and from the sun in photosynthetic cells such as plant cells), interaction with other cells, and reproduction. Many types of cells can perform more specic functions and react to external stimuli.e activity of cells is cyclical, following a procession called the cell cycle. e cycle begins when a new cell is created, progresses through liv-ing and growing, and concludes when the cell divides producing two new daughter cells. We will focus on the structure and functions of eukary-otic cells. Eukaryotic cells divide using a process called mitosis or using another process called meiosis, which produces the gametes that partici-pate in reproduction.As previously stated, eukaryotic cells contain a nucleus, which contains the cell’s genetic material. e cytoplasm, which surrounds the nucleus, is where most of the living processes of the cell not related directly to pro-cessing of the genetic material occur (see Figure 1.1).e bulk of genetic material is stored in molecules called DNA. e data encoded in the DNA is used by the cell to build proteins. Proteins are built up from sequences of smaller molecules called amino acids. To build a protein, the cell rst builds a chain of amino acids. e DNA codes both the identity and the order of the amino acids in the protein. Enzymes are an important group of proteins and are responsible for executing the cell’s RibosomesCell membraneNucleusMitochondriaChromatin (DNA)Nuclear envelopeFIGURE 1.1  e general structure of a eukaryotic cell.
Introduction and Biological Background    ◾    13activities by participating in chemical reactions. ey enable the cell’s activities by acting as catalysts, that is, by increasing the rate at which chemical reactions occur in the cell by reducing the amount of energy needed for the reaction. A fundamental property of catalysts is that their amount does not decrease due to the chemical reaction they enable, and therefore they can continue participating in further chemical reactions. It is oen the case that without a catalyst the rate of reaction is so low that the reaction is virtually nonexistent. As enzymes are organic catalysts, we say that they “perform” the cell’s activities.Chapter 5, which deals with molecular computation, shows how we can make use of biological molecules to implement computational processes. e computations involve, for example, the cutting and splicing of DNA molecules performed by various enzymes. As we will see, some enzymes perform general functions, while others are very specic in their activities and exist only in certain organisms.e cytoplasm contains organelles, which have a variety of func-tions. One of the most important organelles is the mitochondrion (plural mitochondria), which is the cell’s “power plant.” e mitochondrion is responsible for producing energy from sugars by using oxygen. It builds special molecules that are used as a source of chemical energy by the cell. In plant and algae cells there exists another important organelle called the chloroplast, which is responsible for photosynthesis. is is the process whereby CO2 and water combine into sugar molecules containing energy (e.g., glucose) by using solar energy. is process releases oxygen. Most of the animal kingdom ultimately depends on this process as a source of energy (eating sugars provides energy). Some bacteria also photosyn-thesize; however, they do not have chloroplasts, and their photosynthesis occurs directly in the cytoplasm.Another essential role of plants in the living world is that of nitrogen xation. Nitrogen is a building block of amino acids and is therefore necessary for building proteins. Atmospheric nitrogen is relatively inert and does not interact readily with other elements. ere are bacteria that x nitrogen, mainly by a symbiotic process with plants in which soil bacteria x nitrogen in the roots of plants. e plants synthesize amino acids, which are a source of nitrogen for organisms that feed on plants.Ribosomes are another important component of the cell. ey are responsible for creating proteins based on the genetic information. We will expand on this fundamental process later.
14    ◾    Biological Computatione cell is enclosed in a cell membrane, which is composed of many organic molecules, among them proteins and lipids (fats). e mem-brane is not just a sac containing the cytoplasm but is rather a com-plex structure that deals with the passive and active transfer of material to and from the cell and is involved in cell adhesion and intercellular communication.e cell’s cytoplasm contains other organelles that are responsible for digesting molecules in the environment, that complete the building of proteins aer they are synthesized by ribosomes, that deal with cellular division, and more. In the past the cytoplasm was considered to be a disor-ganized “soup” in which the organelles and other cellular molecules live, but today we know that it has a complex internal structure that deter-mines the location of the dierent organelles, the regions where cellular processes occur, and more. e internal skeleton of the cell is involved in cellular motion, material transfer in the cell, organelle motion, and even cell division, when the cell divides the cytoplasm and its contents are split between the two daughter cells. 1.3.2  The Structure of DNADNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) is a complex chain-like molecule. Its struc-ture was discovered by James Watson and Francis Crick in 1953 in a major breakthrough in understanding the heredity processes and life in general. We will focus on the properties that enable DNA to be used as data storage used to code for proteins and on the properties of DNA that enable its replication in cell division.DNA is composed of a long sequence of bases or nucleotides. e back-bone of the DNA molecule is formed by sugars and phosphates to which the bases are attached. ere are four types of bases: adenine (A); cytosine (C); guanine (G); and thymine (T). One of the major roles of DNA is to code for proteins. We will see later how the sequence of nucleotides deter-mines the sequence of the amino acids that constitute proteins.One of the rst discoveries about DNA was that in every species tested the amount of adenine was equal to the amount of thymine and that the amount of cytosine was equal to the amount of guanine. is is a conse-quence of the way DNA is organized, but it took a few more years until its exact structure was determined. e model suggested by Watson and Crick explains the equal amounts of adenine-thymine and cytosine-gua-nine to be the result of DNA molecules being made up of two side-by-side strands. Each strand is a sequence of nucleotides, and each nucleotide in 
Introduction and Biological Background    ◾    15one sequence matches (complements) a nucleotide in the opposite strand. is base pairing is such that an A in one strand matches a T in the other strand, and a C matches a G (Figure1.2). e two strands spiral around each other to form a structure called a double helix (Figure1.3). Each strand has a direction dictated by the orientation of its backbone, and the convention is that each strand runs from the 5' end (pronounced “ve prime end”) to the 3' end (Figure1.3).e base pairing is due to chemical bonds (hydrogen bonds) between the A and T bases and between the C and G bases. If we suspend two comple-mentary single DNA strands in a solution, they will anneal with each other due to the base pairing and will form a double-stranded DNA molecule.e exact DNA sequence of each organism is unique. Human DNA contains roughly three billion bases; therefore, the number of possible sequences is beyond imagination. e genetic dierences between dierent species such as humans, chimpanzees, mice, and the tetanus bacteria are characterized by the length of their DNA sequences and the order of their bases. Organisms of the same species also have unique DNA sequences, but the similarity between any two individuals of the same species is very AHHHHHHHHHCCCCCCNNNNNOCCOCCCCNNTG CHHHHNCCNCCCCCNNNCCCCNNOHHHHFIGURE 1.2  e structure of the nucleotides and their pairing.


===== [10/72] chapter-10.html =====

16    ◾    Biological Computationhigh (more than 99% for humans). Nonetheless, these small variations account for the huge variability we encounter.To summarize: 1. e order of nucleotides in the DNA molecule codes the genetic information stored in the molecule. 2. e two DNA strands match according to the base matching rule: A with T, C with G.1.3.3  The Genetic CodeAer discovering the structure of DNA, the next major challenge was to understand the genetic code, that is, to understand how the order of the bases determines the sequence of amino acids in proteins. e research undertaken to decipher the genetic code is a fascinating topic we cannot delve into here, but its main result was that the identity of each amino acid in a protein is determined by a sequence of three nucleotides in the DNA molecule. erefore, one has to read the DNA sequence as if it was made up of words, each of which contains three nucleotides. Each such word TCCTAAGGHHHHHHHHHHDiameter is 2 nmDistance between adjacentbase pairs is 0.34 nme helix makes a turnevery 3.4 nmBase pairing is the result of hydrogenbonding between A and T andbetween G and C.3'3'5'5'FIGURE 1.3  e double helix structure.
Introduction and Biological Background    ◾    17is called a codon. With minor exceptions, all living organisms use the same genetic code, and given a codon we can identify the corresponding amino acid. It is easy to see that there are 64 possible codons (4 × 4 × 4); as there are only 20 amino acids, most amino acids correspond to more than one codon. e mapping between codons and amino acids is called the genetic code and is shown in Figure1.4.e almost complete universality of the genetic code conrms its early origin in the history of life, which is to be expected. On the other hand, one may wonder why the genetic code did not continue to evolve and change in dierent families of organisms. A possible explanation is that charac-teristics necessary for survival are intolerant of change, and as a result the original characteristics are preserved and cannot change or improve even if they originated due to “historic accidents.” Arguing against this answer is that some organisms have developed a few variations on the genetic code and survived. For example, the mitochondria have their own genome that is dierent from the genome of the nucleus. e genetic code used by the mammalian mitochondrial genome deviates slightly from the standard genetic code. is leads to the hypothesis that the universality of the genetic code is not only because any change in it will be catastrophic GG TGG CGG AGGGGlyG A TG A CG A AG AGAspGluG T TG T CG T AG T GValG C TG C CG C AG C GAlaAG TAG CAG AAGGSerArgA A TA A CA A AA AGAsnLysA C TA C CA C AA C GA T TA T CA T AA T GIleMetC G TC G CC G AC G GArgC A TC A CC A AC A GHisGlnC T TC T CC T AC T GLeuC C TC C CC C AC C GProrSerT C TT C CT C AT C GT T TT T CT T AT T GPheLeuT A TT A CT A AT A GTyrStopStopT G TT G CT G AT G GCysTrpStopC GTTTCAGTCAGTCAGTCAGCAGAFirst Letterird LetterSecond LetterAla = AlanineArg = ArginineAsn = AsparagineAsp = AspartateCys = CysteineGln = GlutamineGlu = GlutamateGly = GlycineHis = HistidineIle = IsoleucineLeu = LeucineLys = LysineMet = MethioninePhe = PhenylalaninePro = ProlineSer = Seriner = reonineTrp = TryptophanTyr = TyrosineVal = ValineFIGURE 1.4  e genetic code and the names of the amino acids.
18    ◾    Biological Computationbut rather because the genetic code in its current form has evolutionary advantages. e jury is still out on this issue.Not all of the DNA sequence codes for proteins. A sequence of DNA nucleotides that codes for a specic protein is called a gene. We should note that an exact denition of the notion of gene has proven elusive, and the denition of the term has changed as more and more of the complexi-ties of the control mechanisms involved in producing proteins have been discovered. It is worth pointing out that the genes (i.e., the protein coding sequences) are distributed in the genetic material and in higher species constitute only a small fraction of the total genome. ere is a lot of active research on the functions of the rest of the genetic material. Sequences that used to be called junk DNA and were thought to be useless turn out to have roles in organizing the genome and determining which genes are expressed in the cells. It has been discovered in recent years that many RNA molecules are transcribed from DNA—the rst step in protein syn-thesis—but are not used to build proteins (protein synthesis is discussed in the next section). ese RNA molecules (called noncoding RNAs or ncRNAs) have many roles, and it is already clear from what we know about them that they have a major importance in the regulation of the genome.1.3.4  Protein Synthesis and Gene RegulationAs previously discussed, the DNA is a double helix containing two strands, and a protein is composed of a sequence of amino acids. When a DNA molecule is to be “read” so that it can be decoded and a protein can be synthesized, the helix is unwound, and the information is read from one of the strands. Here again the base pairing is essential. In the rst stage an RNA molecule called messenger RNA (abbreviated to mRNA) is created. RNA is similar to a single DNA strand—it also contains four types of nucleotides: adenine, cytosine, guanine, and, instead of thymine found in DNA, uracil (U), which pairs adenine. We will ignore the chemical dierences between mRNA and single-stranded DNA.To create an mRNA molecule the double helix of DNA is opened at a certain point, and an RNA molecule is built on one of the separated strands using base pairing. is transcription process is aided by enzymes called RNA polymerases (the process is schematically described in Figure 1.5). It is interesting to note that the transcription can happen on either of the DNA strands, and it is erroneous to think that one strand contains the genetic data and the other strand only complements it. In fact, both 
Introduction and Biological Background    ◾    19strands contain protein building instructions in dierent locations in the genome. e mRNA transcription process starts at a region called a promoter, which marks the beginning of the gene and terminates at a sequence used as the termination signal. e promoter is in front of the transcribed region but is not always directly adjacent to it.In eukaryotes mRNA transcription happens in the nucleus. Aer the mRNA is formed, it leaves the nucleus, and protein synthesis can start. e process whereby the information stored in the RNA mol-ecule is converted into a sequence of amino acids is called translation and is performed by a cellular complex or machine called a ribosome. e ribosome reads the RNA molecule codon by codon (recall that a codon is a sequence of three nucleotides). e mapping of codons to amino acids is represented in the cell by another kind of RNA, known as transfer RNA (tRNA). A tRNA molecule is attached at one end to a specic amino acid and at its other end to an anticodon—three bases that are complementary to a codon. When a ribosome is to deal with a particular mRNA codon, the appropriate tRNA molecule attaches to it using base pairing with the anticodon, and the amino acid is detached from the tRNA and attached to the growing sequence of amino acids that will make up the protein. Now the ribosome moves on to the next UUCCCAAUU UGGTAATAUGGCGCGTATACGCGCGAATTT TGGG AGTTAAAACCCTCNewly made RNATemplate strandof DNARNA nucleotidesNon-templatestrand of DNAFIGURE 1.5  e transcription process.
20    ◾    Biological ComputationmRNA codon and so on until the ribosome reaches the stop codon. Stop codons do not have corresponding tRNA molecules. e stop codon means that the sequence of amino acids is complete and that the corresponding protein has been synthesized in its entirety. Since protein production is crucial to cells, many thousands of ribosomes in each cell are constantly synthesizing proteins.Proteins are chain-like linear (nonbranching) sequences of amino acids. Each amino acid (see schematic structure in Figure1.6(a)) has a part called the backbone, which is virtually identical for all amino acids and a part called side chain (denoted here by R), which is dierent in each of the 20 amino acids and gives each amino acid its special characteristics. Proteins are the machinery that operates the cell, and therefore most proteins have a unique three-dimensional structure that allows them to perform their function. e linear chain of amino acids folds and twists according to chemical and physical laws aer the protein has been synthesized (a sche-matic structure of a protein can be seen in Figure1.6(b)). In some cases other proteins are involved in achieving the three-dimensional struc-ture necessary for the protein to function. Some proteins consist of more than one linear chain of amino acids that combine to create the complete protein.e three-dimensional structure determines the protein’s behavior in the cell as proteins interact with each other and with other cellular mate-rial according to their physical shape. For example, hemoglobin, which (a) (b)HHHHOCCORNFIGURE 1.6  (a) A schematic structure of a single amino acid where R represents the side chain that is dierent for each of the 20 amino acids. (b) A schematic structure of a protein that is a folded linear chain of amino acids. e ribbon represents the backbone of the amino acid chain with the various amino acids branching from the backbone. (e protein is polymerase β consisting of 355 amino acids.)


===== [11/72] chapter-11.html =====

Introduction and Biological Background    ◾    21carries oxygen in the bloodstream to the muscles, has four cavities that can be loaded with heme, an iron compound that can bind to oxygen.Researchers distinguish between several levels in the organization of proteins. e rst, called the primary structure, refers to the sequence of amino acids. e secondary structure describes local structures along the amino acid sequence such as dierent kinds of helices, extended strands that combine to create sheets, turns, and loops. ese structures are maintained by a network of chemical bonds (hydrogen bonds) between neighboring amino acids. e three-dimensional structure of a protein is referred to as its tertiary structure and describes the three-dimensional location of each atom in the protein.Determining the tertiary structure of proteins can provide important clues about how they perform their function. Protein structure can be determined using experimental methods such as crystallography using x-rays and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). Finding the three-dimen-sional structure of proteins is an expensive and complex undertaking, and the exact structure of only a relatively small fraction of proteins is known. As the tertiary structure is derived from the amino acids sequence, an ongoing eort exists to build computational tools that will predict the spa-tial structure for a given sequence. Although in recent years signicant progress has been achieved in several aspects of the problem, by and large the current tools have only limited success in predicting the three-dimen-sional structure of proteins.To summarize, in the simplest case protein synthesis consists of the following steps. An mRNA molecule is transcribed from the DNA mol-ecule, and the information stored in the mRNA molecule determines the sequence of amino acids in the synthesized protein (translation). e uni-directional information transfer DNA → mRNA → proteins is called the central dogma of molecular biology.As research progressed it became obvious that the central dogma does not cover all possible variations and processes. For example, the genetic material of retroviruses (e.g., HIV) is stored in RNA and the virus injects itself into the genome of the host cell. is RNA → DNA process is called reverse transcription.One of the central research topics today is that of understanding the processes that determine which genes will be expressed in the cell (i.e., will be translated into proteins) and at what point in time. Gene regula-tion requires dierent levels of control. At the most basic level, the DNA molecule contains regulatory regions called promoters, which are usually 
22    ◾    Biological Computationclose to the DNA region that codes for a protein. Recall that, for a gene to be expressed, RNA polymerase has to transcribe it to an mRNA molecule. e promoter allows the RNA polymerase to home in on the correct loca-tion in the DNA. In eukaryotes, proteins called transcription factors are attached to the promoters and are responsible for attaching to the RNA polymerase. us, the protein will not be expressed if the promoter is inaccessible (e.g., due to a fold in the DNA). As dierent cells express dif-ferent proteins, we nd that dierent promoters are “active” in dierent cells, and by experimentally attaching a gene to a particular promoter one can cause it to be expressed in certain cells (e.g., in muscle cells or in nerve cells). Cellular regulatory processes are of course much more complicated and are dierent for bacteria and eukaryotes.One of the rst regulatory structures to be understood was that of the operon in bacteria in which a few consecutive genes are jointly reg-ulated (Figure1.7). In addition to the promoter the operon contains another DNA sequence before the gene or genes, called the operator. Proteins, called repressors, inuence gene expression by attaching to Promoter Operator lacZ lacY lacAlacZ lacY lacALac repressor(active)RNA polymerase cannotbind to promoterTranscription repressedLactose sugarbinding sitelacZ lacY lacAInactivatedrepressorTranscription allowede inducer(Lactose)FIGURE 1.7  A schematic structure of the lac operon which controls the metabo-lism of the sugar lactose depending on the presence of glucose. ree genes lacZ, lacY and lacA are under joint control. e lac repressor is attached to the operator region and thus prevents the RNA polymerase from initiating transcription from the promoter. Once a sugar is bound to the repressor it cannot attach to the DNA and the polymerase can bind to the promoter and transcription is initiated.
Introduction and Biological Background    ◾    23the operator and thereby preventing or reducing the transcription rate. Repressors work in two major ways. In one mechanism the repressor is constitutively bound to the DNA and prevents transcription. When an inducer molecule is present in the cell it attaches to the repressor molecule, changes its conformation, and prevents it from attaching to the operator and thus enables transcription. In another mechanism, the repressor is not regularly bound to the operon sequence. e repressor protein may exist in the cell but may not be able to attach to the opera-tor unless another molecule is attached to it and changes its conforma-tion. When this happens the repressor can attach to the operator and block transcription. In both mechanisms repressors implement negative control, or inhibition, on gene expression. Other mechanisms imple-ment positive control in which molecules called activators strengthen the anity of the transcription machinery to its target DNA and thus increase the transcription rate of a gene or set of genes. Additional regu-latory mechanisms operate on the mRNA and even at the protein level.1.3.5  Reproduction and HeredityOne of the main characteristics of the living world is reproduction, a pro-cess whereby parents create ospring and pass their characteristics on to them. e information transfer from parent to ospring is called inheri-tance. Inheritance exists already at the single-cell level as previously noted: a cell can divide and generate two new cells. An important component of inheritance is the passing on of genetic material in the DNA.e term genotype is used to describe the heritable (or genetic) infor-mation, and phenotype is used to describe the physical characteristics and behaviors of the organism (which, of course, change over time). Generally speaking, the phenotype is derived from the genotype under the envi-ronmental conditions the organism encounters during development. It is common to assume that changes to the phenotype (e.g., breaking a leg, getting the u) do not change the genotype and are not passed on to sub-sequent generations (we expand on this issue in Chapter 3). Genetics is the biological eld dealing with inheritance.Recall that the genetic information (the genotype) is stored as DNA molecules. In eukaryotes the information is distributed among a few DNA molecules. A DNA molecule together with a few attached protein molecules form a unit called a chromosome. e cells of most species contain several chromosomes. e number of chromosomes is the same in all the cells of a multicellular organism, except for the gametes.
24    ◾    Biological ComputationCells go through a number of stages that occur in a xed order; this constitutes the cell cycle. e cycle starts with the formation of a new cell and ends when the cell divides, and each of its descendents starts its own life cycle. e last phase of the life cycle—mitosis—is the phase where the cell actually divides. We rst focus on the previous phase, in which the DNA is replicated and the chromosomes get duplicated, known as the replication phase.e structure of the DNA molecule as previously discussed lends itself to the possibility of duplicating the genetic information. Just as the syn-thesis of an mRNA molecule uses one of the DNA strands as a template, a new DNA strand can be created from a previous one by base pairing. To generate a double stranded copy of the DNA molecule, the two original strands separate, a complementary strand is created from each of them, two new double helixes are formed, and cell division can proceed. is process involves many enzymes, of course. Among those are DNA poly-merases, which synthesize DNA fragments, and DNA ligases, which join together the DNA fragments. Errors in replication are one source of muta-tions, random changes in the genetic information.Not all species reproduce by the mating of male and female individuals. Some species of plants, aphids, and other organisms can reproduce asexu-ally in a process whereby a single parent passes a copy of its complete genome to its descendents, similar to the way a single cell divides. Ignoring mutations, these descendents have genetic information that is identical to that of their parent. e situation is more complex in sexual reproduction. e genes in the cells of organisms that undergo sexual reproduction are organized in pairs, where usually one comes from the father and the other from the mother. We have already noted that dierent individuals may have dierent versions of the same gene. A peculiar example is the texture and color of earwax. Two types of earwax in humans are controlled by a single gene (called ATP-binding cassette C11). One version of the gene gives rise to an individual having brown-yellow wet earwax (the form that predominates in Africa and Europe), whereas another leads to gray dry earwax (common among East Asians). e dierent versions of one gene are called alleles. As the two genes in each pair originate in dierent par-ents, they may be dierent alleles. In other words, in sexual reproduction new combinations of alleles are created, giving rise to diverse individuals, and the ospring in a sexually reproducing population will be dierent from their parents. e dierences between the individuals are the raw material for the evolutionary process discussed in Chapter 3.
Introduction and Biological Background    ◾    25We now briey discuss the cellular basis of sexual reproduction. e cells of organisms that reproduce sexually contain pairs of chromosomes, where one chromosome originates in the father and the other in the mother. ese cells are called diploid, and the number of chromosomes in them is denoted by 2n. Both chromosomes in a pair are of the same length and have genes for the same characters. ey are called homologous chromo-somes. Human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes (n = 23) and there-fore contain 46 chromosomes.A noteworthy pair of human chromosomes is the sex chromosomes. ey come in two forms, the X chromosome and the Y chromosome, which have dierent lengths. In females the genotype is XX (i.e., each cell contains two X chromosomes), whereas the male genotype is XY. As males can inherit the Y chromosome only from their father, one can use genetic markers on the Y chromosome to test for paternity and to establish pater-nal lineage.An obvious question arising from this discussion is what impact does the dierence between alleles in homologous pairs have on a phenotype? e answer is complex and diers from situation to situation. For some properties it suces to receive the corresponding allele from one of the parents (an allele having this property is considered to be dominant), while other properties require getting the appropriate allele from both parents (recessive alleles). Returning to the previous illustration, it turns out, for example, that the wet earwax allele is dominant over the dry one.As a diploid cell contains 2n chromosomes, it would seem that the descendant’s cells, receiving the chromosomes of both parents, will con-tain 4n chromosomes, and the number of chromosomes will double from one generation to the next. is runaway process does not happen as the genetic information is passed on by specialized cells called gametes (in mammals, an egg or a sperm). ese are created by a special division pro-cess called meiosis or reductional division and contain only one chro-mosome from each pair. ese cells are called haploid, and the number of chromosomes in them is denoted by n. is allows the descendants to have diploid cells, where each homologous chromosome pair contains one chromosome from each parent.From the current perspective one essential element of meiosis is of par-ticular interest: the mixing of information between the homologous chro-mosomes. is process is called crossover and happens by a pairing up of the homologous chromosomes and exchange of corresponding sections of DNA. e location of the exchange sites is random to a large extent.


===== [12/72] chapter-12.html =====

26    ◾    Biological ComputationIf each gene had only one possible molecular form (i.e., a single pos-sible allele), the crossover would have no eect. But as many genes have dierent alleles, the chromosomes in a homologous pair are not identical; therefore, the crossover process gives rise to new combinations of alleles, producing descendants that have dierent properties.Aer the crossover the cells are still diploid, but their chromosomes are a new combination of alleles. e reduction in the number of chro-mosomes happens during meiosis when the cell divides into two haploid cells, each of which contains only one copy of the genetic informa-tion that has already undergone crossing over. (In reality, this process is more complex. Before the reductional division the genetic informa-tion is duplicated. us, meiosis can be described schematically as 2n → 4n (duplication) → crossover → 4 haploid cells.) Moreover, note that the haploid cells contain one chromosome chosen randomly from each pair of homologous chromosomes, which have already been recombined using the crossover process. In humans this allows for more than 8 mil-lion (223) possible combinations of 23 chromosomes.e last stage of sexual reproduction is fertilization, when a male gam-ete and a female gamete combine to create a new diploid cell. So in humans the 23 chromosomes from the father combine with the 23 chromosomes from the mother to create 23 homologous pairs of chromosomes. is process again increases variation as two random gametes, picked from the many gametes available to each parent, participate in the fertilization.To summarize, sexual reproduction increases variation in the popula-tion via several mechanisms: 1. Random crossover. 2. Random selection of one chromosome from each homologous pair. 3. Random selection of the gametes that will undergo fertilization.In Chapter 3 we will see how it is possible to mimic these various mechanisms to solve search problems, in which a solution to a problem is sought from a large space of candidate solutions.1.4  MODELS AND SIMULATIONSWe mentioned at the beginning of this chapter that using concepts from the biological sciences in computer science can be viewed as “translating” biological phenomena into formal mathematical models. e translations 
Introduction and Biological Background    ◾    27we will deal with in this book are not exact translations but rather the usage of certain elements of the biological phenomena as an inspiration for computational and mathematical ideas.A mathematical model of a system describes the behavior of the sys-tem using mathematical tools such as variables, equations, functions, and rules. Historically, it was common to separate models to two types: models described using dierential equations that were used to explain continuous deterministic systems and models dened by sets of rules suitable for describing discrete systems that may be nondeterministic. e rst type of model might be appropriate for modeling the ow of blood in the circulatory system by a set of equations, whereas models of the second type might be more appropriate for modeling the immune system. In recent years, however, many models are hybrids that combine both techniques.Many disciplines use mathematical models. ey are particularly prev-alent in the natural sciences, but mathematical models are also used heav-ily in social sciences such as economics and sociology. A model focuses on the properties of the system to be studied and describes them formally and exactly. Ideally, this allows for a formal and exact analysis of the system, or at least for gaining a better understanding of the system and its behav-ior. Models can also be used for predicting the behavior of the system, even when the reasons for the behavior are not well understood. is may help when trying to intervene with a system in order to change its behav-ior. A case in point is ecological models that can predict the outcome of introducing a new species into an environmental niche and the complex dynamics that might ensue.Aer a system is described as a model, it can be handled in two ways: 1. Finding analytical solutions of the model: is approach is appro-priate when the model is described by equations or functions that are amendable to analytic analysis. 2. Simulating the behavior of the system: is is useful when the sys-tem is described by a set of rules that are not necessarily determin-istic or by equations that cannot be solved analytically. Simulations do not analyze the system mathematically but rather use a math-ematical description of the system to simulate its behavior, usually with the aid of computer programs. e simulation calculates the 
28    ◾    Biological Computationchanges in the variables describing the system according to the rules specied by the model. is is usually done iteratively as a step-by-step process.When building a model the most important decisions are identifying the variables that characterize the system and its behavior. e model is usually a simplied representation of the system which is tractable; for this purpose, only the properties necessary for describing the particular behavior being studied should be represented in the model.Here are a couple of examples of models arising in dierent elds:• Consumer behavior: A simple model of consumer behavior stipu-lates that the consumer has to choose among n products denoted 1, 2, …, n whose prices are p1, p2, …, pn respectively. e consumer is rep-resented by a utility function U, which determines the consumer’s satisfaction and is a function of the quantities of each of the items the consumer buys. e larger the value of U the more satised the consumer is. Note that the function U reects the particularities of an individual consumer, who might, for example, be an individual who feels the highest satisfaction when owning a small number of necessary worldly goods or a greedy individual who wants the high-est quantity of each product he can aord. Each consumer has a bud-get M, which is used to buy the products. e goal of the consumer is modeled as an optimization problem, where U is to be maximized under the constraint that the money spent cannot surpass M.• Growth of a bacteria colony: e next chapter presents a simple mathematical model of the growth of a bacteria colony in the lab. at model does not attempt to be completely precise biologically. e reproduction law we will describe states that the colony grows at a rate proportional to the colony’s size at every point in time. If we denote the number of bacteria at time t as y(t), we can derive a simple dierential equation that describes the exact behavior of the func-tion y(t). (e solution to such an equation is described in the next chapter.) is function allows us to calculate the size of the bacteria colony without having to resort to simulations. Note that this model is oversimplied and ignores many parameters such as the inuence of the amount of available nutrients on the colony’s size, the inu-
Introduction and Biological Background    ◾    29ence of its density on its growth rate, the minimal amount of time needed for bacterial reproduction, and more.• L-systems, or Lindenmayer systems, are a mathematical formal-ism based on term rewriting proposed by the biologist Aristid Lindenmayer for modeling the growth and development of plants. More recently, L-systems have found several applications in com-puter graphics. An L-system is specied by a set of rewrite rules of the form X → Y, meaning that every occurrence of the symbol X is replaced with the string Y. e rules of the L-system grammar are applied iteratively starting from an initial state. As many rules as possible are applied simultaneously, per iteration. For example, start-ing with the string A and the rules A → AB, B → A, the resulting strings are AB, ABA, ABAAB, ABAABABA and so on (keep in mind that all possible replacements are done simultaneously, so each time the rules are applied the result is a new string that will be the seed of the next iteration). When the strings produced by L-systems are interpreted as graphic commands they can be used to produce strik-ing fractal images, some of them reminiscent of biological patterns. For example, starting with the string F the system composed of the rule F → F + F − F − F + F, produces the strings F, F + F – F – F + F, F + F – F – F + F + F + F – F – F + F – F + F – F – F + F – F + F – F – F + F + F + F – F – F + F, and so on. If F is interpreted as the instruction “draw forward” and + and – as a turn of 90° le or right, respectively, the strings can be executed and result in drawings of a variant of the Koch snowake (see Figure1.8). By adding more symbols, it is possible to model more complex patterns, for example, patterns of branching growth.Generation 1: Generation 2: Generation 3:etc.FIGURE 1.8  e rst three generations in the evolution of the Koch snowake.
30    ◾    Biological Computation e L-system starting with the symbol X and the rules X → F – [[X] + X] + F[+FX] – X, F → FF leads to complicated tree structures. e strings are interpreted as before, with + and – specifying turns of 25°. e symbols [ and ] are the magic behind the branching structure. When executing the string, [ is interpreted as a command to store the current position and angle on a stack, and ] is a command to return to the position and angle of the last push. Finally, note that the symbol X does not aect the drawing. When the string is inter-preted as drawing instructions, we can simply ignore the X’s. eir role in the string is to serve as placeholders, allowing the L-system to keep track of the structure of the curve. Figure1.9 shows the rst two iterations of this L-system.ese examples of models demonstrate how assumptions about the behavior of a given system are used to build a model and how they are formalized during that process. Sometimes these assumptions will allow only a single outcome, whereas in other cases the hypotheses allow for a family of common behaviors, all of which adhere to the constraints of the model. e model allows us to analyze the system and come up with hypotheses that are used to further investigate the system, either by test-ing them on the model (e.g., using additional simulations) or by studying the system directly, back in the lab or in the eld. e crucial question of course is whether the model gives a faithful representation of the system. is is a complex question for a number of reasons. First, the model sim-plies the system and therefore may not allow for a direct comparison of its variables with the parameters and data that can be measured directly from the system. Also, when building the model we neglect many of the system’s components, and therefore, even if it behaves in a similar fashion to that of the system, it is unclear whether the neglected components are FIGURE 1.9  A simulation of plant growth by an L-system.


===== [13/72] chapter-13.html =====

Introduction and Biological Background    ◾    31crucial for understanding the behavior of the real system. Furthermore, the model may behave accurately in some cases and deviate from the sys-tem’s behavior in other circumstances, say when the initial conditions are varied. ese and other questions all have to be considered when building a formal model that attempts to describe a natural system.An important point to consider is whether the fact that a model pres-ents a behavior matching the behavior of the system it models provides an explanation of that behavior. If our goal is to understand the causes of a particular behavior, a simple simulation will not necessarily suce. On the other hand, if we aim to nd the minimal requirements needed for a system to present a particular behavior, a model may present a satisfactory answer and be considered explanatory. In Chapter 4, dealing with neural networks, we will see that it is easy to build models that present useful and complex behaviors, even though gaining an insight into how the system achieves these goals can be extremely dicult. ese models act as black boxes: we dene the initial conditions and the rules of behavior and allow the system to self-organize accordingly, thereby oen losing the ability to analyze the role of each component in the system, or at least making this task very dicult.e use of formal mathematical tools to build faithful models of bio-logical phenomena is outside the scope of this book. at eld is called theoretical biology or systems biology and makes use of a wide range of mathematical and computational tools (systems biology is discussed briey in Chapter 6). It is interesting to note that experimental biologists also take advantage of a completely dierent kind of models: they perform research on species called model organisms, which are easy to use in the lab, in an eort to understand processes also occurring in other species or even across the living world. Oen used model organisms are yeasts: particularly the baking yeast (which is a single-cell eukaryote); the micro-scopic roundworm C. elegans, for which the developmental trajectory of each of its 1031 cells has been worked out to amazing detail; the fruit y Drosophila, which has easily observable chromosomes and was used in groundbreaking work in genetics; and mice, which as mammals are closer to humans. Model organisms for plants include Arabidopsis and tobacco, which have relatively simple genomes, and maize (corn), whose separate kernels allow for easy observation of the eect of genetic changes on the development of the organism.is book focuses on attempts to use biological knowledge to develop new methods for solving problems using computers. Clearly, we will need 
32    ◾    Biological Computationto choose some minimal characteristics of the biological systems that can be used for this purpose. For example, we will see in Chapter 4 how to build a computer system that is capable of independent learning, thereby eliminating the need to reprogram it to solve new problems. In Chapter 3 we will harness some basic insights into the evolutionary process to create computer programs that solve dicult optimization problems (i.e., prob-lems of nding a maximal value of a multivariable function that is not dif-ferentiable or does not have a simple formal description) by generating a collection of possible solutions and applying evolutionary like processes to promote the best ones. e main consideration in building such models is their usefulness as computational tools and not necessarily their precision as descriptions of biological systems or processes. is is the reason this eld is oen referred to as biologically inspired computing.Building and using such models allows us to develop an intuition about biological processes, even though the biological systems are much more complex, contain many interacting mechanisms, and behave in diverse ways in dierent species under dierent conditions. is is apparent even when looking at the previously described biological systems. e general under-standing of the biological systems that is the starting point of the techniques we describe does not necessarily match the real behavior of the biological processes, nor is our goal to achieve a better understanding of the biological behavior. Having said that, using the models may help us in understanding general biological principles rather than specic processes. In the next chap-ter we will see how mathematicians and computer scientists attempted to construct models that explain the amazing ability of living things to self-rep-licate, that is, to generate ospring similar or identical to themselves. ese researchers were trying to understand which requirements are necessary to build a self-replicating system and were not attempting to understand how self-replication occurs in nature. Surprisingly, aer the discovery of DNA and its behavior it turned out that the abstract model studied by theoreticians was similar in fundamental respects to what happens in living cells.We have stated already that other computational tools, not inspired by biology, make use of the basic principles discussed in this book. ese principles include self-organization, local interactions between compo-nents, asynchronicity, redundancy, use of noise, and nondeterministic and parallel and distributed systems. e reader who studies the models we describe in this book and the ways to analyze, implement, and test them (e.g., varying parameters and determining their inuence, attempts to combine dierent models, analyzing the models’ fault tolerance) will 
Introduction and Biological Background    ◾    33gain important insights and intuition about the relative merits of these principles that are also used in the development of large soware systems not necessarily based on biological models.In Chapter 5 we will discuss the usage of biological molecules (DNA and proteins) to perform computations. is obviously does not involve modeling a biological system but can be rather seen as the opposite—using biological molecules to model the computational process.1.5  SUMMARYe chapters ahead discuss several paradigmatic computational models and techniques that were inspired by observing the living world or by bio-logical knowledge. In each chapter we try to give the relevant biological background and intuition and to present the fundamental aspects of the computational approaches we discuss. We do not assume any prior bio-logical knowledge, and each chapter is self-contained.In Chapters 2–5 we describe topics that by now are considered well estab-lished and form the core of the emerging eld of biological computation. In the concluding chapter, Chapter 6, we provide a survey of additional topics like swarm intelligence, articial immune systems, articial life, formal lan-guages to describe biological systems, and system biology. ese approaches interact with the approaches described in the previous chapters and expand on them and show which directions this eld may develop in the future.e techniques discussed in Chapters 2 through 4 and in Chapter 6 can be applied immediately to solving practical problems, whereas at the moment the notion of molecular computing discussed in Chapter 5 is of less immedi-ate use to programmers. All the models discussed, however, provide insight about biology, about the nature of computation, and about how the two elds relate to each other.Each of the techniques we discuss exists in many varieties and can be extended in various ways for dierent purposes. Each chapter includes ref-erences to further reading, and the nal chapter includes a list of recom-mended books. We hope that, aer studying the material presented in this book, the interested reader will be well prepared to independently explore the wealth of useful and related material available online.Our goal in each chapter is to present the fundamental concepts behind the techniques and examples of types of applications for which it may be relevant. We hint at some of the directions in which each technique may be modied, oen via the exercises that appear at the end of each chapter. We intentionally refrain from presenting most of the material formally 
34    ◾    Biological Computationin order for the text to be accessible and readable. Several fundamental theorems, however, are presented formally along with a proof or a sketch explaining how the proof of the theorem is constructed.e techniques presented in the following chapters are powerful and easy to implement, and many free implementations (in both senses of the term) exist online. We encourage readers to “play along” and experiment.Enjoy the ride!1.6  FURTHER READINGe following introductory textbooks in biology can be used to supple-ment the short introduction to biology we present in this chapter.Campbell, Neil and Jane B. Reece. 2009. Biology, 8th ed. San Francisco: Pearson Benjamin Cummings.Solomon, Eldra, Linda Berg, and Diana W. Martin. 2007. Biology, 8th ed. Florence, KY: omson Brooks/Cole.Starr, Cecie, Ralph Taggart, Christine Evers, and Lisa Starr. 2008. Biology: e Unity and Diversity of Life, 12th ed. Florence, KY: omson Brooks/Cole. 1.7  EXERCISESExercises with solutions are marked with bold numbers.1.7.1  Biological Computation 1. When building a system one tries to avoid the existence of single points of failure, a failure which will cause the system to crash. Use this notion to discuss why the control mechanisms of the non-standard computational models (as summarized in Table1.1) may account for the systems’ robustness. 2. Try to use your answer to the previous question to discuss how self-organization can contribute to robustness. What are the dangers in relying on such a mechanism? 3. Discuss which of the properties of nonstandard computation enu-merated in Table1.1 will make standard programming techniques more dicult. Consider all the stages of building soware systems: analysis, design, programming, testing, and maintenance.
Introduction and Biological Background    ◾    351.7.2  History 4. Which of the following constitute positive feedback and which con-stitute negative feedback? a. Feeling cold, the body reacts by shivering designed to raise its temperature. b. Global warming causes the glaciers to melt. As glaciers reect a lot of sunlight, their existence reduces warming. c. Fat cells secrete the hormone leptin. When the amount of fat decreases, less leptin is secreted, and that causes brain cells to send hunger signals. Cells in the gastrointestinal tract can deter-mine how much food has been consumed and can signal other brain cells to stop the eating. e newly replenished fat cells resume the leptin secretion, and the feeling of hunger passes.1.7.3  Biological Introduction 5. How many bits are needed to code the information contained in a single nucleotide? 6. Does the double-stranded DNA molecule contain more information than each of the separate strands? 7. Some regions of DNA contain repeating long sequences of the nucle-otides AT (i.e., regions of the form ATATAT). Explain why these sequences are believed to have a role dierent from that of storing genetic information. 8. Try to come up with biological reasons that could explain why the genetic code is not a one-to-one mapping (i.e., why there are multiple codons that code the same amino acid). Does your hypothesis lead to any predictions that can be tested either by examining the genetic code or experimentally? 9. Where is the genetic code stored? Try to gure out how the genetic code becomes expressed in the cell. 10. We have noted in Section 1.3 that it is believed that a change in a phenotype does not imply a corresponding change in the genotype. How is this assumption manifested in the formula “DNA → RNA → protein” (the central dogma of molecular biology)?


===== [14/72] chapter-14.html =====

36    ◾    Biological Computation 11. In the following table, match the items in column A (biological terms) with items in column B (computational terms). Note that not all terms need necessarily be matched, and more than one term can be matched to some of the items.Column A Column BDNA HardwareProtein SowareEnzyme Programming languageGenetic code CompilerRibosome Machine language How successful is the analogy between the two domains? 12. Assume eye color has two possible alleles: A for brown eyes; and a for blue eyes. An individual with the alleles A and a (denoted by Aa) will have brown eyes (i.e., a does not aect the eye color in this case). We say that in this situation A is dominant relative to a, and a is recessive relative to A. Assume two parents are both Aa. Every child will get one gene from each parent (A or a) with probability of one half. Calculate the probability of each possible genotype for the descendents and the probability of each phenotype (i.e., eye color). 13. Assume the gene for leaf color has two possible alleles: A for red leaves; and a for white leaves. An individual with both the A and a alleles (denoted as Aa) has pink leaves (which is the combination of red and white). Assume two parents are both Aa. Every child will get one gene from each parent (A or a) with probability one half. Calculate the probability of each possible genotype for the descen-dents and the probability of each phenotype (i.e., leaf color). 14. We discussed two processes that use DNA as a template for creating a new molecule: creating mRNA and creating new DNA. In both pro-cesses, errors can occur, as is expected in any chemical process. e cell deals with such errors by having error correction mechanisms. a. In which of the two processes are errors more critical? What hypothesis can you deduce from this regarding the error correc-tion mechanisms?
Introduction and Biological Background    ◾    37 b. Most proteins are generated in the cell in many copies and thus are transcribed again and again. Does this change your previous answer? 15. We have discussed the fact that most cells in multicellular organ-isms, except for the gametes and a few types of specialized cells, con-tain the same genetic information. Cells go through a specialization process and have dierent roles. Discuss how regulatory mechanisms could be employed toward this end and how regulation has to inte-grate with cell division.1.7.4  Models and Simulations 16. You may have encountered queueing theory in the past (e.g., in a computer networks course). Which of the types of models we discussed is most similar to the models of queueing theory? How does queueing theory allow for analytical solutions, despite the fact that the models are based on random behavior (i.e., they are probabilistic models)? 17. You may have encountered game theory in the past. Which of the models we discussed is most similar to the models of game theory?1.8  ANSWERS TO SELECTED EXERCISES 2. If the programmer foresaw the possibility of a particular fault that can crash the system and determined how to deal with it, the system may be able to recover from it. Alternatively, a self-organizing system may be able to recover from many kinds of faults. e more complex the system and its possible set of problems, the odds of planning for all faults in advance decreases, and therefore self-organizing capabilities may become more important. is gives rise to the danger of the sys-tem recovering (self-organizing) in an inappropriate way. e best way of dealing with this is testing how the system reacts to an array of prob-lems and adjusting the system if it reacts inappropriately to problems. 4. a. Negative feedback: shivering raises the body’s temperature, which decreases the feeling of cold, which causes the shivering to stop and the system to revert to its initial state.
38    ◾    Biological Computation b. Positive feedback: the glacier melting reduces the solar reection, and therefore Earth’s temperature rises. is causes more gla-ciers to melt, and the warming trend increases. 7. Easily compressible data cannot contain much information (as the same data can be represented in a more concise fashion). e more compressible the data, the less information it carries. A long repeat-ing sequence can be easily compressed (“repeat AT 200,000 times”). erefore, it would seem that repeat sequences contain very little information. If such sequences exist and do not disappear during the course of evolution (see Chapter 3), it might suggest that they have a role other than that of storing information (e.g., a structural role). 9. e genetic code is stored by the set of tRNA molecules in the cell—molecules whose one end presents an anticodon and whose other end is linked to the appropriate amino acid. e tRNA molecules are coded for in the DNA of the cell. Loading the tRNA molecules with the appropriate amino acid for the anticodon is the function of specic enzymes called tRNA synthetases, which themselves are coded for by DNA genes, of course. Try to gure out how the genes involved in this process can themselves become expressed: how does the process get started?


===== [15/72] chapter-15.html =====

39C h a p t e r 2Cellular AutomataC  (CA)  proposed in the 1950s by the famous mathematician John von Neumann as a model for studying the abil-ity of organisms to self-replicate. Since then, the CA model has been used to describe many phenomena in diverse research areas. Some of these areas are biological and include models for the spreading of diseases and the behavior of bacteria colonies (see Section 2.1), but CA are also used in nonbiological elds, for instance for creating physical simulations. CA can be enjoyed as purely recreational mathematics, but we will use this model to discuss deep topics in biological computation.2.1  BIOLOGICAL BACKGROUND2.1.1  Bacteria Basicse vast majority of living organisms are the prokaryotes of which there are two types, Bacteria and Archaea. e prokaryotes are char-acterized by the absence of a nuclear membrane and consequently the noncompartmentalized nature of their single cell. All organisms syn-thesize proteins on molecular complexes called ribosomes, and there-fore the need to accommodate a large number of these relatively large molecular machines means that the minimum size of autonomous organisms is generally a few hundred nanometers (1 nm = 10–9 of a meter) across; however, they can be as small as 200 nm in diameter. Figure2.1(a) shows an electron microscope image of a colony of the Vibrio cholerae bacteria, which infect the digestive system; a schematic description of bacteria’s structure is given in Figure2.1(b).
40    ◾    Biological ComputationBacteria exhibit an amazing range of sizes, metabolic capacities, and life-styles, with the largest characterized representative exceeding 500 microm-eters (1 µm = 10–6 of a meter) in diameter. is remarkable bacterial diversity not only is fascinating for bacteriologists but also is crucial to the contin-ued existence of our world. For example, various species of bacteria release oxygen into the atmosphere, whereas others, living inside the human body, inuence the delicate balance between health and disease.e most notorious property of bacteria is their capacity to reproduce rapidly. In a rich medium (containing sugars and amino acids), the o-studied Escherichia coli divides every 20 minutes to produce 72 generations per day. Such growth, if le unchecked, would generate a mass of bacteria equal to the mass of the earth in two days. In general, bacterial growth involves replication of genetic material followed by binary ssion into two identical daughter cells, each containing one copy of the genome.2.1.2  Genetic Inheritance—Downward and SidewaysIn contrast to the linear chromosomes of eukaryotes, the essential com-ponent of a bacterial genome is typically a single, closed circle of dou-ble-stranded DNA, 4–5 megabases (Mb) long, called the bacterial chromosome, which is compacted inside the cell to form a structure called a nucleoid. In addition, the genomes of some bacteria also contain smaller circles of double-stranded DNA, known as plasmids, which range in size from 1000 bases to several megabases. Essential bacterial genes, those required for growth and reproduction, are generally encoded within the chromosome, whereas genes needed only under exceptional conditions are encoded within a plasmid. For example, genes encoding resistance to antibiotics are oen encoded in plasmids. A very large fraction ofthe PlasmidRibosomesCell wallCytoplasmDNA (nucleoid)Bacterial ﬂagellum1 µm(a) (b)FIGURE 2.1  (a) A colony of Vibrio cholerae bacteria; (b) A schematic structure of a bacterium. 
Cellular Automata    ◾    41bacterial chromosome DNA (about 85% in Escherichia coli) encodes for proteins, whereas for humans less than 5% of DNA encodes proteins (see Chapter 1).e replication and equal partitioning of the bacterial genome that occurs during bacterial growth underlies the classical vertical inheritance of traits from one generation to the next. However, bacteria can acquire genes in another manner, termed horizontal gene transfer or lateral gene transfer (LGT), whereby genetic material is received by one bacterium from an unrelated bacterium. Comparative genomic analysis indicates that LGT impacts bacterial evolution in the long-term and additionally serves as a pathway for acquiring transitory traits, such as the reduced susceptibility to antibiotics, a worrying and increasingly prevalent phe-nomenon since the 1960s.2.1.3  Diversity and the Species QuestionClassifying bacteria into species and strains has been a challenge since they were rst visualized and is even more so presently, despite the ava-lanche of genomic information becoming available each day. is prob-lem is particularly pertinent as millions of bacterial species are thought to exist in our environment that have not yet been sampled or grown successfully in a laboratory.It is becoming clear that bacterial genomes are composed of core sequences, such as essential genes; dispensable sequences characterized by their erratic appearance and nucleotide variability across a panel of iso-lates (the same bacterial species sampled repeatedly and independently); and strain-specic genes that are unique to a given isolate. ese observa-tions have created the notion that a bacterial species cannot be represented by a unique genomic sequence but instead is dened by a pan-genome, which is the core sequences plus the collection of dispensable and strain-specic sequences. Moreover, since bacteria exist in nature in a particular environmental niche, such as inside our guts or in the ocean, an initially radical research approach is to study the niche community as an entity and to call the genetic repertoire of the diverse microbes therein a metagenome. In recent years, metagenomics has become a mainstream eld. Within such an environment, events of LGT are expected to occur quite oen. Currently, more than 100 metagenomic projects are under way for which novel bio-informatics tools are being developed. Together with the insights gained from about 700 fully sequenced microbial genomes, our understanding of what really denes a bacterial species is likely to improve.
42    ◾    Biological Computation2.1.4  Bacteria and HumansCurrently, researchers are analyzing the metagenome of the human gut, estimated to contain some 10 trillion individual bacteria that are mem-bers of more than 1000 dierent species. Bacteria are found also in other human habitats, including the female reproductive tract, the skin, and the mouth. Together, all the bacteria in the human body constitute the human microbiome. Bacteria living inside the body that do not cause disease are known as commensals, whereas those associated with human disease are called pathogens. Bacteria play crucial roles in the life of higher organ-isms like humans. Many bacteria develop symbiotic relationships with their hosts. For example, bacteria participate in key stages of food diges-tion in humans. Furthermore, the mere existence of the “good” bacteria keeps at bay the number of the pathogenic bacteria because they compete for the same environmental resources. However, the distinction between harmless or even benecial bacteria and pathogens is becoming blurred as emerging studies reveal that many recognized pathogens, such as the bacteria responsible for pneumococcal diseases, are commonly carried asymptomatically. Such studies highlight the gaps in our present under-standing of pathogenicity and of the interplay between dierent species and strains of bacteria that cohabit at the same niches.A better understanding of pathogenicity is urgently needed to expand our ability to combat bacterial diseases. Antibiotics have changed the outcome of the everlasting war between humans and bacteria dra-matically in the last 60 years. However, the excessive use of antibiot-ics brought about the emergence of “superbugs,” such as the multidrug resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae and methicillin-resistantStaphylococcus aureus (MRSA), which do not respond to antibiotics and pose a major public health risk.2.1.5  The Sociobiology of BacteriaA growing body of studies demonstrates that bacteria produce and secrete signaling molecules that other bacteria detect and to which they respond, for example, by changing gene expression. ese signals enable bacteria to exhibit advantageous communal behavior, which appears to under-lie several key phenomena, such as biolm formation, whereby bacteria organize into a particular architecture. Another phenomenon is quorum sensing, a mechanism by which bacteria can estimate the density of their colonies by monitoring the amount of signal molecules secreted by the 
Cellular Automata    ◾    43community members. In fact, a colony of bacteria can be regarded almost as a multicellular organism rather than a collection of individual cells.An impressive example of such collective behavior is seen in Figure2.2: an expanding colony of bacteria encounters a fragment of glass wool on the surface of the petri dish, causing the individual cells in the colony to FIGURE 2.2  A series of pictures showing how a ber approached by a bacte-ria colony is being surrounded by an individual cell that leaves the colony and engulfs the ber. Eventually, the coated ber is being absorbed into the colony. (From Shapiro and Dworkin, Eds., Bacteria as Multicellular Organisms, Oxford University Press, 1997. With permission.)


===== [16/72] chapter-16.html =====

44    ◾    Biological Computationchange behavior in such a way that the colony manages to engulf the glass wool fragment.Another example concerns pattern formation by bacteria colonies. Eshel Ben-Jacob has shown (Ben-Jacob, 2007) that a colony of the same bacteria can grow in a very dierent patterns under dierent conditions like food availability (Figure2.3). Furthermore, it was shown that a colony of bacteria has the ability to “learn,” and therefore its response to a rst course of antibiotics may be very dierent from its response to successive courses. e details of the mechanisms involved in these processes are only beginning to unravel.e “social” processes occurring within a bacterial colony are so rich that ongoing studies are investigating whether certain forms of cooperative multicellular behavior even lead to the emergence of “cheaters,” individual bacteria that reap the benets of cooperation without contributing to the community. In general, the recent coining of various phrases by bacteriolo-gists (e.g., the sociobiology of bacteria, microbial multicelluarity, quorum sensing) illustrates the extent to which this area has become a focus of cur-rent bacterial research. e following description of cellular automata deals with articial systems, but we are sure that the analogy with bacterial colo-nies and their self-organization will be evident to the reader.2.2  THE “GAME OF LIFE”We will start our discussion of cellular automata by describing an example of a two-dimensional CA known as the “Game of Life.” A more general and formal denition of CA will be presented later.(a) (b) (c)FIGURE 2.3  Branching patterns exhibited by Paenibacillus dendritiformis bacte-ria: (a) shows the pattern at higher food levels; (b) shows the typical pattern with intermediate levels of food depletion; (c) shows the growth for a very low level of food. ese forms of bacterial self-organization provide the colony with the abil-ity to make an ecient use of the available resources. (From Ben-Jacob, Eshel, European Physical Journal B – Condensed Matter and Complex Systems 65, no. 3, 315–322. With permission.)
Cellular Automata    ◾    45A two-dimensional cellular automaton is a square grid of cells, each of which is in one of a nite number of states. e automaton progresses from one generation to the next using the following procedure: each cell inspects its state and the states of its neighbors and updates its state using a simple rule. e same rule is used by all the cells. A conguration is a collective state of the automaton, that is, a description of the state of each cell in a given generation.e best-known cellular automaton is the “Game of Life” (or Life for short) presented by John Horton Conway in 1970. In Life, the grid is in-nite in both dimensions. Each cell can be in one of two states: alive or dead (equivalently, full or empty). e update rule depends on the number of live cells in the immediate neighborhood of each cell (i.e., how many of the eight cells around a given cell, including diagonals, are alive):Birth rule: a dead cell with exactly three live neighbors comes to life; in any other case a dead cell remains dead.Survival rule: a live cell with two or three live neighbors stays alive.Death rule: a live cell with four or more live neighbors dies of overcrowd-ing; a live cell with at most one live neighbor dies of loneliness.Note that the states of the cells are inspected before the update. at means that rst all the cells needing to be updated are identied, and then the updates happen simultaneously for all of the automaton’s cells. e rules are demonstrated in Figure2.4.e lower gray cell’sneighborhood consists of 4live cells so it will die in thenext generation.e upper gray cell’sneighborhood consists of 3live cells so it will change tolive in the next generation. e gray cell’s neighborhoodconsists of 2 live cells so itwill stay alive in the nextgeneration.e gray cell’s neighborhoodconsists of 3 live cells so itwill stay alive in the nextgeneration.FIGURE 2.4  Examples of the execution of the transition rule of the “Game of Life” (a live cell is marked with a lled circle).
46    ◾    Biological ComputationTypically, we will use a computerized simulation to follow the evolution of cells in the “Game of Life,” but we could also run the simulation manually: 1. Start with an initial conguration where live cells are represented on a checkerboard using the black pieces. 2. Find all the cells that will die in the next generation. Mark each such cell by adding another black piece on top of the one in the cell. 3. Find all the cells that will be born in the next generation. Mark each such cell by placing a white piece on it. 4. Make sure that you did not miss anything; then update the board by removing all pieces from the dead cells (those with two black pieces), and execute the birth rule by replacing all the white pieces with black pieces. 5. Now that you have the next generation; repeat from step 1.Figure2.5 shows a few congurations that lead to interesting patterns you may want to follow for several generations.Studying these examples demonstrates that although the rules are sim-ple, the system’s behavior can be complex and hard to predict. Some ini-tial congurations never change when the rules are applied; other initial congurations cycle between a nite number of congurations (i.e., these congurations are called oscillators); still others preserve their shape but move over the board.Observing Life can have a hypnotic eect, but it also raises many ques-tions such as the following:• Can we predict the board’s conguration in n generations without executing the game for n generations?e clock e gliderFIGURE 2.5  Initial congurations that lead to interesting behavior.
Cellular Automata    ◾    47• Do all initial congurations lead to a steady state, aer which there are no further changes?• Do all initial congurations lead to a state with a xed number of live cells, that is, a state aer which the automaton will not grow further?Conway’s goal was to nd simple rules for cellular automata with the following elusive properties:• ere will be no initial conguration for which it will be easy to prove that the population of live cells will grow indenitely without bounds.• ere will be initial congurations for which it will seem as if the population of live cells grows without bounds.• Some initial congurations will change during many generations, but eventually they will settle into one of three situations: (1) extinc-tion (due to overcrowding or loneliness); (2) periodic oscillation between several congurations; or (3) achieving a steady state.In this regard, one of the most interesting examples is the “R-Pentomino,” which is an innocent-looking pattern of ve cells shown in Figure2.6. It takes 1103 generations for it to stabilize. Readers are encouraged to try it on their favorite Life applet (e.g., at http://www.ibiblio.org/lifepatterns/) and be amazed by the richness of the nal pattern. No wonder this pat-tern is known as one of the Methuselah patterns, named aer the biblical Methuselah who lived for 969 years.From this, and many other such examples, it became clear that indeed, as Conway intended, predicting the behavior of the system is extremely complicated. In fact, it turns out that it is impossible to predict the evolution of the system from its initial conguration, and its evolution can be deter-mined only by simulating the game. is can be proved mathematically FIGURE 2.6  e R-Pentomino. is simple pattern takes 1103 generations to set-tle down into a complicated “community” of blocks, blinkers, gliders and more.
48    ◾    Biological Computationbyshowing that Life can function as a computer (in formal terms, it is equivalent to a universal Turing machine [TM]). erefore, predicting the fate of an initial conguration in the “Game of Life” is equivalent to decid-ing whether a computer program will halt for a given input or what its out-put will be, which are known to be undecidable problems. We will return to this important point later in the chapter.2.3  GENERAL DEFINITION OF CELLULAR AUTOMATASo far, we have discussed a very specialized case of a cellular automaton. We will attempt now to generalize the properties of a CA.e cells may be in one of a larger set of states (not just “live” or “dead” as in Life). e set of states has to be nite (typically the set is rather small and contains no more than 10 states). e set of states is usually denoted by the letter ∑ and the number of states by k.e cells consulted for each cell by the behavior rules are called the cell’s neighborhood. e neighborhood may be dierent from one automaton to the other. Sometimes the neighborhood is dened to be the cells per-pendicular to the cell (four cells in the two-dimensional case, called the von Neumann neighborhood). In other cases the neighborhood contains all the adjacent cells (eight in the two-dimensional case, called the Moore neighborhood). In general the neighborhood may include cells that are not directly adjacent neighbors and may have any shape.An automaton need not be two-dimensional; it may be one-dimensional (a linear formation of cells) or three-dimensional (a cube of cells) or have higher dimensionality. e cells need not be on a square, chess-like grid. Any regular tiling of the automaton space such as triangular or beehive shaped tiling will do. We will assume that the automaton space is innite. When implemented by a computer program, we will usually enlarge the board when necessary. But we may also assume other boundary condi-tions, such as a two-dimensional surface on a sphere where the edges meet or a board laid out on a torus.Taking all of this into account, we see that the elements needed to dene a particular CA are as follows:• e layout of the board (e.g., a two-dimensional board, a beehive) and its boundary conditions.• e set of states ∑. At any instance every cell is in one of these states. We will denote the state of cell i at time t by Sti. A conguration is a


===== [17/72] chapter-17.html =====

Cellular Automata    ◾    49collective state of the automaton’s cells, that is, a description of the state of each cell in a given generation.• e neighborhood of every cell. e states of all cells in a cell’s neigh-borhood are used as input when calculating the state of the cell in the next generation. e neighborhood is denoted by Nit, which species the states of the cells in the neighborhood of cell i at time t. When we are not interested in a specic time period the t may be omitted.• e transition rule determines the state of each cell in the next gen-eration, based on its current state and the current states of the cells in its neighborhood. For simplicity we will assume that a cell’s neigh-borhood contains the cell itself. We will denote the transition rule by δ(Nit). Note that the transition rule may not consider the location of a specic cell on the board (e.g., its x and y coordinates). Using such information would violate the principle that each cell can get information only from its neighbors and cannot make use of “sys-tem-wide” properties (i.e., a cell can use only local rather than global information). is is the basis of the cellular automata model.So, a particular automaton is dened by four properties: (1) the board; (2) the set of states; (3) the denition of a cell’s neighborhood; and (4) the transition rule.All the cells’ neighborhoods have the same shape and this shape does not change with time. For now we will also assume that all the cells tran-sition at the same time to their next state. is is called a synchronous transition. Accordingly, the time in the system can be divided into dis-tinct and discrete time units, a regime called discrete time.Note that discrete time is very different from the notion of time as continuous, and the incompatibilities between these two notions of time can lead to paradoxical behavior as in Zeno’s arrow paradox. Imagine an arrow in flight. Now suppose time is divided into a series of indivisible moments. At any given moment, the arrow is at an exact location, so it is not moving. But if at any moment in time there is no motion, we must conclude that movement cannot happen—that the arrow is motionless. The paradox actually stems from the idea that time can be divided into discrete units. Thus, we must be careful when we model dynamic systems using CA not to get into situations when the discrete nature of time might be a confusing factor in the behavior 
50    ◾    Biological Computationof the simulation or to assume that a discrete time model necessarily captures all the important elements of a continuous phenomenon (or vice versa, of course).A state s for which δ(s,…,s) = s is called a quiescent state: a neighbor-hood where all the cells (including the cell itself) are in a quiescent state and will remain in a quiescent state at the next time step. e quiescent state of cells in the “Game of Life” is “dead”: the rules of the game will not result in a creation of any living cell if the entire board is empty.We summarize this section with a formal denition of a CA as follows:2.4  1-DIMENSIONAL AUTOMATAA one-dimensional (1-D) automaton is a tape or sequence of cells. For example:1 0 0 1is an instance of a 1-D automaton with the state set {0,1} where the tape is of length 4. We oen assume that the tape is circular (i.e., the right-hand neighbor of the rightmost cell is the le cell and vice versa). Typically, a cell’s neighborhood will be described by the radius r around the cell. erefore, the number of cells in the neighborhood is 2r + 1 (r cells on each side of the cell and the cell itself).If we keep the number of states and the size of the neighborhood mod-erately small, the number of dierent possible neighborhoods also remains relatively small, and we will be able to describe the automaton using a simple table that holds the next state of a cell as a function of the states in FORMAL DEFINITION OF A CELLULAR AUTOMATONA d-dimensional cellular automaton A is a 4-tuple (Zd , ∑, N, δ) where:•  Zd is the description of the space deﬁning the automaton’s layout.•  ∑ is a ﬁnite set of the possible cell states.•  N is an ordered subset of Zd of size n+1 called the neighborhood of A. For a cell x ∈ Zd, the neighborhood of x is deﬁned to be the cells in positions x + ri for i = 0,1,…,n. where ri is a vector in the d-dimen-sional space (i = 0 represents the cell x itself).• δ: ∑n+1→∑ is a function called the transition rule of A.This is a standard deﬁnition of a cellular automaton. Some variations later in this chapter do not adhere to this deﬁnition.
Cellular Automata    ◾    51its neighborhood. For example, an automaton where k = 2 and r = 1 is an automaton in which each cell can be in one of two states and the next state is determined by the states of the cell and its two neighbors.Table2.1 describes a possible transition rule for such an automaton. Note that the entire table represents a single transition rule. Also note that this table enumerates all possible states of the environment.If the automaton’s initial conguration is as previously described1 0 0 1Aer applying the transition rule, its state in the next generation will be1 0 1 1Observe that all tables describing transition rules for 1-D automata with k = 2 and r = 1 have eight rows. Note that the number of rows in the table is determined by the number of possible neighborhoods (here 23 = 8) and is not dependent on the size of the automaton, namely on how many cells it contains. For simplicity, the following notation has been devised: the next state of cells as a function of the neighborhoods will be written as a sequence of bits (read bottom to top from the “Next State” column in Table2.1). So the transition rule in Table2.1 can be described by the sequence 01101110. is sequence is the binary representation of the decimal number 110, so this transition rule is known as Rule 110 (Table2.2). is shorthand for describ-ing the transition rules is known as Wolfram numbers, aer Stephen Wolfram (2002), who rst proposed and used this notation.TABLE 2.1  Rule 110NeighborhoodState of Le NeighborCurrent State of CellState of Right Neighbor Next State0 0 0 00 0 1 10 1 0 10 1 1 11 0 0 01 0 1 11 1 0 11 1 1 0
52    ◾    Biological ComputationAs every eight-digit binary number can represent an automaton’s transition rule, we see that the number of possible automata is 28 = 256. is is a signicant observation since it means that we have now a systematic way to address all possible transition rules for binary 1-D automata. Furthermore, practically speaking, we can reduce this num-ber signicantly. ere is an obvious symmetry between the digits 0 and 1. In addition, we will usually consider only automata with a quiescent state (i.e., for the conguration where all the cells in the neighborhood are 0, the next state of a cell in state 0 remains 0). A further simplica-tion may arise from allowing only rules that are symmetrical around the middle cell in the neighborhood. In this case, we will want the neighbor-hoods 100 and 001 to have the same value as well as neighborhoods 110 and 011.e rst simplication reduces the number of possible automata by half. e second simplication implies that the binary representation of a tran-sition rule ends with a 0, since this represents the transition 000  0. e third simplication allows us to look only at the values of ve neighbor-hoods to infer all the other values of the transition rule. Taken together, we see that the interesting transition rules are of the form α1α2α3α4α2α5α40 (note that α2 and α4 appear twice due to symmetry), and the number of rules to consider for automata with k = 2 and r = 1 has been reduced from 256 to 32.We can visualize the behavior of a 1-D automaton as a function of time with a space–time diagram. Every row of the diagram will describe the automaton’s state at a particular generation, with time progressing down the chart. For example, Figure2.7 shows the progression of rule 18 for an automaton that starts with a single cell with value 1 on a long tape for 20 generations (cells with the value 1 are denoted by a circle and cells with value 0 by a space).TABLE 2.2  Rules and eir Decimal NamesConverting a Rule to Its Decimal NameNeighborhood as a binary number111 110 101 100 011 010 001 0002 to the neighorhood’s state128 64 32 16 8 4 2 1Next state 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 001101110b=128•0+64•1+32•1+16•0+8•1+4•1+2•1+1•0=110d
Cellular Automata    ◾    53One of the interesting advantages in the Wolfram notation is that we can go systematically through all automata and qualitatively characterize their behavior. It turns out that roughly 85% of the automata behave in a uniform and uninteresting way (Figure 2.8(a)), 10% in a way that seems ordered and complex (Figure 2.8(b)), and 5% in a seemingly random and chaotic way (Figure 2.8(c)) although they follow deterministic rules. From experiments with other CA it seems that this observation is quite general. In most systems, most sets of rules will lead to uniform and uninteresting behavior (similar to the behavior in Figure 2.8(a)), whereas only in a minor-ity of cases the system will show either a complex behavior (like in Figure 2.8(b)) or random-like behavior (like in Figure 2.8(c)).01234567891011121314151617181920FIGURE 2.7  Space–Time Diagram. is representation enables one to follow the behavior of a 1-dimensional automaton over time. In this example rule 18 is followed for 20 generations starting from a single non-empty cell.(a) (b) (c)FIGURE  2.8  e dierent general behavior of 1-dimensional automata. (a) Trivial order (this specic pattern was created by rule 250); there are 222 autom-ata that show this type of behavior. (b) Complex order, (this specic behavior comes from rule 90); there are 24 such automata. (c) Chaotic-like behavior (cre-ated by rule 30); there are 10 automata that show chaotic like behavior among the total of 256 automata. (From Wolfram, Stephen. A New Kind of Science, Wolfram Media, 2002. With permission.)


===== [18/72] chapter-18.html =====

54    ◾    Biological Computation2.5  EXAMPLES OF CELLULAR AUTOMATACellular automata have properties that are useful for modeling cer-tain classes of phenomena. By denition, time progresses discretely for CA, which therefore makes them appropriate for models where time is naturally divided into generations and where the progress from one generation to the next is synchronous. In a cellular automaton, the state of every cell is a function of its neighborhood, and this is appropriate for describing phenomena where the neighborhood aects behavior and the interaction between the components of the model is local. Another important feature of CA is that all the cells obey the same rule, making CA appropriate for modeling homogeneous systems. On the other hand, CA are less useful for modeling systems where time is not discrete or when the behavior of each cell is dicult to dene by discrete states.A few examples will give us a better understanding of the phenomena that can be modeled by CA. Some of these models are based on the pre-viously given CA denition, and in other cases we will modify the CA denition to allow an easier description of the phenomena we are try-ing to model. Some of the modications are merely technical; however, some modications, like introducing randomness into transition rules, are more fundamental.2.5.1  Fur ColorMammals’ hair color is determined by pigment cells called melanocytes in the basal layer of the epidermis (skin). ese cells produce melanin, which determines the hair color. In general, mammal hair color is a sin-gle color or a template containing two colors (e.g., a zebra; unlike sh and birds, no mammals display an array of colors). Actually, producing the two-color pattern is a binary process: either no (or very little) melanin is produced, in which case the “background” color is displayed, or melanin is produced, in which case the “foreground” color is displayed. e fore-ground color might appear in two tones, such as black–brown for zebras and orange–yellow for tigers. But the main question remains as to how a particular cell knows whether to produce melanin or not.It is important to realize that this is a developmental decision. Genetically, all the epidermis cells are identical, and there is no a priori determination of what color each cell will display. erefore, each cell has to determine its melanin-producing behavior based on its neighbors’ states. Clearly, the amount of time available for this decision-making 
Cellular Automata    ◾    55process is limited, and at its end each cell has to decide whether to pro-duce melanin. Once this has been determined, the decision cannot be reversed. is process is an example of the more general mystery: the process of embryonic development. In general, the embryonic develop-ment process depends not only on the organism’s genetics but also on many other factors. Understanding the process by which the genetic information is deployed during development in a robust way not aected by irrelevant changes in the environment and resulting in a functioning organism is one of the main challenges of modern biology.One of the mysteries of this process is that the embryo starts out as a single cell that constitutes a completely homogeneous and symmetrical system. is system develops into a small set of identical cells and then evolves into an asymmetrical system where cells have dierentiated such that each may fulll its unique function (e.g., blood cells dier from skin cells). So the question is how does a homogeneous symmetrical system lose its symmetry? e symmetry-breaking question shows up in other scientic elds as well, and although we will not discuss it in detail we will note that Alan Turing, the father of the Turing machine and one of the main gures in the history of computer science, was also puzzled by the symmetry-breaking phenomenon in embryonic development. In 1952 he suggested a theoretical model for this problem (Turing, 1952). is model, just like the model we will present next, is not faithful to the biological details, yet both models show how symmetrical laws of nature that act on a symmetrical system can in principle lead to symmetry breaking. In contrast to Turing’s complex model, we will describe two simple models that give rise to symmetry breaking.Let us start with a very simple model that describes the decision process governing melanin secretion. e cells are located on a grid and can be in one of two colors (e.g., black or white), which are initially chosen ran-domly. In every generation, each cell chooses one cell in its neighborhood randomly and takes on its color. is process repeats itself for a number of generations. Note that this process does not adhere to our previous CA denition. Here, states are determined stochastically and not by a deter-ministic rule.What kind of hair pattern do we expect to see using this model? Obviously, we cannot give an exact answer due to the random behav-ior of the system. It is important to note that the initial distribution of the black cells is of paramount importance: if the initial number of black cells is very small, the probability that they all disappear aer a number 
56    ◾    Biological Computationof generations increases. In fact, the percentage of cells that start out being black is a parameter of the model, and we may change its value and observe its impact on the system’s behavior. Once we let the system run for enough generations, we will see the color distribution as spots on the grid; if we limit the neighborhoods to be only the cells to the right and le of every cell or only to the cells above and below it, we will get stripes.is model demonstrates that we can get complex color distributions by using a simple and local rule for each cell’s behavior. is absolutely does not mean that this is the way animals’ hair color is determined. When we created this model, we did not take into account what we know about the details of the biological process but concentrated on the abstract problem of symmetry breaking. We could obviously go now and see if the model we came up with corresponds to what is known about the generation of hair color patterns. In this way simple models can be used to guide us toward the relevant properties of the biological system of interest.On the other hand, the model is too simple to describe the formation of more specic color patterns, such as that of the various tails we see in animals. e limited surface area and the cyclic surface make the color formation on tails more elaborate and specic than the rest of the body.A slightly more complex model (Young, 1984) considers the weighted average of the cells’ colors in a radial neighborhood around each cell. As before, each cell has one of two colors (0 for white, 1 for black), and the transition rule is = − −∈∑C H w i i j j Ci j i ji j N, ,( , )( , )where C' is the value of the cell in the next generation, w is a weight matrix (note that the matrix is centered around (0,0)) used to compute the weighted average, and N describes the radial neighborhood. e function H(u) has value 1 if u ≥ 0 and 0 if u <0.Although this system is deterministic, by starting from dierent ran-dom congurations and varying the weights and the neighborhood size (these are the model’s parameters) many dierent color distributions can be obtained. Note that the weights may be either positive or negative. A negative value will result in a phenomenon where a black cell in the cell’s neighborhood will prevent or delay the cell turning black.
Cellular Automata    ◾    572.5.2  Ecological ModelsCA are extremely useful in simulating ecological systems composed of predators and prey that share a conned habitat.Consider an automaton with cells in one of eight possible states: 0 for an empty cell, 1 for prey, 2–6 for stages (or ages) in a predator’s life, and 7 for a reproducing predator. Predators depend on prey to progress to their next stage, as they die of starvation if there is no prey in their neigh-borhood. Prey that are adjacent to predators disappear (are “eaten”). e prey reproduce and inhabit adjacent cells in their neighborhoods, but when a predator in state 7 reproduces it lls its adjacent empty cells as well as adjacent cells that have previously contained prey. e cells that have been thus inhabited will contain a young predator in stage 2, while the old parent dies and leaves its cell empty (Ermentrout and Edelstein-Keshet, 1993).If one starts with a square grid of dimensions 50 × 50 cells, with an initial random distribution of prey, and a few cells containing predators, the system exhibits complex population dynamics. e size of the preda-tors and prey populations uctuates widely with time. Depending on the specic parameters used, the population can become extinct, show some regular uctuations, or evolve into a complex prey and predator popula-tions, which interact in unpredictable ways. As we noticed before, most sets of parameters will lead to uninteresting behavior, whereas some will lead to surprisingly rich behavior.A dierent ecological model that yields interesting behavior is Wator (Dewdney, 1984). In this model, the universe is torus-shaped, lled with water, and contains sh and sharks that hunt and eat them. e sh swim randomly into one of the vacant cells that are adjacent to their cell, either horizontally or vertically. If the sh survives for a few generations and has an adjacent empty cell, it will reproduce into that cell. A shark eats a sh in an adjacent cell or swims into an empty adjacent cell if there are no sh in his neighborhood. A shark that has not eaten for a few generations dies of starvation. e sharks also reproduce in a manner similar to the way the sh reproduce.is model has ve parameters: (1) the initial number of sh; (2) the initial number of sharks; (3) the time it takes sh to reproduce; (4) the time it takes sharks to reproduce; and (5) the time it takes the sharks to starve to death. ese parameters can be tweaked so that the system achieves a steady state, but this is a dicult task especially when the game 
58    ◾    Biological Computationboard is small. Typically, this model gives rise to a widely uctuating sys-tem or to the extinction of the population. Note that similar to the color formation automata, Wator uses random moves, and thus the automaton is not deterministic.It may also seem that Wator is not CA per our denition since the sh and sharks move on the board, while we did not dene any motion in a CA and discussed only the way the cells’ states change. Actually, this is not a fundamental extension of the original denition. A move-ment of an organism from one cell to its neighbor can be implemented in the standard model by adding states and rules by which an organism to be moved dies in its original cell and an identical copy is created in a neighboring cell.2.5.3  Food Chainis model describes a universe in which dierent species feed o one another. For example, consider a universe containing grass eaten by zebras, which in turn are hunted by tigers. We will try to model some characteristics of such a food chain using CA.Every cell in the CA can be in one of N states: 0,1,…,N – 1. A cell in state k will eat any of its four perpendicular neighbors, which are in state k – 1, by changing the neighbor’s state to k. e food chain is circular so that cells in state N – 1 are eaten by cells in state 0. For example, Figure2.9 shows a transition of a particular conguration of the CA (N=6, and the states are 0,…,5). Such automata are called circular cellular automata (CCA) (Dewdney, 1989). Can you guess how this particular system will behave?0213214214233235154002232243243333401550FIGURE 2.9  An example of one generation of the food chain automaton. A cell in a particular state will be “eaten” by a neighboring cell (only the four perpen-dicular neighbors are considered) with a state higher by 1. e order is cyclic, so a cell in state 5 can be eaten by a cell of state 0. In this automaton spherical boundary conditions are not imposed, and cells on the boundaries have fewer neighbors than interior cells.


===== [19/72] chapter-19.html =====

Cellular Automata    ◾    592.6   COMPARISON WITH A CONTINUOUS MATHEMATICAL MODELFor comparison, we present a continuous mathematical model that de-scribes the growth of a bacteria colony in ideal lab conditions. Obviously, this model does not exactly describe the real biological processes.e reproduction rule we want to implement states that the bacteria population grows at a rate proportional to its size at any point in time. We will denote the number of bacteria at time t by y(t). e rate of growth at time t is lim( ) ( )ty t t y tt→+ −0In other words, this is the derivative of y(t) which we denote y’(t). So now we can express the reproduction rule as y’(t) = λy(t) (2.1)where λ is a positive constant that characterizes the reproduction rate.Note that (2.1) describes properties of functions, and we are looking for a function that obeys this equation—in this case, a function whose derivative at any point is equal to the value of the function at that point times a con-stant λ. Such equations belong to a mathematical eld called ordinary dif-ferential equations. Solving (2.1) is quite straightforward, as described next.To determine the function y(t) which gives the number of bacteria at time t, we rewrite (2.1) as y’(t) – λy(t) = 0Multiply the equation by −λteto get −λte(y’(t)–λy(t)) = 0 (2.2)e function −λteis never equal to 0; therefore, a function y(t) will satisfy the reproduction function (2.1) if and only if it satises (2.2).e le-hand side of (2.2) is the derivative of the function −λtey(t); therefore, (2.2) can be written as
60    ◾    Biological Computation e y tt−( )=λ( ),0e only functions with derivative 0 are constant; therefore, the func-tion −λtey(t) is a constant, that is, −=λtey t C( )where C is a constant. To solve for y(t), we divide by −λteto get y t Cet( ) =λ (2.3)is derivation shows that only the exponential functions described in (2.3) satisfy the reproduction rule (2.1); in other words, (2.3) describes the (innite) set of all solutions to (2.1) and is called the general solution to (2.1).e reproduction rule described by (2.1) does not provide us with enough information to determine the size of the bacteria colony at time t, as there exists an innite number of solutions to the equation. is is not surprising since the reproduction rule describes the rate of growth, and the initial number of bacteria has not been specied.Assume, for example, that the number of bacteria at time t = 0 is y0, that is, y(0) = y0Substitute into (2.3) to get y Ce y( )000= =λierefore, C = y0.So of all the possible solutions given by (2.3) only one function satises the initial conditions: y(t) = y0eλt. is function is called the particular solution of equation (2.1) with the initial condition y0.is model diers in a few key aspects from the other models we explore in this chapter. In this model time is continuous, as t may be any real number. Furthermore, the mathematical analysis used depended on the change in the number of bacteria over time periods that are 
Cellular Automata    ◾    61arbitrarily short to compute the total number of bacteria. ese kinds of models use calculus as their main mathematical tool. e model we just presented is a very simple example: the reproduction rule is an easily solved rst-order dierential equation. Some models need to use much more complicated dierential equations that oen are not amenable to analytical solution and require numerical solutions.e assumptions underlying this model are unrealistic from a biological point of view (e.g., in reality the rate of bacteria reproduction is nonuni-form), but they allowed us to focus on the main characteristic of a bacteria colony: that its growth rate is proportional to its size. To build an exact biological model we would have had to also allow for the availability of food, the density of the colony, and so forth. At best, our model describes a bacteria colony during a limited period of its existence. However, using analytical mathematical tools allowed us to derive an exact formula that gives the colony size at any given moment without having to simulate the colony’s development during discrete time periods. We can use dierential equations to describe more complex processes, for example, processes that deal with multiple organisms competing over resources. is is beyond the scope of this book, but it is important to remember that these tools are available for modeling.Discrete and continuous models each have their advantages and disad-vantages. Some systems are inherently continuous (like blood ow), and some are inherently discrete (e.g., modeling DNA mutations where there are only four types of nucleotides). In many situations, though, the modeler can choose which type of model to use for the task at hand. Oen, discrete mod-els are appropriate for populations of xed size where nite size eects are important, whereas continuous models are more appropriate for analyzing asymptotic behavior. When the equations that govern the continuous model can be solved analytically, the analysis is usually more ecient than the lengthy simulations needed for discrete models. On the other hand, when the equations do not have analytical solution, a discrete model may be preferred.2.7  COMPUTATIONAL UNIVERSALITY2.7.1  What Is Universality?At rst glance it seems that the question of whether a computer can be used to solve a particular problem is fundamentally dierent from the question if an initial state of the “Game of Life” can be found such that a particular behavior may be observed. It would seem that the complexity 
62    ◾    Biological Computationof the rst problem results from the many variables that might aect the answer (e.g., which computer are we referring to, how large is its memory), whereas the analysis of Life does not depend on any such parameters.Surprisingly, when we analyze what operations computers can perform (i.e., which algorithms can be implemented by them) or even when we try to analyze computing devices that work in diverse and unusual ways, it turns out that in a deep sense all computing devices are able to implement the same class of algorithms. is does not mean that simple computers have the exact capabilities as high-end supercomputers. e supercomputers will arrive at solutions faster, for example, but in spite of the technical dierences the fundamental computing capabilities of all computers are the same.is amazing insight was achieved by researchers who dened dierent computational models and compared them. A computational model is a sim-ple but exact description of the principle characteristics of the operation of a computational device. As we already saw, a model is a simple presentation of a complex system that captures the important characteristics of the system.e founders of computer science came up with a set of computational models to standardize and formalize the description of algorithms. Aer carefully dening the models, the researchers attempted to investigate many dierent questions these models brought up. One such class of ques-tions deals with comparing the dierent models: determining whether one model is more powerful than another (i.e., given a problem that is solvable by one model, can it always be solved with the other?). Are two models equivalent; that is, are the same sets of problems solvable using both models (even if they might dier in speed or eciency)?Studying these problems led to the formulation of a fundamental hypothesis of computer science, the Church–Turing thesis. is hypoth-esis asserts that we can describe formally and precisely the set of prob-lems that may be solved algorithmically. is hypothesis emerged when it turned out that many computational models, which were mostly developed in the 1930s using very dierent ideas and techniques, were all equivalent: any problem that is solvable using one of the models is also solvable in the others. is equivalence led researchers to believe that all the models fun-damentally describe the same intuitive idea known nowadays as “eective computation.” Any computational model that is equivalent to these mod-els is called a universal computational model.e most famous such model is the Turing machine (TM). is model, developed in 1936 by Alan Turing, is of a state machine that reads an in-nite 1-D tape composed of characters. At any point in time the machine is 
Cellular Automata    ◾    63in one of a nite set of states (hence the name state machine), which deter-mines its actions for any input character it reads o the tape. According to the state and the current character on the tape, the machine writes a new character to the tape and moves the read/write head one position to the right or the le of its current position on the tape. e model assumes that any piece of information may be described as a sequence of characters on the machine’s tape. A dierent model was described by the logician Alonzo Church. His model is called Lambda Calculus and is similar to a minimal computer language and therefore is particularly useful in pro-gramming language research.As already stated, these two models were proven to be computation-ally equivalent; that is, any algorithm may be translated from one model to the other, and we may always select the model that is easier to work with for proving a particular statement. Nonetheless, the models dier to such an extent that describing a problem in one model might be mean-ingless in the other; therefore, we need to translate between the models. For example, when describing a computation using a Turing machine we need to describe how the data are encoded on the tape and determine the machine’s behavior in every state. But in the lambda calculus there is no tape and no predetermined set of states.e current state of aairs is that we have a number of models that are computationally equivalent, and no stronger computational model has been found during the decades that have passed since they were rst developed. us, the current hypothesis in computer science is that a Turing machine can, in principle, perform any computation. Furthermore, Turing proved that some computational problems cannot be solved using a Turing machine. According to the Church–Turing thesis, these problems are algorithmically intractable, and no computer will ever be able to solve them, regardless of any future technological development.One of the interesting and important characteristics of a Turing machines is that it is relatively easy to build one Turing machine that can simulate the behavior of any other Turing machine. Such a machine is known as a universal Turing machine. To build such a universal TM, we need to nd a way to describe any other TM on the input tape of the universal TM. is description must contain all the data necessary for a complete description of the TM—that is, its states and the transition rules from state to state upon reading the tape of the simulated TM. Other com-putational models also allow us to build a universal machine or program that can simulate any other computation under the model.


===== [20/72] chapter-20.html =====

64    ◾    Biological ComputationA universal TM is similar to a modern general purpose computer in the sense of being able to perform a wide range of computations by executing many dierent programs. Note, however, that in any real computer the memory is nite, as opposed to the idealized innite tape of a TM.e fact that we can construct a universal Turing machine, U, is of major importance since this is a single machine with maximal computing power. e existence of universal TMs allows us to replace the question “Does a TM X with the following properties exist?” with “Is there an input for which the universal TM U will behave in the following manner?” Note that the existence of a universal TM implies that for a universal comput-ing model it is impossible to distinguish between the data used as input to the computation and the program that controls the computational process. e data can be used as the program and vice versa.Turing showed a well-dened computational problem that cannot be solved by any TM. To understand his counterexample, let us consider a computer program that contains loops. For example, we might implement (in pseudo-code) a program that computes the sum of the integers from 1 to 10 (1 + 2 + 3…+ 10) assum := 0for i := 1 to 10 sum := sum + iAt the end of the execution of the loop the variable sum will contain the result we wanted to compute. Obviously the statement in the body of the loop is executed exactly 10 times, but for other loops determining the number of iterations that will take place may be much harder. Consider, for example, the following code segment: sum :=0L1: if i=0, exit. sum := sum+i i:=i–1 goto L1Here the situation is more complicated. If the variable i contains the value 10 at the beginning of the execution of the code segment, the loop will be executed exactly 10 times and will calculate exactly the same value as before. If i starts out with any other positive integer value, the loop will be executed i times; however, if i starts out as a negative integer, the 
Cellular Automata    ◾    65condition in statement L1 will never be satised, and the computation will be in an innite loop and will never stop. Since the value of i is determined earlier in the program, it is not clear what its value will be.It is interesting to ask if we can design an algorithm that will be able to look at a code of a computer program and its input and decide whether it will result in an innite loop. In simple cases, like the rst one we showed, the problem is easy and even trivial to solve. However, for the general case Turing showed that it is impossible to construct a computer program that takes as its input another computer program and its input and determines whether the other program will halt or go into an innite loop. In other words, it is impossible to determine in a nite time whether a particular program will halt on any particular input. is is called the halting prob-lem, and it is unsolvable using our strongest computational model (i.e., in universal computational models). Such problems are called undecidable.We will see that a cellular automaton is a computational model and will analyze it in comparison with other computational models. Moreover, we will show that the “Game of Life” with its simple rules is a universal com-putation model. As a corollary, we will see that some questions about the behavior of CA are undecidable and cannot be answered algorithmically.2.7.2  Cellular Automata as a Computational ModelTo discuss CA as a computational model, we rst need to explain how the operations of CA can be thought of as performing a computation. Let us look at a particular cellular automaton. At every generation the transition rule of CA determines the state of the cells in the next generation. In other words, we compute for every cell its next state, taking into consideration its current state and the states of the cells in its neighborhood.If we think, for instance, on the Game of Life, we can rephrase its rules using the following pseudo-code:If the cell is aliveThen If the number of live cells in its neighborhood is either 2 or 3 Then The cell’s state in the next generation is “alive” Else The cell’s state in the next generation is “dead”If the cell is dead
66    ◾    Biological ComputationThen If the number of live cells in its neighborhood is 3 Then The cell’s state in the next generation is “alive”It is important to note that the CA executes this computation simulta-neously on all cells and therefore that the computation it executes is dier-ent from the computation of a single cell’s next state. However, a standard computational model (e.g., computer program) can execute this computa-tion cell by cell. Actually, this direction of the proof should be self-evi-dent, as we usually implement CA using a regular computer program. It is harder to show that CA can be used to perform standard computations. To answer this kind of question we have to show how a computation in another model can be simulated by CA.For instance, let us look at the addition of two numbers. First, we have to represent the numbers in a cellular automaton. Let us consider a 1-D cellular automaton and assume the numbers are represented as unary numbers (i.e., the number n is represented as a sequence of n cells con-taining 1). e two numbers will be written one aer the other, with an empty cell (represented by zero) between them. So an initial state of a cel-lular automaton1 1 1 1 1represents the problem of adding 2 and 3.Now we need to dene the set of states and dene the neighborhood so that the CA will eventually achieve the state1 1 1 1 1which represents the number 5.e problem with nding a transition rule that will apply to any addi-tion problem and not just to the problem 2 + 3 is that the rule has to be applied simultaneously to all the cells of the CA. Moreover, the xed neighborhood size (in this example it is 3; i.e., each cell sees only its imme-diate neighbor on each side) makes every cell ignorant of the states of cells outside of its neighborhood. However, in this example we can take advan-tage on the particular observation that there is only one cell whose local neighborhood is 101, so we can set rules that will be applicable only to cells 
Cellular Automata    ◾    67with this neighborhood. is neighborhood should change to 110. us, in the next generation the neighborhood to its right will be 101 and will be treated the same way; aer three generations the computation will be correctly executed, no more 101 neighborhood would exist, and thus the computation will end.More complicated questions can be addressed using CA. Consider a cellular automaton using rule 132 (see Section 2.4), and observe that it can determine whether a number is odd or even. If its initial state is com-posed of an even number of live cells, then aer some generations all the cells will be empty. Conversely, if the initial state is composed of an odd number of live cells, aer some generations the automaton will arrive at a steady state where exactly one cell is alive. In other words, this automa-ton is a special-purpose computer that can determine if a number is odd or even. By adding more states and changing the transition rule, we can build CA that can perform more complex operations, such as squaring any integer and nding prime numbers. e important point here is that we can transform a computational problem so that it can be described by CA, and we can create transition rules that will allow the CA to execute the computation.In the next section we will see that this can be done in the general case—that is, any computation can be carried out in the CA model.2.7.3  How to Prove That a CA Is UniversalAs already noted, to prove that a computational model is universal we have to prove it is computationally equivalent to another universal com-putational model such as Turing machines or the lambda calculus. To prove this equivalence we have to prove two claims: (1) that any TM can be simulated by CA; and (2) that any CA can be simulated by a TM. If we proved only one of these two claims, we would have shown that one model is at least as strong as the other and not that the models are equivalent.e latter direction is simple: while we describe our cellular automata as set of rules we actually run them using a conventional computer pro-gram. Since all computer programs can be executed on Turing machines it follows that every automaton can be simulated by a TM.To prove the other direction—that we can simulate a TM by a cellular automaton—recall that a TM is characterized by the initial state of its tape, the set of states, and the transition rules that determine for every state how the current tape cell has to be modied and how to move the read/write head. 
68    ◾    Biological Computationerefore, we have to determine how to represent the TM’s tape and states on the automaton’s grid and to write the transition rules such that the automa-ton mimics the TM’s behavior at any point in time. Such a construction is sketched in Section 2.7.4 and proves that we can build a CA for any TM.Note that this proves only that we can construct a cellular automaton for a given TM. It does not help us to determine for a given automaton whether it is equivalent to any specic TM. us, proving, for example, that Life is itself a universal computational model is a bit more complicated, as the transition rules for Life are xed, and we cannot dene the transition rules to simulate the behavior of a particular TM.e creative solution to this predicament is showing that certain pat-terns (like the glider described in Figure 2.5) can be made to interact and collectively behave like digital circuits. In particular we can show that we can perform logical AND and NOT operations, which turn out to be suf-cient for a universal computation (more about this in Section 2.7.5).Note that the most general denition of a cellular automaton consists of an innite number of cells, and therefore the equivalence between a TM and a cellular automaton is relevant only when we limit ourselves to a nite number of nonempty cells in the CA. Remember that a TM performs its computation sequentially and thus cannot access or simulate an innite number of cells in nite time, whereas a cellular automaton can address an innite number of cells due to the locality of the transition rule.2.7.4   Universality of a Two-Dimensional Cellular Automaton—Proof SketchWe will present a construction of a two-dimensional (2-D) cellular auto-maton Ms that simulates a given TM M. Showing that any TM can be transformed into a 2-D CA demonstrates that 2-D CA are a universal com-putational model; the sketch follows the proof in Mitchell (1998).e automaton Ms simulates a TM M in “real time” (i.e., any step taken by M is simulated in one time unit by Ms). Let M be a TM with n states and an alphabet of size m, and assume without loss of generality that n < m.We note the following properties of Ms:• e CA Ms operates in an innite 2-D space. A certain number of its cells will represent the TM and be active, and all other cells are in the quiescent state that will be denoted by 0.


===== [21/72] chapter-21.html =====

Cellular Automata    ◾    69• We will denote by k the number of possible states for each of Ms’s cells. Let k = 1 + max(m,n) = m + 1. e state numbered m + 1 is the quiescent state 0.• Four cells (h, a, b, s) play a central role in the operation of Ms (Figure2.10(a)). e cell corresponding to the TM’s read/write head is denoted as h and is at state P. e cells adjacent to it to the right and le are denoted as a and b, respectively. e cell currently being read on the tape is denoted by s and is in state S0. We dene the neighborhood of each cell as the seven cells around them arranged in the shape shown in Figure2.10(b). Note that when each of the four previously mentioned cells is the center of the shape in Figure 2.10(b) it can be identied by unique properties of its neighborhood. For example, the cell s is distinguishable because it has an occupied cell above it and empty cells below it.e cellular automaton is constructed as follows. One row of the grid is used to represent the tape of M. At each time step t of the operation of Ms the cells in this row are in states corresponding to the characters on the tape of M. Although Turing machines use innite tape, the size of their input must be nite. In the automaton Ms this is implemented by using a Pcell hcell sS0S–1S–2S–3S1S2S3(b)(a)cell a cell bFIGURE 2.10  A CA that simulates a TM. (a) A schematic description of the CA’s operation. e cell corresponding to the TM’s read/write head is denoted as cell h and is at state P. e cells adjacent to it to the right and le are denoted as a and b, respectively. e cell currently being read on the tape is denoted by s and is in state S0. e other cells depicting nonempty tape cells are denoted by i, and their states are Si. (b) Description of the neighborhood dened for each cell (marked in gray) in the universal CA. (Adapted from Mitchell, Melanie, In T. Gramss, S. Bornholdt, M. Gross, M. Mitchell, and T. Pellizzari, Nonstandard Computation, pp. 95–140, Weinheim: VCH Verlagsgesellscha, 1998. With permission.) 
70    ◾    Biological Computationspecial state that denotes the lemost and rightmost cells of the input. All the cells outside of this nite active region are set to the quiescent state 0.e row above the row representing the tape simulates the read/write head of M, which is denoted as cell h in Figure2.10. Cell h is exactly above the cell s, whose state S0 will be read at time t. e cells to the right and le of h are denoted as a and b, respectively. All the cells in this row other than h are in the quiescent state 0. We will not write the transition rules of the CA in a formal way, but we will follow the execution of the CA that simu-lates the following generic rule of the TM M (Figure2.11): “If the head is in a state P and sees the input symbol u, change u to v, switch to state Q, and move the head one place to the right.”To understand the translation we have to remember that the main problem is that in the CA Ms all the cells act simultaneously according to the transition rules, but to implement M we want to change only the cell that corresponds to the current tape position and the cells that correspond to the read/write head containing the information about the state of the machine.Since the four previously described cells (s, h, a, b) each sees a dierent kind of neighborhood (Figure 2.12), the CA rules can be made to uniquely reect the required changes for each cell.P0w0u0ts0w0uPt0h0uPt0r0a0y0w0uPbFIGURE 2.12  e unique seven cells environment of the cells s, h, a, b.0r000t000uP00w000y000r000t000v000wQ00y00FIGURE 2.11  e CA before and aer executing the following rule: If the head is in state P and sees the input symbol u, change u to v, switch to state Q, and move the head one place to the right.
Cellular Automata    ◾    71Notice that the cell corresponding to the read/write head has to “move” relative to the tape, in accordance with transition table of M, but cells do not move in the standard CA model. As usual when designing CA, this problem is solved not by having the cell move but rather by updating the cell values in accordance with the transition rule in a way that simulates information ow between cells. Note that the cell corresponding to the read/write head and the two cells adjacent to it are congured in a way that makes them identiable by their neighborhoods, and h is the only cell among them whose value is not 0. erefore, it is possible to choose transi-tion rules that update the states of these cells so that the cell describing the read/write head can replace either a or b (depending on the direction of the head’s movement). e state of the new cell representing the read/write head—either a or b—changes to the state of Ms corresponding to the new state of M according to transition table of M.We have thus shown how it is possible to construct a 2-D cellular autom-aton Ms that simulates any TM M thereby proving that 2-D CA are a uni-versal computation model.2.7.5  Universality of the “Game of Life”—Proof Sketche computation universality of Life is proven by showing how to build state congurations that behave as digital circuits that perform logical operations.We will use the “glider” (shown in Figure2.5) to build such “digital cir-cuits” composed of logical gates that perform the standard logical opera-tions AND, OR, and NOT.e rules of Life allow the glider to travel “autonomously” on the board. Aer four time steps the glider moves one cell diagonally down and to the right. Congurations called glider guns “shoot out” new gliders periodi-cally and then return to their initial conguration, which guarantees they will continue to create new gliders indenitely. Figure2.13(b) shows the well-known Gosper glider gun, named aer its discoverer. e Gosper glider gun shoots out a new glider aer every 30 time steps (i.e., its period is 30).e logical circuits are based on using glider guns that shoot out sequences of new gliders representing bits. As an example we will show how to implement the NOT operator. It acts upon a sequence of bits rep-resented by a stream of gliders. e bit 1 is represented by a glider, and the bit 0 is represented by the absence of a glider—a gap in the glider sequence advancing along the board. We place a glider gun that shoots out new 
72    ◾    Biological Computationgliders continuously perpendicular to this glider stream. It turns out that two perpendicular gliders colliding in a particular way annihilate each other. erefore, in the stream of gliders being shot out of the gun only the gliders that do not intersect the gliders representing the input will sur-vive. Put dierently, only the gliders that intersect the gaps in the input stream (corresponding to the 0 bits) will survive. erefore, the surviving stream represents exactly the NOT value of the input stream, as depicted in Figure2.14.Notice that, for a glider from the input stream and a glider from the glider gun to annihilate each other, they have to be precisely positioned relative to each other. Dierent relative positions during a collision can have dierent outcomes: for instance, a four-cell block or a “blinker” that lights up periodically may be created. Figure2.15 shows two gliders posi-tioned in an annihilating conguration (verifying this is le as an exercise to the reader).e operations AND and OR are implemented by employing similar techniques, that is, creating two input streams of gliders (with 1 represented by a glider and 0 by its absence) and letting them interact so that the out-put stream of gliders will have a glider only if both input streams had a glider (when implementing AND) or when at least one stream had a glider (in the case of OR). To combine these logical operators into more complex logical circuits, which are necessary to show that Life has universal com-puting power, we need to create more machinery, such as the capability of copying glider streams, moving glider streams, and halting them. We also have to be able to store information (represented as a glider stream) and to retrieve it.e existence of ways for performing all of these tasks, together with the implementation of the logical operations on glider sequences, shows (a)(b)FIGURE 2.13  (a) A glider that can travel autonomously across the board. (b) e Gosper glider gun that releases a glider every 30 generations.
Cellular Automata    ◾    73that it is possible to implement logical circuits that can perform an arbi-trary computation within the “Game of Life” framework, which proves that the “Game of Life” is a universal computational model.2.8  SELF-REPLICATIONWithout delving deeply into the problem of dening life, we can say that one of the distinguishing characteristics of life is the ability of living organisms to reproduce. In other words, living organisms can create new FIGURE  2.15  Two gliders in a conguration that will lead to their mutual elimination.InputstreamFromglider gunOutputstreamFIGURE 2.14  e conguration of Life that describes the NOT operation on a stream of bits represented by the existence or absence of gliders. Since gliders from the glider gun will survive only if there is a gap (i.e., 0) in the input stream, the output stream will be the logical complement of the input stream.


===== [22/72] chapter-22.html =====

74    ◾    Biological Computationorganisms that are very similar or even identical to themselves. Recall that von Neumann’s purpose when inventing the CA model (together with the famous mathematician Stanislaw Ulam) was to investigate the phenom-enon of self-replication.It is easy to nd CA that exhibit what looks like self-replication. For instance, a 1-D cellular automaton where a cell with value 1 causes the cells in its neighborhood to also change their values to 1. But this is not an interesting example of self-replication since copying the value 1 from cell to cell is very dierent from the complex processes of self-replication in the living world which we are trying to investigate, such as cell division, or the creation of a human baby. erefore, we want to construct a self-repli-cating cell automaton that is complex enough to convince us that its self-replication mechanism is somewhat similar to replication or procreation in complex biological systems. e cell automaton that copied the value 1 is no more interesting than a rock that splits into two similar-looking smaller rocks during an earthquake, and neither can teach us much about self-replication.Another domain where self-replication can be experimented with is programming, where the challenge is to have a program whose output is the original program itself. is is clearly a programming challenge since Print (‘A’) will output A and the output of Print (‘Print (‘A’)’) is not identical to the original (and in addition might be considered as a syn-tax error depending on the way the particular programming language handles quotation marks). e recursive nature of the challenge is clear. Surprisingly, such programs were written in almost all programming languages. ese programs, nicknamed “quines” aer the American phi-losopher Willard Van Orman Quine, operate mainly by tinkering with the printing commands of the particular languages. e following is a Quine program in C:char*f=”char*f=%c%s%c;main(){printf(f,34,f,34,10);}%c”;main(){printf(f,34,f,34,10);}While such programs are fun for programming acionados, they hardly give us general insight into self-replication.One way of making the CA models of self-replication more relevant is by looking only at CA that possess a certain minimal level of complexity. is is what von Neumann did. An alternative way would be to look at 
Cellular Automata    ◾    75many CA that exhibit self-replication and then to select those with inter-esting characteristics. Many researchers chose this path, using models with varying levels of complexity.e basic diculty in constructing a self-replicating system is that the system seems to need to contain its own description and the recipe for constructing the next generation, which must contain the recipe for constructing the generation aer that, and so on ad innitum. is is patently impossible.Von Neumann’s insight was that the self-description can have two roles: (1) as a recipe for controlling the construction of another copy of the system; and (2) as data that will be copied verbatim and attached to the new copy of the system, which in turn will enable it to continue self-replicating.is approach allows us to solve the innite regress problem that ini-tially seemed unsolvable. Our current understanding of biology shows that self-replication in living organisms works in a similar fashion, as the DNA that contains the genetic data is read as a recipe for creating pro-teins and is replicated as data during the replication process. It is amaz-ing that von Neumann had this insight about self-replication already in the 1940s, since the DNA structure was discovered in 1953, and it took a few more years until an understanding of its fundamental properties was achieved.e self-replicating cellular automaton von Neumann constructed was so complex that he never nished its design completely. e cells could be in one of 29 states, and the automaton had a universal construction capability—that is, it could construct essentially any conguration of cell states based on the description in its input (Mitchell, 1998). Moreover, von Neumann’s automaton had universal computing capabilities, that is it can compute any computable function, which as we already saw is highly sig-nicant. Further studies were able to complete simpler, but still very com-plicated, versions of universal self-replicating CA.It turns out that one can construct relatively simple self-replicating CA if these CA are not required to have universal construction capabili-ties (i.e., these systems can replicate only specic congurations). Moshe Sipper and James Reggia (2001) suggested one such elegant system, which was implemented on a 2-D square lattice. Each cell can be in one of ve states. It may contain a rook, a bishop, a knight, or a pawn or can be empty. e transition rules for each state are given in Figure2.16.
76    ◾    Biological ComputationFIGURE 2.17  e initial conguration of the self-replicating automaton. Every con-guration in the marked square will be duplicated. (Adapted from Sipper, Moshe and James A. Reggia, Scientic American 285, no. 2, 34, 2001. With permission.)KnightIf there is a bishop justbehind or to the left of theknight, replace the knightwith another bishop. Bishop or RookReplace it with a pawn.Empty squareIf there are twoneighboring knights andeither faces the emptysquare, ﬁll the square witha rook. If there is only oneneighboring knight and itfaces the square, ﬁll thesquare with a knightrotated 90 degreescounterclockwise. If there is a neighboringknight and its left sidefaces the square, and theother neighbors areempty, ﬁll the square witha pawn. If there is a neighboringrook, and the otherneighbors are empty, ﬁllthe square with a pawn. If there are threeneighboring pawns, ﬁllthe square with a knightfacing the fourth, emptysquare. Otherwise, if at least oneof the neighboring squaresis occupied, remove theknight and leave thesquare empty. PawnIf there is a neighboring knight, replace the pawnwith a knight with a certain orientation, as follows: If a neighboring knight isfacing away from thepawn, the new knightfaces the opposite way. Otherwise, if there isexactly one neighboringpawn, the new knightfaces that pawn. Otherwise, the new knightfaces in the same directionas the neighboringknight. FIGURE 2.16  Rules that describe a self-replicating automaton. Each cell can be in one of ve states: rook, bishop, knight, pawn, or empty. (Adapted from Sipper, Moshe and James A. Reggia, Scientic American 285, no. 2, 34, 2001. With permission.)
Cellular Automata    ◾    77e initial conformation is given in Figure2.17, where the square at the le is the “genome” and the two pawns to the right form the “replication arm” used in the replication process. We leave it as an exercise to the reader to start from the initial conguration in Figure2.17 and see how it dupli-cates. We also leave open the question if such specic self-replicating autom-ata can be used to study the general properties of self-replicating systems.Note, however, that living organisms are not universal “replicators” either. Bacteria can be used to replicate other foreign or even synthetic DNA, and in fact many applications of biotechnology are based on such capabilities; nonetheless, some genes cannot be replicated in this way as they may be lethal to the host. In higher multicellular organisms there is a much tighter regulation on what can be replicated, and in this sense their replication system is not universal at all.An interesting alternative way for constructing self-replicating CA is via an evolutionary process. Here we start with a large collection of randomly created CA and then search for the ones closest to being self-replicating, that is, the CA that create copies closest to their initial conguration. At the next stage, one starts with the previously identi-ed set, mutates them slightly, and repeats the process. By iterating this process we may eventually nd CA that replicate exactly. is search process is similar to biological natural selection, which is the engine of the evolutionary process. We will deal with this search procedure in more detail when we discuss genetic algorithms (Chapter 3) and Avida (Chapter 6), a programming environment that enables experiments related to articial life and can be used, among other purposes, to study self-replication.2.9  SUMMARYWe have seen that CA originated in an eort to model biological processes (e.g., cells, bacteria colonies), but they are useful in other contexts as well.Models based on CA also abound in physics, chemistry, and other areas in which there is a need to build models based on discrete time and space. An interesting application is discussed in Rosin (2006) where cellular automata were trained to perform image processing tasks like noise ltering, thin-ning, and nding convex hulls. e purpose of the training was aimed to automatically select, using a technique similar to genetic algorithms, a set of rules that can perform the task at hand. CA are also useful where research on the origin of complex behavior from simple local rules is being done.
78    ◾    Biological Computatione main lesson of this chapter is that a small number of simple rules repeatedly applied can create a wide spectrum of complex behavior that oen seems as if it were the result of a detailed plan and nonlocal coordination.Considering CA as a nonstandard computational model enabled us to use fundamental concepts and theorems from computer science to gain deeper insights into CA. One such aspect is our study of universality. We should note that universality is interesting as a theoretical question that determines the theoretical capabilities of cellular automata. Models of specic phenom-ena do not depend on universality, and, furthermore, no one would use a cellular automaton as a practical universal computational device.In our theoretical studies of CA we were able to use the undecidabil-ity of the Halting problem to learn that the fate of initial congurations in the “Game of Life” cannot be predicted without actually following the simulation all the way through. In more grandiose terms, Life cannot be predicted; it must be lived!2.10  PSEUDO-CODE// Generic code to run a 2-D cellular automata// InitiaINIT_MAT(mat)lizing the matrix to the starting set-upWHILE not END_CONDITION(mat) BEGIN // The end condition can be met by either reaching a pre-determined // number of generations, or by reaching a certain state of the matrix. FOR i:=1 TO n FOR j:=1 TO n// Calculate the new state of each cell based on its current // state, the states of its neighbors, and the transition rules // which constitute the function NEW_STATE. // To emulate simultaneous update of the main matrix a temporary // matrix is used. temp_mat[i,j] := NEW_STATE(NEIGHBORHOOD(mat,i,j)) // Update the main matrixFOR i:=1 TO n FOR j:=1 TO nmat[i,j] := temp_mat[i,j] END


===== [23/72] chapter-23.html =====

Cellular Automata    ◾    792.11  FURTHER READINGBen-Jacob, Eshel. 2008. Social behavior of bacteria: From physics to complex organization. European Physical Journal B-Condensed Matter and Complex Systems 65, no. 3, 315–322.Dewdney, Alexander K. 1984. Sharks and sh wage an ecological war on the toroi-dal planet Wa-Tor. Scientic American 251, no. 6, 14–22. See implementation at: http://wator.panmental.de.Dewdney, Alexander K. 1989. Computer recreations: a cellular universe of debris, defects and demons, Scientic American 261 no. 2, 102–105.Ermentrout, G. Bard, and Leah Edelstein-Keshet. 1993. Cellular automata approaches to biological modeling. Journal of eoretical Biology, 160, no. 1, 97–133.Mitchell, Melanie. 1998. Computation in cellular automata: a selected review. In T. Gramss, S. Bornholdt, M. Gross, M. Mitchell, and T. Pellizzari, Nonstandard Computation, pp. 95–140. Weinheim: VCH Verlagsgesellscha.Rosin, Paul L. 2006. Training cellular automata for image processing. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 15, no. 7, 2076–2087.Shapiro, James Allen and Martin Dworkin (Eds.). 1997. Bacteria as Multicellular Organisms. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Sipper, Moshe and James A. Reggia. 2001. Go forth and replicate. Scientic American 285, no. 2, 34.Turing, Alan M. 1952. e chemical basis of morphogenesis. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B (London), 237, 37–72.Wolfram, Stephen. 2002. A new kind of science, Wolfram Media. Available at: http://www.wolframscience.com/Young, David A. 1984. A local activator-inhibitor model of vertebrate skin pat-terns. Mathematical Biosciences 72, no. 1, 51–58.2.12  EXERCISES2.12.1  “Game of Life” 1. Given the initial state of the board in Figure2.18, compute the state of the board in the next ve generations. Assume the grid is large enough not to encounter boundary conditions.(a) (b) (c)FIGURE 2.18
80    ◾    Biological Computation 2. Why did we need pieces in two colors for the manual execution of Life as described in the text? 3. Does the orientation of the live cells on the board affect the sys-tem’s outcome? That is, if, for example, we rotated the boards in exercise 1 by 90° clockwise, would the future of the system change? How? 4. Try to nd an initial conguration for Life that will result in an oscillator with period 3 (i.e., returns to its initial state aer three generations). 5. True or false: If the board is nite, one would eventually return to states that have occurred previously in a periodic fashion. Prove your claim.2.12.2  Cellular Automata 6. In the standard CA model, how would you build an automaton where every cell at every instant belongs to one of two types of cells, for which there are dierent transition rules (the neighborhoods are the same for both types)? 7. ere are 256 one-dimensional automata with k = 2 and r = 1. Find a formula for computing the number of automata as a function of the parameters k and r. 8. Describe rule 146 using a table. 9. Choose a random starting position, and create a space–time diagram 10 generations long for executing rule 146 from this initial state. 10. Identify the similarity in behavior between rules with binary repre-sentation α1α2α1α2α20α20 (rules 0, 90, 160, 250). 11. We discussed automata where cells can determine the state of their neighbors in the next generation. Explain why this does not contra-dict the basic model where each cell determines only its own state in the next generation. 12. Explain how it is possible to simulate a CA with any neighborhood using a CA with a nearest neighbor’s neighborhood.
Cellular Automata    ◾    81 13. Given a deterministic CA operating on a nite board, prove the fol-lowing: If it has a conguration that can be reached in one step from two previous congurations, a conguration of the CA can be found that has no previous conguration. Such a conguration can there-fore exist only as an initial conguration of the system and is called a “Garden of Eden” conguration. 14. It is possible to change the CA model to a model with asynchro-nous time by randomly choosing only one cell at each time step and applying the transition rule only to that cell. Does this change the properties of the model signicantly? 15. We have dened the transition rule in a way that is independent of the cell’s location on the board. What is the importance and the goal of this property? What would happen if we removed it? 16. Construct a 1-dimensional CA with three states (0,1,2). e initial state of the automaton is composed of a pair of 1s, and all the other cells are in the quiescent state (state 0). See the space–time diagram in Figure2.19. e transition rule should change the states of the cells between the two 1s from le to right from state 0 one aer the other to state 2 over time. Aer changing the rightmost 0 to 2, the CA will not change anymore. Ignore what happens outside the boundaries marked by the two 1s. 12221102211002110001FIGURE 2.19 17. Construct a 1-dimensional CA using Exercise 16 as a refer-ence point; however, state 2 will now progress from left to right between the 1s, with the provision that at any generation only one cell will be in state 2 (Figure2.20), and state 2 will disappear in the last generation. Hint: You may need to add extra states to the automaton.
82    ◾    Biological Computation1200110001102011002110001FIGURE 2.20 18. Construct a 1-dimensional CA using Exercise 17 as a reference point; however, state 2 should now move right and le indenitely. at is, when the automaton reaches the nal state of Exercise 17, it will then make state 2 move le until it will meet the cell in state 1 on the le and then will turn right again, thereby creating an indenite oscillator.2.12.3  Computing Using Cellular Automata 19. Why could we discuss the undecidability of the halting problem for computer programs and Turing machines as if it was one claim, even though the two computational models are dierent? 20. e following problem is undecidable: Given a computer program and an input string, determine whether the program will output a specic character during its execution. Show how we may use the halting problem to prove the undecidablility of this problem. 21. List the main dierences between a computational model based on Turing machines and a model based on cellular automata. 22. We have claimed that we can construct a two-dimensional CA that simulates any TM. Is this enough to prove that CAs are a universal computational model, or do we need to apply the construction for a universal TM and nd a CA equivalent to it? 23. We have claimed that we can construct a CA for a given TM. From this claim we can deduce that we can construct a CA that can accept on its grid a description of a TM and can simulate it. Why?2.12.4  Self-Replication 24. Von Neumann’s automaton has a universal construction capability. What input does it need to construct a self-replicating automaton? 25. Based on the results given in Section 2.8, is a universal construction capability necessary for self-replication? Is it enough?
Cellular Automata    ◾    832.12.5  Programming Exercises 26. Program an “engine” to execute any CA. When designing your pro-gram try to allow maximum exibility in dening the CA’s universe (the grid on which it computes) and the transition rules. 27. Using the engine created in Exercise 26, implement the automata mentioned in this chapter. 28. Construct a cellular automaton that, when given a board containing cells that form all kinds of shapes, will leave only shapes that look like a symmetric cross of any size (i.e., lines of the same size that cross each other in the middle) and will eliminate all other shapes (see Figure 2.21). (A single cell is not considered a cross.)Initial conformation Final conformationFIGURE 2.21 29. An N × N board where each cell has a random numerical value between 0 and N2 is given (assume that N is known to the cells). Find the rules for a cellular automaton that will keep only the cells with the highest value on the board and will eliminate (set to 0) the values of all other cells (see Figure 2.22).012000000001200000012435785991232460Before AfterFIGURE 2.22


===== [24/72] chapter-24.html =====

84    ◾    Biological Computation2.13  ANSWERS TO SELECTED EXERCISES 4. Many patterns can be found with three generations periodicity. One such example is given in Figure2.23.FIGURE 2.23 5. If the board is nite, the number of congurations is nite. (For an N × N board it is 2(N×N)). us, for any initial conguration, its evolu-tion must eventually hit a conguration that already occurred. Since the rules are deterministic, the cycle between these congurations will repeat itself forever. 7. e number of possible automata is Kk(2r+1). 10. In all of these rules the state of a given cell in the next generation is dependent on the state of its two neighboring cells but not on its own state. 13. Since the automaton is deterministic, every conguration is fol-lowed by a unique consequent conguration. If there is a congu-ration that is reachable from two dierent previous congurations, it means that the number of consequent congurations is smaller than the total number of congurations of the system. erefore, the system must have some congurations that are not the con-sequents of any conguration and are thus “Garden of Eden” congurations. 15. e requirement that a cell cannot use its location (e.g., its x,y coor-dinates) in calculating its next state is essential to the concept of cel-lular automata as it allows each cell to communicate only with its local neighborhood and requires that all cells will follow the same 
Cellular Automata    ◾    85rules. It thus ensures homogeneity and locality and ensures that the computation of the CA is not a simple translation of programs that use addressable memory. 16. e key here is to notice that the new state of the cell is determined by its current state and the current state of its neighbor from the le according to the following table. Note that there are other combina-tions of the two relevant bits (i.e., the current cell and the cells to the le) but they will not occur inside the boundaries marked by the two 1s.Le Current New State0 0 01 0 22 0 20 1 12 1 12 2 21 2 2 17. e solution requires changing the current 2 into 0 and changing the 0 to the right into 2. However, the lemost 0 cell must use an additional ag to prevent it from starting another wave of 2 aer the rst one. 20. Add a print command for the required character immediately before any stop command (or termination point) of the program. (If that character is part of any other output of the program replace the character for that output.) Now, if this printing problem was decid-able, then we would have a solution to the Halting problem, which is known to be undecidable and, therefore, this is impossible. 24. To construct a self-replicating automaton the input tape should con-tain a coded description of the automaton.


===== [25/72] chapter-25.html =====

87C h a p t e r 3Evolutionary Computation3.1   EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY AND EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION3.1.1  Natural SelectionCharles Darwin opened his famous book, e Origin of Species, in which he presented the theory of evolution by natural selection, with a discus-sion aimed at showing that a far-reaching hereditary change in organisms’ characters is possible and that such changes can be achieved by selective breeding. Darwin explained the mechanism for such evolutionary changes by presenting the example of domesticating animals and crops. By selec-tive breeding based on small variations in hereditary characteristics, one can gradually create dierent strains according to the breeder’s prefer-ences. Figure3.1 gives as an example Brassica oleracea and the variety of crops cultivated from it. Domestication and articial selection oen result in extensive hereditary changes. Consider, for example, the dier-ent dog breeds or the many edible and decorative plants created by man. Domestication is an example of evolution in action, albeit on a small scale. Darwin argued that under natural conditions the environment takes on the role of the breeder, as individuals who are better adapted to the envi-ronment reproduce more than others.e industrial melanism of the peppered moth provides a famous exam-ple of this process. An increase in air pollution has been shown to give a camouage advantage to darker moths that were rare before the industrial revolution, so that the dark form of the moth became the more prevalent form, replacing the previously more common light form. Antipollution 
88    ◾    Biological Computationlegislation, which led to reduced pollution, reversed the trend. Scientists have observed a more disturbing example of evolutionary change: various strains of bacteria have developed resistance to antibiotics, oen very rapidly.e theory of natural selection has far reaching implications, but it is based on simple basic assumptions: 1. ere is variation between the individuals in the population, each individual having a unique combination of characteristics. 2. A large part of this variation is hereditary. 3. e world has limited resources, and some of the variants in the population can make better use of these resources. ese individuals will produce more ospring than other individuals.ese simple and widely accepted assumptions necessarily lead to natural selection. In other words, the principle of natural selection is an unavoid-able result of the conditions that exist in the living world.Brassica oleraceaBroccoliCabbageKohlrabiCauliﬂowerBrussel sproutsArtiﬁcialselectionFIGURE 3.1  Some of the cultivated varieties of wild cabbage (Brassica oleracea).
Evolutionary Computation    ◾    89One of biggest obstacles to Darwin’s natural selection theory was understanding the source and nature of the hereditary variations. When Darwin published e Origin of Species in 1859 there was no established theory explaining heredity. It is interesting to note that in 1866 Gregor Mendel, the father of modern genetics, discovered the basis for hereditary laws, but his research was ignored and forgotten until the beginning of the 20th century. At the beginning of the 21st century, we now have a much more complete picture of the mechanisms of heredity based on our under-standing of DNA and the processes related to it, as we saw in Chapter 1. Darwin assumed blending inheritance, in which the characteristics of both parents blend to produce the corresponding organ in the ospring. Darwin believed that tiny particles he called gemules allow for heredity. e gemules represent characteristics, are present in all organs, and are sent from the organs to the reproductive cells so that during reproduction the gemules from both parents mix together to create the ospring, who usually has the average of the parents’ characteristics. In turn, the o-spring’s gemules will be sent to their reproductive cells, and so on.Darwin’s blending inheritance theory, also known as pangenesis, had severe theoretical problems since selection (natural or articial) cannot aect blended characteristics. Repeated blending will “dilute” the charac-teristics, and selection cannot preserve them. In the same way that when we mix red and white paints we cannot separate the resulting pink back into its white and red components by more mixing, it is impossible to sep-arate the parents’ characteristics aer blending. As discussed in Chapter 1, we know now that the alleles of both parents are preserved in the ospring and are not blended. is was one of Mendel’s most important ndings.Another important problem with Darwin’s inheritance model is that it allows the inheritance of acquired characteristics, which the individual developed during his or her life. If an ostrich developed calluses on its knee due to the knee rubbing the ground when it runs and passed this property on to its descendants so that they will have calluses on their knees even before they start running, this would be the inheritance of acquired char-acteristics. Since young ostriches really do have calluses before running, this idea seems plausible, but we know now that ostriches have calluses on their knees at a young age because of natural selection and the reproduc-tive advantage of individuals with this property and not due to the inheri-tance of acquired characteristics. Or consider the long necks of giraes. According to the inheritance of acquired characteristics model, ancient giraes with necks of normal length were compelled to feed on leaves 
90    ◾    Biological Computationof tall trees and thus had to stretch their necks. is acquired trait was passed on to their ospring, resulting in the long neck of modern giraes. According to pangenesis when a particular organ is aected by the envi-ronment, its gemules are aected in the same fashion and are passed to the reproductive cells in this new form and therefore the acquired character-istics are passed on to the individual’s descendants. Inheriting acquired characteristics is oen referred to as Lamarckian evolution, named aer Jean Baptiste Lamarck. He predated Darwin and suggested an evolution-ary model that relied on the inheritance of acquired characteristics.Note that there are two types of information ow according to this model of inheritance of acquired characteristics. First, the change caused by the environment (e.g., the callus caused by the knee hitting the ground) has to be stored as information in the gemules. As the reproductive cells do not contain a copy or “image” of the organs but rather instructions that control the gradual and complex development of the embryo and the indi-vidual under the environmental inuences, it is unclear how to automati-cally translate back an external change in an organ to a change in these instructions. August Weismann, one of the most inuential scientists to have worked on evolution, described this problem as follows: believing that information can be translated in such a manner is similar to believ-ing that an English telegram sent to China will arrive already translated to Chinese. e second information transfer, according to the model of the inheritance of acquired characteristics, is the passing of the gemules from the organs to the reproductive cells. is would require that reproductive cells do not exist early on but rather are produced during the organism’s adult life from the gemules sent from the various organs. is information transfer is not supported by modern understanding of the major heredi-tary processes. For example, we know now that all human female eggs, or oocytes (about 500,000) already exist when a baby female is born. Male sperm cells are being continuously produced in the testis, but we don’t know of a mechanism that enables transfer of arbitrary information from the rest of the body into the testes. Weismann actually tried to check the validity of the model by repeatedly breeding mice whose tails have been cut o and discovered (of course) that the ospring were born with tails of regular length.Interestingly, recent discoveries may open the door to the return of Lamarckian ideas (of course not in their naïve version), operating at the molecular level. Mechanisms like reverse transcription, which enables reverse ow of information from RNA to DNA in contrast to the central 
Evolutionary Computation    ◾    91dogma (see Section 1.3.4), and inherited regulatory changes in gene expression (a form of inheritance referred to as epigenetic inheritance) paint a richer picture of hereditary information ow than was previously assumed. In any case, even though Lamarckian evolution diers from our modern genetic model, it can be used in evolutionary computation (genetic algorithms, or GAs). We will see in Section 3.5 how this idea is implemented and to what eect.Modern evolutionary theory (known as neo-Darwinism) denies the troublesome ideas of blending inheritance and the inheritance of acquired characteristics. It is intimately related to the modern understanding of heredity provided by genetics, based on distinguishing between inherited genetic information and the organism’s characteristics. e transfer of genetic information is schematically described in Figure 3.2. e individu-al’s genetic information is called its genotype (multiple units of inheritance called genes make up the genotype). e individual’s expressed character-istics are called its phenotype. For example, the information in the DNA molecules (see Chapter 1) that is responsible for eye color is part of the genotype, whereas the eye color itself is a phenotype. Hereditary changes impact the genotype, whereas natural selection selects between the dier-ent phenotypes created under the combined inuence of the genotype and the environment. We return to the distinction between genotype and phe-notype in the discussion of the use of Lamarckian inheritance by genetic algorithms.e origin of variations in the genotype is random mutations. In asex-ual reproduction a single parent passes a copy of all his or her genetic information to the ospring. erefore, each descendant is an exact genetic copy of the parent, except for rare mutations. On the other hand, in sex-ual reproduction each individual usually contains two copies of genetic information—one from each parent—which are not necessarily identical, since each parent may pass on a dierent form of the gene. e dier-ent forms of a gene are called alleles. Additionally, during meiosis new combinations of alleles taken from the two parental chromosomes are cre-ated (see Chapter 1). erefore, in sexual reproduction, the progeny have new combinations of alleles and thereby dierent characteristics. is is the source of the power of sexual reproduction, as found in animals and humans. Asexual reproduction is found in bacteria, plants (which exhibit both types of reproduction), and some other simple organisms.To summarize, neo-Darwinism, which is the common evolutionary the-ory held today, denies the passing on of acquired characteristics and explains


===== [26/72] chapter-26.html =====

92    ◾    Biological Computationevolutionary change by natural selection of nondirectional (random) varia-tions. For our discussion it is important to emphasize the following points: 1. Genetic change can result from one of two events: A mutation, which is a discrete random change in the genetic material that causes a change in a trait (e.g., color change), or, in sexually reproducing organisms, via a new combination of alleles.Germline cellsDevelopmentMature formHeredityEvents occurringin the phenotypeMutationFIGURE 3.2  Information transfer in asexual reproduction. e hereditary con-tinuity is based on reproductive (germ line) cells. e information in the repro-ductive cells is transferred to the next generation. Only changes in the genetic makeup of the reproductive cells (i.e., mutations, which are rare) impact the next generation. Changes to the nonreproductive cells of the organism (somatic cells), which are caused by the environment, will change the mature form but will not impact the ospring. e information transfer in multicellular organisms with sexual reproduction is also mediated by germ line cells, but the situation is more complicated, as each ospring is endowed with a unique combination of genes from its parents.
Evolutionary Computation    ◾    93 2. Natural selection is not a creative force in evolution; it can elimi-nate deleterious variations in the population and can increase the frequency of successful variations.3.1.2  Evolutionary Computatione term genetic algorithm in its most general sense refers to a family of computational models inspired by biological evolution. e dierent models are based on various conceptions of the biological evolutionary processes and do not necessarily faithfully represent current biological understanding. Moreover, genetic algorithms allow researchers to experi-ment with dierent evolutionary mechanisms in order to analyze their behaviors and outcomes.Any evolutionary computation is based on representing pos-sible solutions to a computational problem as “genetic” information passed from one generation to the next. The evolutionary process is initialized with a (usually random) population of “solutions,” which correspond to individual organisms. Each solution is examined to determine how successful it is in solving the computational problem; this defines its fitness and determines how well represented it will be in the next generation’s population. Furthermore, new solutions may be created by introducing random changes (similar to mutations) or by combining elements of different solutions (similar to sexual repro-duction). Therefore, better solutions become more prevalent from one generation to the next, and the probability of finding a satisfactory solution to the computational problem increases. The computational process is halted when a good enough solution to the problem is found. Evolutionary computation is often described as a function optimiza-tion process, since the computation can be viewed as a search for the maximal value of the fitness function.Genetic algorithms are used for a variety of applications, prominently optimization problems. Typically the problems are hard to attack using standard mathematical tools (e.g., the functions are noncontinuous, the set of equations is nonlinear), and the set of candidate solutions is very large. An important advantage of genetic algorithms is that it is a very generic method, and a genetic algorithms engine can be utilized for solv-ing a wide variety of dierent types of problems by modifying or supply-ing a few functions. A good review of evolutionary computation can be found in Mitchell and Taylor (1999).
94    ◾    Biological Computation3.2  GENETIC ALGORITHMSSolving a computational problem using an evolutionary process depends on answers to a few fundamental questions: 1. How is the genetic data passed from generation to generation represented? 2. How is the tness of each individual determined? 3. How does tness aect the makeup of the next generation? 4. Which genetic changes will be performed on individuals when pro-ducing the next generation? 5. When should the evolutionary computation terminate?e classical genetic algorithms model, which we will use during most of this chapter, is based on the model rst suggested by John Holland in 1975 (Holland, 1975). In this model, the answer to the rst question is that the genetic information is represented as a xed-length sequence of binary bits. We refer to every such sequence as a genotype or sometimes as a chromosome. It is important to understand that, while this par-ticular representation is the most familiar one, there is nothing sacred about this representation. Other representations such as a sequence of numbers rather than a sequence of bits, arrays, matrices, linked lists, or other data structures may be used as representations when they are more suitable. e important thing is to preserve the principle that ran-dom changes in the solutions will change their tness, which in turn will change the impact of each solution on the population of solutions in the next generation of solutions, and with that will give rise to the possibility of generating better and better solutions.In the algorithm we will present, the ospring are generated by com-bining the chromosomes of two parents. e ospring, which like all individuals are made up of a single chromosome (i.e., the organisms are “haploids” and carry only one chromosome), contain genetic information derived from both parents by a crossover process similar to the biologi-cal process of exchanging genetic information between chromosomes.e crossover process of two chromosomes is done by randomly pick-ing a location in the sequences and exchanging the corresponding parts of both chromosomes:
Evolutionary Computation    ◾    9510110 \/ 010101101010 /\ 1100100Aer exchanging the corresponding parts, the following two chromo-somes will be generated:101101100100010100101011e general structure of a genetic algorithm is as follows: 1. Start with a random population of n chromosomes. 2. Compute the tness of each chromosome in the population. 3. Repeat until n ospring are created in the new population: a. e selection phase: Pick a random pair of chromosomes from the current population. e probability of picking a particular chromosome has to be an increasing function of tness. b. e crossover phase: Crossover the parent chromosomes with probability pc (the crossover probability), and then choose arbi-trarily one of the resulting chromosomes as the ospring (if there was no crossover, choose one of the parents). c. e mutation phase: For every bit in the ospring, ip it (if 0 then change to 1; if 1 then change to 0) with probability pm (the mutation probability). d. Insert the ospring into the new population (note that the pro-cess in steps a through c generated a single ospring). 4. e new population becomes the current population forming the next generation. 5. If a predened end criterion has been reached then stop; otherwise repeat from step 2.ere are many valid variants within this scheme, some of which will be discussed later in this chapter. e general description shows that the behavior of a genetic algorithm is inuenced by a few central param-eters. e general structure of the algorithm does not dictate how the 
96    ◾    Biological Computationtness of each individual is computed and how the dierences in tness determine how the parents, who will mate and create the next genera-tion, are chosen. ese two components, as well as the probabilities pc and pm, have a major inuence on the behavior of the algorithm, that is, on the changes in the population from one generation to the next. Another important parameter is the population size n, which deter-mines how many individuals will be tested in each generation out of all the possible solutions or chromosomes.ExamplELet us demonstrate how a genetic algorithm behaves using a very simple exam-ple where the goal is to ﬁnd the integer x in the range [0,..,31] that maximizes the function g(x) = 31x – x2.Clearly, this is a very simple problem that is easily solved analytically (or by exhaustive search), but it will serve to demonstrate how to solve a problem using a genetic algorithm (Table3.1a and Table3.1b).Solution representation: we will represent every possible solution by a ﬁve-bit sequence  (chromosome).  Five  bits  sufﬁce exactly  to  represent the integers 0 (00000) to 31 (11111) as binary numbers.Initial population: we will choose the population size to be 4 (just for the sake of the example, as this population is much smaller than commonly used). The initial population will be random.Score: the score of an individual i in the population, fi, will be the value of the function g; that is, we will look at each chromosome as the binary representation of a number x and will compute g(x).The probability of selecting a chromosome as a parent: the probability of picking individual i as a parent is correlated to its score and is deﬁned as the ratio between its score and the sum of the scores of all organisms in the population, that is,P iffik( ) =∑all solutions kSample run: Table3.1 shows the execution of the algorithm for a population of four individuals.•  The sequences 10011 and 11000 are chosen as parents. For the cross-over phase, the point after the fourth bit was randomly picked as the crossover point to produce 10010 and 11001. We pick the ﬁrst chromo-


===== [27/72] chapter-27.html =====

Evolutionary Computation    ◾    97some and select it as the ﬁrst individual in the next generation (note that we are not demonstrating mutations in this example).•  This process is repeated until we have the next generation, that is, the four offspring shown in Table3.1b.•  The  entire  process (i.e., score  calculation, selection, and crossover) is repeated to produce subsequent generations.When will the execution of the algorithm halt? We can choose among a few strategies, depending on the problem:•  If we know what the score of the optimal solution should be, we can halt when it is reached.•  If we know what the score of the optimal solution is, we can halt when an individual with sufﬁcient score has been found (e.g., 90% of the optimal).•  We can halt when the variance in scores in the population is small (a special case is to halt when all the individuals have the same score).•  We can decide to halt if the ﬁtness of the best solution found has not improved for a certain number of generations.•  We can decide to halt after a certain number of generations (e.g., halt after 1000 generations) and then choose an individual with the maximal score as the solution. Since it is in general possible that the computation will not converge to an  optimal solution, this technique can be com-bined with any of the others to ensure termination.Based on prior knowledge of g(x) we might choose to halt the evolutionary process once an x with g(x) ≥240 is reached or at most after 1000 generations.It is probable that after some generations the individuals 10000 or 01111 which have the score 240 will be generated and the system will halt (in the TABLE3.1a  Initial Generation of Genetic Algorithm Optimizing g (see text for details)Initial population 10011(x = 19)01000(x = 8)11000(x = 24)01101(x = 13)Score 228 184 168 234Probability of being selected as parent (rounded)0.28 0.23 0.20 0.29TABLE3.1b  Population of the Second Generation of Genetic Algorithm Optimizing g (see text for details)Next generation 10010(x = 18)01101(x = 13)11001(x = 25)01011(x = 11)Score 234 234 150 220Probability of being selected as parent (rounded)0.29 0.29 0.18 0.27
98    ◾    Biological Computationrange [0,…,31], g(x) reaches a maximum value of 240.25 for x = 15.5; however, in this example we considered only integer values for x).The beauty and strength of the genetic algorithm is that we did not need to understand and analyze the function g, so we could use exactly the same algorithm to maximize other, much more complex functions, for example, g(x) = 15 – (x – 2)2 or g(x) = sin(x)3 – cos(x).3.2.1  Selection and Fitnesse phrase survival of the ttest is oen used to describe the process of natural selection. is term, which was rst used by Herbert Spencer and not by Darwin, means that, on average, the individuals best adapted to their environment survive and reproduce the most in nature. For exam-ple, animals that make good use of their food resources or that can escape from their predators by running fast are adapted to their environment and have increased chances of survival. Assigning a precise meaning to the phrase survival of the ttest is elusive, however, as it seems to be making a circular claim: survival is the result of being adapted, while being adapted is dened as survival in the environment. According to this interpreta-tion it would seem that survival of the ttest boils down to survival of those that survive. Biologists have argued frequently about the meaning of the claim that evolution works by the principle of survival of the ttest. Most biologists today prefer to use the original term natural selection to describe the evolutionary processes.Natural selection of course does not compute a numerical tness value for each individual that in turn determines how many descendants he or she will have. It is the other way around: the number of ospring denes the tness of the individual. In general, if an organism has many ospring we can deduce that it is better adapted.Genetic algorithms are obviously very dierent, as the tness func-tion (called the score in the previously given example) chosen by the programmer has a direct impact on the number of ospring. e choice of tness function can cause the algorithm never to converge to a solu-tion or to do so very slowly. e values of the tness function are the inputs of the selection process, so the tness function and the selec-tion method have to be compatible for the genetic algorithm to perform successfully.It is important to distinguish between computing a measure of the suc-cess of a particular solution in the population (a single chromosome) and the relative success of a solution in relation to other solutions in the popu-lation. In the previous example, fi was computed without taking the other 
Evolutionary Computation    ◾    99chromosomes in the population into account, whereas the values P(i) were computed by taking all the scores of the population into account. To cap-ture this distinction we introduce the following denitions:• Evaluation Function: a function used to determine the success (score) of a single solution, based on the requirements of the problem.• Fitness Function: a function which translates the value of the evalu-ation function to the value which will determine how likely the solu-tion is to reproduce (that is, how frequently it will participate in the reproduction and crossover operations).e values of the evaluation function for each individual in the popu-lation are independent of each other. On the other hand, the value of the tness function is always dened relative to a given population (usually relative to the values of the evaluation function for all other individuals in the current generation).e tness of individual i is usually dened to be f fi/ where fi is the value of the evaluation function and f is its average value over all the individuals in the population. is normalization allows us to consider the relative quality of individuals in the population when selecting the individuals that serve as parents of the next generation.Recall that aer computing the tness values, the next phase is the selection phase in which individuals are selected as parents according to their tness. Before discussing various selection regimes, we dene a term that will help us analyze the dierence between dierent selection mechanisms.e selection pressure is the degree by which the genetic algorithm prefers selecting individuals with a high-tness value as parents for the next generation over individuals with an average or low-tness values. Intuitively, a selection method with high selection pressure creates more copies of the better individuals, thereby hastening the removal of the indi-viduals with lower tness values. In other words, when the selection pres-sure is low the maximum number of ospring for high-tness individuals is low, so low-tness individuals are almost as capable of reproducing as individual with high-tness. When the selection pressure is high, low-t-ness individuals are less likely to reproduce and have fewer descendants. us, a careful balance should be maintained. If the selection pressure is too high, the genetic algorithm will converge quickly to a small number 
100    ◾    Biological Computationof high-tness individuals. is phenomenon is called premature conver-gence, and we will see that it is one of the main obstacles to the success of a genetic algorithm. Premature convergence means that we may have given up too quickly on individuals with low-tness who still could have made positive contributions to the gene pool. On the other hand, if the selection pressure is too low, we might encounter slow convergence, or the algo-rithm may not converge to a solution at all.When a genetic algorithm starts executing, we expect to nd a small number of successful individuals in a population of average and below-average individuals. It is important not to lose the better solutions at this stage. Later on, it is likely that there will still be a variance in the popula-tion, but the average tness of the population may be close to the maxi-mal tness. Nonetheless, we would like the higher-tness individuals to have a larger inuence on the next generation than the average-tness individuals.e standard selection mechanism used most oen by genetic algo-rithms is called roulette wheel selection and emulates the game of rou-lette, where each individual is represented by a set of consecutive slots on the roulette wheel with a size relative to its tness, as seen in Figure3.3. Choosing this roulette system to select parents gives every individual a probability to become a parent, which is the ratio between its tness and the sum of all the individual tness values.Note that with the roulette mechanism there is a danger of early con-vergence. e higher the tness value of an individual, the more oen it will be selected as a parent and therefore will have more descendants. If the initial population has too many high-tness individuals, they will be selected as parents most of the time, and we may lose solutions.ikjFIGURE 3.3  Roulette wheel selection. Here individual j has the highest tness, while individual k has the lowest tness. erefore, when the wheel spins, the probability that j is selected as a parent is the highest, k has the lowest chance to become a parent, and i has an intermediate probability.
Evolutionary Computation    ◾    101Several alternative selection mechanisms may be more suitable in cer-tain cases, including the following:• Rank selection: In this technique individuals are sorted by their tness and chosen as parents based on their ranking rather than directly by their tness. is method helps to avoid early conver-gence since the selection pressure is low, and low-tness individu-als may be selected quite oen as parents. e disadvantage of this mechanism is that an individual might have a signicantly higher tness than the next ranked individual, yet ranking hides such dif-ferences in tness and may cause slow convergence. Conversely, ranking works well when the tness dierences are small but believed to be signicant. e roulette mechanism will select each individual with a similar probability, but the ranking mechanism can give rise to more signicant dierences between the selection probabilities.• Tournament selection: In its most naïve form this mechanism works as follows. Two individuals are randomly chosen from the popula-tion. e one with the higher tness is then chosen to serve as parent (the two individuals may or may not be returned to the population so they can be reselected). ere are more general variants of this mechanism where the number of individuals compared (the tourna-ment size) is larger than two. One advantage of tournament selection is that it is somewhat easier to implement than more complicated selection regiments while still allowing the adjustment of selection pressure (by choosing dierent tournament sizes). Another advan-tage is that there is no need to precompute the tness values, which require evaluating of the entire population, since the contestants can be compared based on the evaluation function. is eliminates the need for two passes through the population to compute tness or the cost of sorting the population (in rank selection). Eliminating the need for global population statistics makes tournament selection better suited to parallel implementations. Similarly, there are cases in which it is easier to compare solutions, as done in tournament selection, rather than to compute an evaluation function for indi-vidual solutions (e.g., if solutions represent dierent game playing strategies, pitting them against each other may be the best way to evaluate their quality).


===== [28/72] chapter-28.html =====

102    ◾    Biological Computation• Steady-state selection: In this mechanism only a small fraction of the population is replaced at every generation, whereas most indi-viduals continue to live from one generation to the next. Usually the low-tness individuals are replaced, of course. Aer deciding which individuals are to be replaced, the next generation’s parents have to be selected using one of the selection mechanisms so that new individuals can be created to replace the ones to be eliminated. In this method the turnover between generations is much more gradual. It is interesting to note that with this mechanism better solutions survive from generation to generation without the danger of crossover.Each of these mechanisms has many variants that are appropriate when solving specic problems.3.2.2  Variations on Fitness FunctionsWe have assumed up to now that the values of the evaluation and tness functions are positive (or at least nonnegative) and that higher tness val-ues represent better solutions, that is, that the goal of the genetic algorithm is to maximize the tness function. For many problems these assumptions are not appropriate.Sometimes tness values are not necessarily positive. For instance, when we search for the maximal value of the function g(x,y) = x2 – y2, for some ranges of x and y the function has only negative values. In this case, if we use the roulette mechanism the tness values will give us incorrect roulette cell sizes.Moreover, many problems are represented as minimization problems rather than maximization problems. In most of the problems we dis-cussed, the evaluation function represented the level of success of the solu-tion; therefore, our goal was to nd a solution of the highest evaluation value. In many other problems the evaluation function represents the cost of a solution; therefore, we want to minimize its value.We describe a couple of techniques that allow us to use genetic algo-rithms in cases where the natural tness measure is not suitable for the selection mechanisms in their standard form. In all such cases the solu-tion is to map the values of the evaluation function to values that are better suited to serve as tness values.
Evolutionary Computation    ◾    103• Minimization problems: e common solution is to subtract the value of the evaluation function from some constant:f xC g x g x C( )( ) ( )max max=− <0 otherwise We can select Cmax in advance (as an input to the system), or as the largest value of g observed so far, or as the largest value of g in the current generation, or in the last k generations.• Negative evaluation function values: Here the solution is to add to the evaluation function g(x) a large positive value f xg x C g x C( )( ) ( )min min=+ + > 00 otherwise As in the previous case, Cmin may be selected in advance (as an input to the system), as the absolute value of the worst g observed so far, or observed in the current generation, or observed in the last k generations.• Dynamic range: In the implementation we presented so far we used the same mapping of evaluation function to fitness func-tion for the entire duration of the algorithm. This may not always be suitable. Consider the following example. Assume that the evaluation values are distributed between 1 and 10, and thus the best solution (10) will have a huge advantage over the worst (1) when using roulette wheel selection. Now assume that all solu-tions were improved by a constant value, and the range is now between 1001 and 1010. Now, the best solution (1010) will have only marginal advantage over the worst (1001). To avoid this problem and to keep supplying the impetus to continue to push the better solutions further, we transform the evaluation values into the range between the best and the worst values by the fol-lowing normalization:
104    ◾    Biological Computation f xg x CC C( )( )minmax min=+ −−ε where Cmin and Cmax are the current minimal and maximal values in the population, respectively; the ε is added to make sure that even the solution with the minimal value will still have a nonzero prob-ability to be selected.ese techniques help with some of the more common situations. More sophisticated mappings are also possible, but they need to be evaluated to see how well they really improve the behavior of the algorithm (e.g., how well they help avoid early convergence and slow termination).For the most part we assume that individual tness (i.e., the value of the evaluation function) is computed independently for each indi-vidual. ere are, however, situations in which it is either necessary or protable to compute the tness of individuals based on how they inter-act with other individuals. An interesting technique is based on allow-ing individuals from two populations to compete with one another. For example, if the goal is to evolve a mechanism that handles arbitrary data in an appropriate way, it might be useful to evolve two popula-tions: one consisting of candidate mechanisms, and another consist-ing of datasets that attempt to cause the mechanisms to fail. ese two co-evolving populations will then nd themselves in an evolutionary arms race—of the sort that can be found between predator and prey in nature—that may improve the solutions the genetic algorithm will manage to nd. More generally, the tness function does not have to be a xed and simple function specied in advance but may in fact be a complex algorithmic function whose result changes depends on the population of solutions or on other factors. See the exercises at the end of this chapter for examples. We return to this topic in the discussion of Articial Life in Chapter 6.3.2.3  Genetic Operators and the Representation of Solutionse two genetic operators we have used—mutation and crossover—expand the set of solutions tested by the algorithm. Mutations change the chromosomes in a random fashion, and their inuence on the tness of individuals is determined in the following generations. Crossover is more 
Evolutionary Computation    ◾    105signicant, as it allows the genetic algorithm to combine elements of already reasonably good solutions to create better solutions. Other genetic operators for improving the performance of genetic algorithms for certain problems have been suggested over the years.It is important to realize that one of the crucial factors determining how well a genetic algorithm performs is the representation of the solu-tions as chromosomes—that is, the way the evaluation function interprets the chromosome—and how well this representation is compatible with the genetic operators. As the representation of solutions is such a central issue, it is sometimes called the representation problem.Consider the example of designing a genetic algorithm for nding val-ues for x ∈ [31,…,62] and y ∈ [0,…,31], which maximize the value of the function g(x) = x2 – y2. In this case it is clear that, given a possible solu-tion (x,y), any change that will increase x will yield a better solution, as will any change that will decrease y. us, the changes in x and y should be independent and the representation should provide this independence. e “natural” way to achieve this is to represent the variables as a chro-mosome of length 10, where the rst ve bits represent the rst gene x (as x – 31) and the last ve bits represent y (the second “gene”). How will this representation behave when the genetic operators are applied? Mutations (which change a single bit) will obviously operate on x and y indepen-dently. What about crossover? Look at the example in Figure3.4: assume crossover happens at the mark in Figure3.4(a), and the result of the cross-over is shown at Figure3.4(b). In both possible ospring x is changed, while the y’s remain as they were in the parents’ generation. Note that for all possible crossover points x and y are never both aected by a single crossover.If we had chosen a different representation for x and y we could have created a situation in which a crossover could affect the values of Chromosome 1Chromosome 2Chromosome 1Chromosome 2(a)(b)FIGURE 3.4  Eect of crossing over on two chromosomes.
106    ◾    Biological Computationboth variables simultaneously. Consider, for example, a representation of solutions in which the bits representing the two variables are inter-laced (Figure3.5). What will happen when we cross over two solutions under this representation? By changing the representation we created a situation in which the crossover operator changes the values of both genes. Therefore, we have increased the rate of generating new solu-tions, but we may pay for this by damaging parts of the solution (e.g., y = 0) that may have been found by the algorithm earlier. In fact, note that offspring may not carry any significant property of either of their parents. Is such a payoff worthwhile? Usually we can assume that the answer to this question will be negative (this is clearly the case for the function g) and will result in lengthening the search process, often significantly.Another example of the diculty of choosing a representation is manifested by the genetic algorithm solution to the following clustering problem. Given a set of N elements (vectors in Rn), arrange them in K sets (where K << N), and dene one of the elements in each set as its center, such that over the K sets the sum of the distances between the elements and the centers of the clusters they belong to is minimized. ere are two natural ways to represent the solutions: 1. Every solution is represented as a vector of length N, where every element denotes to which of the sets 1,…,K the corresponding ele-ment belongs. e center of each set can be calculated by looking for the element whose sum of distances to all other elements in its set is minimal. Note that in this representation the membership of each element is explicitly represented but that the identity of the centers is implicit and must be calculated in each generation. 2. Alternatively, each solution can be represented by a vector of length K that holds the identity of the center of each set. An element belongs to set k if its distance from the center of the set is minimal compared with its distances to all other centers. Here, the identity of the centers is explicit, but the membership of the elements has to be calculated in each generation.FIGURE 3.5  Interlaced representation of two variables.


===== [29/72] chapter-29.html =====

Evolutionary Computation    ◾    107In this case it is harder to determine which representation leads to a more eective evolutionary search without implementing both representations. It turns out the second representation is signicantly more ecient.Various genetic operators were proposed to improve the performance of genetic algorithms for specic problems. Many of these were general-izations of the crossover operator. An example is increasing the number of break points along the chromosome: for example, taking the rst segment of the chromosome from one parent, then the second from the other par-ent, and then the last part again from the rst parent. In the limit, each bit can be taken independently from either parent. Another suggestion was to use the information from more than two parents in generating each ospring. In the exercises at the end of the chapter we describe other rep-resentation methods and the corresponding genetic operators.So far we have presented the classical genetic algorithm, but the generic evolutionary algorithm can be implemented using dierent representa-tions and dierent operators. For instance, the genetic information may be represented as a vector of real numbers rather than bits; mutations may be implemented by adding a random number (chosen from some distribu-tion, say, the normal distribution); the rate of mutations, Pm, may change during the evolutionary process; and other genetic operators in addition to crossover may be used. Among these operators we will mention the inver-sion operator, which selects two points on the chromosome and inverts the bit sequence between them (e.g., 11101 becomes 10111 when the underlined sequence is inverted). is operator is inspired by chromosomal inversions that happen in nature. For this operator to be useful, the “meaning” of the bits has to be independent of their location on the chromosome; that is, every bit has to have an identity. Given such an identity, inversion will change the order of the “genes” on the chromosome causing a change in the distance between genes, which might impact crossovers signicantly. For example, if the problem has 10 parameters a,b,..,j, each of which can be 0 or 1, we can think of each bit in the chromosome as the “gene” for one of the parameters. It might be that ordering the genes on the chro-mosome abcfedghij will lead to better performance than abcdefghij, since abcf might tend to vary together because values for these genes represent a component of good solutions in the search space. In other words, dier-ent regions of the chromosome will become building blocks for generating solutions. Inversion is particularly useful when the representation of indi-viduals is richer than a simple string of bits.
108    ◾    Biological ComputationIt is of course possible to come up with other genetic operators, either by imitating other biological processes or based on theoretical consider-ations. e appropriateness of the operators to particular problems should then be evaluated by gauging their success in improving the solutions found by the evolutionary search process and by examining the behavior of the algorithm (e.g., its speed, the number of generations it takes it to converge, the risk of converging to local maxima).We can see from the previous examples that it can be very dicult to guess in advance how well a particular crossover method will work for a given evaluation function, and the decision is based to a large extent on intuition, understanding of the problem, and trial and error. Note that in the true biological context the “evaluation function” (i.e., the success and adaptation of an organism) is not a simple mathematical function, and therefore the corresponding problem of how nature nds good represen-tations is even harder. For example, it would be interesting to understand how evolution determines how many genes are needed to represent a cer-tain characteristic (e.g., one gene with a few functions as opposed to several independent genes), how close to each other in the genome should related genes be located, and how evolution “decides” whether to preserve one copy of a gene or a few copies in dierent locations to protect against a change in one of the copies (on this issue see also the discussion of robustness of gene networks in Chapter 6).3.3  EXAMPLE APPLICATIONSis section presents a few domains in which genetic algorithms have been used successfully.3.3.1  SchedulingScheduling problems, from arranging a weekly course schedule for college students to designing the production oor of a car factory, are multiob-jective optimization problems with multiple inputs, multiple constraints, and limited resources. Such problems are very dicult to solve using standard optimization methods. Genetic algorithms can address, in a single framework, various subtypes of optimization problems. e algo-rithm maintains a population of alternative schedules, and mixing and matching improves their overall performance. us, genetic algorithms have become a popular method to address such problems (Bagchi, 1999). More generally, an important question about genetic algorithms and sim-ilar techniques is how best to approach problems that require optimizing 
Evolutionary Computation    ◾    109several objectives simultaneously (Coello, 2000). A naïve way of working with multiple objectives, and hence multiple tness functions, is to aggre-gate them into one multi-objective function using a weighted sum. Note that for this to work all functions should be approximately in the same numerical range, or they must be normalized appropriately. In another interesting technique, called the vector evaluated genetic algorithm (VEGA), for a population of size M, k subpopulations (where k is the number of objectives) of size M/k are evaluated. Individuals are selected in each subpopulation according to a tness function that is based on a single objective. e populations are then mixed and the regular opera-tions of mutations and crossing over are performed and nally the pro-cedure is iterated for the next generation. Both the weighted sum and the VEGA techniques are easy to implement but are severely limited in the type of cases they handle successfully (Coello, 2000).3.3.2  Engineering OptimizationIn an application of genetic algorithms to an engineering problem (Goldberg, 1989) the goal was to optimize the structure of an oil pipe, which consisted of stretches of pipe and compressor units used to maintain pressure, so that energy needed to operate the compressors is minimized under the constraints of the minimal and maximal allowed pressure in each pipe segment.3.3.3  Pattern Recognition and ClassiﬁcationA very early system (Cavicchio, 1970) used genetic algorithms to nd good feature detectors for an image classication device. e images are com-posed of 25 × 25 black and white pixels and are divided into various named classes. During the training stage, images belonging to known classes are presented to the device, and the states of subsets of pixels (which serve as detectors) are recorded. In the recognition phase an unknown image is presented to the device, which then ranks the classes to which the image may belong based on the responses of the feature detectors to the new image and the information learned during the training stage. e goal of the genetic algorithm is to nd subsets of pixels (i.e., detectors) that can be used to improve the classication success. Clearly, the set of detectors (each being a set of pixels inspected by that detector) determines how well the system performs in the classication. Genetic algorithms, in which the population consisted of sets of detectors, were used to search for successful detector sets.
110    ◾    Biological Computation3.3.4  Designing Cellular AutomataGenetic algorithms are oen combined with other models such as cel-lular automata and neural networks. Genetic algorithms can be used, for example, to nd transition rules for cellular automata that lead to a desired behavior. In an interesting experiment (described in Mitchell, 1998) a genetic algorithm was used to nd a transition rule performing the “density classication task” on a one-dimensional cellular automa-ton with two states and radius 3 (k = 2, r = 3). e goal in this task is that the automaton decides whether the initial conguration of a long array contains a majority of 1's, in which case the system should settle to a xed-point conguration of all 1's, or not, in which case it should settle to a xed-point conguration of all 0s. Recall from the discussion of Wolfram numbering (Section 2.4) that for the automaton under discussion there are 2 22 1282 1r+=dierent rules, a huge number making it impossible to search for appropriate rules exhaustively. e genetic algorithm operated with a population of 100 possible solutions each representing a rule and mea-sured their tness by checking how well they preformed the density clas-sication task on a random set of initial congurations (in each generation a new set of initial congurations was used). Most of the time the genetic algorithm was unsuccessful in nding a good transition rule, but in 3% of the runs it was able nd transition rules that signicantly outperformed naïve strategies for solving the density classication task.3.3.5  Designing Neural NetworksIn another application that combined the use of genetic algorithm and another biologically inspired computation model, a genetic algorithm was used to evolve a neural network that is able to learn to recognize handwrit-ing well. As will be explained in Chapter 4, neural networks have internal mechanisms to modify the connection between elements once the net-work has been laid out. However, they do not have an internal mechanism that can help in designing the network layout itself. Genetic algorithms can be used to make a selective competition between dierent layouts and thus evolve better networks (Miller, Todd, and Hegde, 1989).3.3.6  BioinformaticsIn a typical situation, a researcher is faced with a set of DNA sequences that share a biological function and another set of sequences that do not. e challenge is to nd a sequence motif (which we assume can be represented 
Evolutionary Computation    ◾    111as regular expression) present in all (or most) of the sequences from the rst set and none (or very few) from the second set. Several researchers have used evolutionary computation techniques to nd regular expressions that represent shared properties of sets of related nucleotide sequences. In these systems the tness of solutions depends on how well the regular expressions match the set of sequences and possibly also how well they fail to match a control set of irrelevant sequences. In Section 3.6, which deals with genetic programming, we discuss this computational task in more detail. Langdon and Harrison (2008) provide a clear explanation of one such system.3.4  ANALYSIS OF THE BEHAVIOR OF GENETIC ALGORITHMSWe have to ask ourselves why genetic algorithms so oen succeed in nd-ing good solutions to dicult problems. We can reformulate this ques-tion and ask which problems can be solved eciently by using genetic algorithms, as there are problems for which genetic algorithms fail to nd good solutions. To answer these questions we have to understand how genetic algorithms behave as search strategies.Search algorithms, including genetic algorithms, search for an optimal solution to a problem in a search space. e search space denes the pos-sible values of the parameters that characterize a solution. Any point in the search space represents one solution. For example, if a solution is a 2-tuple of real numbers x and y, then the search space is a two-dimesional plane, where each point in the plane is a 2-tuple (x,y) representing a par-ticular solution.For every point in the search space we can associate a value that indicates how successful this point is (we called this value the value of the evaluation function). So, if, for example, the solution is the 2-tuple (x,y), we can associ-ate it with the value h = f(x,y). We can think of this value as another dimen-sion or another axis depicting the height (i.e., the evaluation function’s value) for each point in the domain. Plotting these values will display the values of the evaluation function for all the solutions in the search space. is graph (obviously not limited to the two-dimensional case) is called a tness landscape. Figure3.6 provides examples of tness landscapes.ink of a genetic algorithm’s search process as a walk on the t-ness landscape aiming at getting to the highest point. is exposes the greatest problem faced by any algorithm that “walks” or “climbs” on a landscape from one point to a close point—it can become “stuck” in a local maximum. at is, it can reach a point that is not the highest in


===== [30/72] chapter-30.html =====

502 Bad Gateway
nginx/1.27.1


===== [31/72] chapter-31.html =====

Evolutionary Computation    ◾    117Let x denote individuals in the population at time t, which are instances of the schema H. If we ignore mutations and crossovers for the time being, we get E m H tf xf tu H tf tm H tx H( , )( )( )( , )( )( , )+ = = ⋅∈1∑∑us, the expected number of instances of a schema in the whole pop-ulation grows by the ratio of the average tness of individuals who are instances of the schema to the average tness of all individuals in the population. e number of instances of a schema with a high average t-ness will rise in the next generation, whereas the number of instances of a schema with a low average tness will decrease. Note that although the algorithm does not explicitly compute the average tness of a schema the value u(H,t) appears in the previous formula.Next we analyze how the crossover and mutation operators aect the behavior of the algorithm. It is enough to consider only the destructive actions of these operators because our goal is to derive a lower bound on the successfulness of a schema. We will compute the probability Sc(H) that a schema H will still exist in the population aer a crossover (at a single point)—that is, the probability that at least one of the descendants of instances of H will also be an instance of H. Let l be the length of the chromosome, d(H) be the length of the schema as previously dened, and pc be the probability of a crossover: S H pd Hlc c( )( )≥ −−11To understand this inequality note that there are l–1 possible crossover points, d(H) among them are inside H, so there is a d(H)/(l–1) probability that a crossover will cut and potentially destroy the schema. e prob-ability that at least one such event occurs is pc(d(H)/(l–1)). erefore, the schema will be conserved with probability 1–pc(d(H)/(l–1)).We stress again that this is a lower bound as there is a possibility that the bits coming from the other parent will recreate the schema.Let us now consider the mutation operator. A schema H will be con-served aer a mutation if and only if all its xed bits were not mutated. A 
118    ◾    Biological Computationbit will not mutate with probability 1 – pm. As the probability of mutation in any bit is independent of all the other bits, the probability that schema H will be conserved aer mutation is (1 – pm)o(H).Combining these results (i.e., multiplying the expected number of instances by the probability of the schema being conserved) produces Holland’s schema theorem, which gives a bound on the expected number of instances of H in the population at time t + 1 which is E m H tu H tf tm H t pd Hlc( ), )( , )( )( , )( )+ ≥ −−1 11−( )( )1 pmo H3.4.3  Corollaries of the Schema Theoreme schema theorem allows us to compute the rate of growth of the num-ber of instances of H: m H tm H tu H tf tpd Hlc( , )( , )( , )( )( )(+≥ −−11111− pmo H)( )Observe that if H is short and of a low order and if its tness stays higher than the average tness of the population, this expression is larger than 1, and the number of instances of H will grow, roughly at the rate of u(H,t)/f (t) every generation. is is an exponential rate of growth (and we are discuss-ing only a lower bound). is is of course compatible with Holland’s building block hypothesis previously presented.However, this argument assumes that the population on which a genetic algorithm operates is a representative sample of the set of all possible chro-mosomes in the search space. is assumption is needed to conclude that an exponential progress rate toward an optimal solution will indeed hap-pen. It is easy to see how problematic this assumption can be. For binary chromosomes of length 20 there are 220 (which is more than a million) possible sequences. We usually restrict the algorithm to a much smaller population (say, 50 to 500 individuals). Obviously, the longer the chromo-somes, the more critical this problem becomes.On the positive side, recall that the schema theorem deals with only one aspect of the behavior of genetic algorithms. Given that some schemas have tness advantage, the theorem shows that crossovers and mutations will not disrupt the growth in the number of instances of these schemas. 
Evolutionary Computation    ◾    119However, the power of genetic algorithms is also derived from the fact that crossovers and mutations can create even better new schemas from exist-ing good schemas.3.5  LAMARCKIAN EVOLUTIONRecall that Lamarckian inheritance is the inheritance of acquired char-acteristics. Neo-Darwinism denies the possibility of inheriting acquired characteristics, based on our knowledge of biological inheritance mecha-nisms, but this need not deter us from using this mechanism as a com-putational tool. Obviously, we rst must consider how to incorporate the inheritance of acquired characteristics into the evolutionary computa-tional model and second evaluate whether this mechanism improves the behavior of the algorithm.In the standard genetic algorithms model every individual in the pop-ulation is represented as a chromosome, and a tness value is computed for every chromosome using the evaluation function. is means that usually we compute the tness directly from the genetic information (i.e., the genotype), and we do not have a notion of an explicit phenotype. For example, we interpret the bits in the chromosome as binary numbers that directly represent the numbers we are trying to optimize. Recall that in nature the phenotype is generated in a complex way involving the geno-type as well as the inuence of the environment. is process can involve various forms of interactions between genes (recall the discussion of reg-ulation in Chapter 1), the inuence of the environment on which genes become active and to what extent, environmental inuence independent of gene action, and more. To consider the inheritance of acquired charac-teristics it is helpful to distinguish between the phenotype and the geno-type, since the inheritance of acquired characteristics amounts to having changes that occur in a phenotype reected in the genotype that is passed to the next generation.An example of a situation in which the distinction between genotype and phenotype is inviting is the design of learning systems, like the neural networks that were mentioned in Section 3.3.5 and will be discussed in detail in Chapter 4. e structure of the network (i.e., the number of ele-ments and the way they are connected) is predesigned, but the strength of the connections (called weights) is adjusted in the learning phase of the network. If we use genetic algorithms to design such systems, we can rep-resent the structure of the system as the genotype and can add a learning stage that can improve the performance of each network by changing the 
120    ◾    Biological Computationweights of the connections between the elements, and generates the mature phenotype. e tness of the individuals in the population (i.e., the dier-ent networks) will be computed only aer the learning stage. In the basic structure of genetic algorithms discussed thus far the tness values are calculated for solutions immediately aer they are formed, whereas here we calculate the tness values aer the solutions have been optimized. is is somewhat similar to Darwinian evolution where the phenotype of individuals, and hence their tness, is aected by their life experience.Recall that Weismann noted that it is unclear how a change caused by the environment can be coded as a genetic change. One can consider various systems where this problem will manifest itself (in Chapter 6, for example, we will see systems whose behavior is a complex result of the behavior of their components, making it dicult to nd a change to the components that would lead to a phenotypically specied target behavior). However, in some computational cases this problem does not arise. For example, in neural networks all that is needed to implement Lamarckian evolution is to use the updated weights aer the learning stage (“pheno-types”) as the parent genotypes instead of the weights prior to the learning stage.Now that we see how to incorporate the inheritance of acquired char-acteristics into the genetic algorithms model, we can address the second question and see what computational benets may arise from this modi-cation. e two outcomes we may hope for are better behavior of the algorithm (e.g., faster convergence to a solution, avoiding local maxima) and nding better solutions. In some cases that researchers studied, both these goals were achieved, but as usual there is no way to predict a priori if inheriting acquired characteristics will give rise to a better or worse sys-tem. Nonetheless, one aspect that was studied is worth mentioning.When we allow learning to impact not only the tness of solutions but also the genotypes of the individuals passed to the next generation, the role of the environment in which the solutions “learn” becomes impor-tant. Returning to biological systems, the inheritance of acquired char-acteristics allows directed changes caused by the environment, which are presumably adaptive, to be passed on directly to the next generation. is is in contrast to the natural selection scenario in which mutations are ran-dom and are selected when they happen to be appropriate for the environ-ment. In the previously given neural network example, the inheritance of acquired characteristics means that a change in weights caused by learn-ing in the current generation is passed on to the next generation. As the 
Evolutionary Computation    ◾    121learned weights were adjusted to the challenges of the parents’ generation, the ospring will have an advantage over randomly generated individuals in learning the same tasks. However, this advantage comes with a cost: researchers who analyzed the inheritance of acquired characteristics in the evolution of neural networks discovered that, when the environment changed rapidly from one generation to the next, neo-Darwinian inheri-tance worked better than the inheritance of acquired characteristics.3.6  GENETIC PROGRAMMINGWe end this chapter by presenting another evolutionary computational model that uses a dierent representation of solutions rather than the sequence of bits commonly used by genetic algorithms. As we have men-tioned several times, it is sometimes easier and more natural to use repre-sentations other than binary chromosomes.In genetic programming (Koza, 1992; Poli, Langdon, and McPhee, 2008), solutions are represented directly as computer programs that imple-ment the dierent solutions to a problem. e tness of each solution is determined by executing the program, usually on a number of dierent inputs, and by analyzing its success.Despite the name genetic programming and its link to computer pro-grams, genetic programming does not really deal with objects that are computer programs and with operators that change lines of code. In prac-tice, the programs are represented as expression trees, and the genetic operators operate on trees.Note that, although genetic programming has become a subeld in itself, the representation of the genetic information does not signicantly aect the structure of the genetic algorithm itself, and it is always simi-lar to standard genetic algorithms as previously described. e elements aected by the representation of solutions are those dealing directly with the genetic information, that is, the genetic operators like mutations and crossovers.As a simple example of genetic programming, consider the problem of nding a simple mathematical function (or arithmetical expression) over x in [0..31] that most closely matches the points (0,0), (10,210), (31,0).We will try to nd a function of x composed of the four basic arithmetic operators (+, –, *, /) and real numbers in the range [0..31]. We will dene the result of division by 0 as 0 (rather than an error), so we do not have to handle separately situations in which division by zero occurs during the evaluation of an expression.


===== [32/72] chapter-32.html =====

122    ◾    Biological Computation• Solution representation: Each solution will be represented as a com-bination of the elements specied above as expression trees, such as the trees shown in Figure3.7.• Initial population: As with other evolutionary algorithms, the com-putation begins with a random population of candidate solutions. To generate this population we need to generate a set of random expres-sion trees. e maximal depth of the trees is usually specied in advance and guides the process. In the full method, randomly cho-sen operator nodes are added to the tree successively until the maxi-mum depth is reached, and beyond that only nonoperator nodes are added (in the current case these would be the numbers between 0 and 31 and the variable x). In the grow method both operator and nonoperator nodes are added until the maximum depth is reached (from that point on until the tree is completed, only nonoperator nodes are added). A commonly used technique called ramped half-and-half combines these two techniques by generating half the pop-ulation using full and the other using grow. To ensure a variety of trees, various tree depths are used.• Evaluation function: Every function f that is a candidate solution is evaluated by computing the values going over the list of points the function is expected to match and summing the distances between the values generated by the function and the desired results. e smaller this sum of distances, the more successful is the solution f. Note that, in contrast to most other examples in this chapter, we deal here with a minimization problem rather than a maximization problem.• Crossover: Once the two parents are selected, we randomly select a node in the expression tree for each parent and exchange the sub-trees of each node (Figure3.8).10x5++–* *x x01021FIGURE 3.7  Trees corresponding to the arithmetic expressions 10x + 5, 0 – x2, 10 + 21.
Evolutionary Computation    ◾    123• Mutation: is is even simpler than crossover. Select a random node in the expression tree, and replace its subtree with a randomly generated subtree using the same distribution used to create the initial popula-tion. A second type of mutation, called node replacement mutations (or point mutations), is similar to single-bit mutations in genetic algorithms and consists of a random change to a single node. In mutations of this kind a function can be replaced only by a function with the same num-ber of arguments, and leaf nodes can be replaced only by leaf nodes.As usual in evolutionary computation, this process continues until an individual with sucient tness is found. In this case, for instance, we may decide to continue the processing until an individual with tness error of at most 0.5 is found.To summarize, the following components need to be decided in order to attack a computational problem using genetic programming: 1. e set of constants and variables that may appear in expressions—in the example we used the values [0..31] and the variable x. is set is called the set of terminals and is denoted by T. 2. e set of functions that are composed to create solutions (we used the four arithmetic operators). is set is called the set of functions and is denoted by F.10** **+ ––x5x x010xx xFIGURE 3.8  e crossover operation on trees. In this case 10x + 5 and 0 – x2 are crossed to yield 10x – x2.
124    ◾    Biological Computation 3. e evaluation function, the selection mechanism, and when will the system halt (as in standard genetic algorithms).As a second example of the use of genetic programming, consider the following bioinformatics application. A set of DNA sequences that presum-ably have something in common (e.g., they may all come from regions in the DNA aected by a specic cellular mechanism) is given, and the goal is to nd a regular expression (RE) that captures their similarity. To reduce the number of irrelevant answers, a control set of sequences that should not be identied as belonging to the original set is also given. Genetic program-ming is used to evolve regular expressions that match as many sequences in the original set and as few of the sequences in the control set.For the sake of this example, we allow regular expressions consisting only of the four nucleotides (this is the terminal set) and the concatena-tion (.), alternation (|), and Kleene star (*) operators, without parenthe-ses. e order of precedence of these operators is, from highest to lowest, Kleene star, concatenation, and alternation. We oen omit the concatena-tion operator and write r1r2 instead of r1.r2, thus at is the same expression as a.t. Examples of regular expressions from this language are a*t, which accepts any string of a’s (including the empty string) followed by a t, and a*t|t*a, which accepts strings that belong either the previously described set of strings or strings of t’s (including the empty string) followed by an a. Because of the lack of parentheses, the expression (a.t)*, which accepts any string consisting of repetitions of at, is not included in the specied regular expression language.As before, solutions are represented as expression trees, crossing over is done by subtree crossing over, and mutations are done by replacing nodes with random nodes or subtrees. Clearly, a reasonable threshold has to be set for the maximal size of the tree to avoid solutions where many sequences are explicitly stored in the tree. To evaluate the quality of the dierent solutions, each regular expression is matched against all the sequences in each set. e quality of the solution depends on the number of true posi-tives and true negatives as well as on the number of false positives (i.e., sequences that match the suggested regular expression but belong to the control set) and false negatives (i.e., sequences with the biological function that do not match the regular expression). To factor these four attributes in a way that takes into account the possibility that the two sets may be dif-ferent in size, the Matthews correlation coecient (MCC) can be used.
Evolutionary Computation    ◾    125MCCtp tn fp fntp fp tn fn tp fn tn fp=⋅ − ⋅+ + + +( )( )( )( )where tp and tn are the number of true positives and true negatives, respec-tively, and fp and fn are the number of false positives and false negatives.e MCC is a value between –1 and +1, with +1 being a perfect predic-tion and –1 being an inverse prediction.Note that crossing over may produce expression trees for which there is no corresponding expression in the language we specied. A crossover of g* and a|t that replaces the g node of the star expression with the entire tree of the second expression results in the tree shown in Figure3.9.e corresponding expression in the language would presumably be (a|t)*, which is disallowed by the syntax of the previously dened lan-guage. ere are various solutions to situations such as this. In some cases the problem emerges because the language is too restricted. A possible solution in this case would be to use the full-standard denition of regular expressions, assuming that in the full language such problems do not exist (or are very rare). However, there may be cases in which such a change to the language is impossible. For example, we might be using an external regular expression engine whose syntax we have to match. Alternatively, the constraints of the language may not be articial but rather be neces-sary for producing expressions that make sense; for example, the language may include if statements in which the condition expression has to be a Boolean expression. In cases such as these we can ensure valid trees when producing the initial population and during mutation by following the syntax of the language. When doing crossover we may allow crossing over only between nodes having the same type (e.g., only a Boolean expression node can replace a Boolean expression node), or we can identify invalid a|t*FIGURE  3.9  A tree depicting an expression disallowed by the syntax of the language.
126    ◾    Biological Computationospring aer crossover and redo the crossing over again to give the par-ents a chance to produce valid ospring.is discussion should make it clear why genetic programming is for-mulated in terms of expression trees rather than textual source code. When textual representations are needed, parsing or unparsing to and from the tree representation may be necessary. Classically, genetic programming is formulated in terms of S-expressions, which underlie the syntax of the programming languages Lisp and Scheme. S-expressions use a prex nota-tion and explicitly encode the tree structure; for example, the S-expression equivalent to the arithmetical expression (2 + 3)*4 is (* (+ 2 3) 4). Since Lisp code is written using this tree notation, it is a natural candidate for genetic programming.3.7  A SECOND LOOK AT THE EVOLUTIONARY PROCESSIn this chapter we presented the standard genetic algorithms model, which is widely used and is a basis for understanding other evolution-ary algorithms. In the previous two sections we presented a few exam-ples of using other evolutionary models for computational purposes and saw how evolutionary computation can use mechanisms such as the inheritance of acquired characteristics regardless of whether they operate in nature and to what eect. Not only are these models useful in practice, but they also provide useful intuition about cases where it is dicult to observe biological processes and thereby can help biological research by raising new questions and hypotheses (see the discussion of articial life in Chapter 6) . In this way biology and computer science inuence and enrich one another.For this and other reasons it is useful to expand here on our knowledge of evolutionary processes. is allows us to see the genetic algorithms model we discussed in a wider perspective.3.7.1  Mechanisms for the Generation and Inheritance of Variationse neo-Darwinian theory presented at the beginning of this chapter stip-ulates that two mechanisms generate evolutionary changes: mutations and sexual reproduction. Both these processes are inherently nondirected (i.e., cannot create targeted genetic changes in response to environmental chal-lenges faced by the organism). Mutations are random and independent of the environment. Sexual reproduction creates new combinations of existing genes and might give an advantage to certain characteristics in the popula-tion (e.g., because their carriers are more attractive sexually and therefore


===== [33/72] chapter-33.html =====

Evolutionary Computation    ◾    127will have more mates and ospring) but does not create new genes, only gene combinations. e roles of the organism and the environment are very clear: the organism presents a possibly new genetic constitution, and the environment selects among individuals. is paradigm is encapsulated by the slogan, “e organism proposes and the environment disposes.”One could deduce from this that the genes uniquely determine the characteristics of the organism, and therefore the environment really selects between genes. But, as we all know, biological systems are much more complex; even identical twins—who share the same set of genes—are not completely identical. e development of an organism is a long and complex process, and the environment plays a role in most of its stages. Rather than considering development as an inputless computer program, we must at least realize that input from the environment can aect the development process signicantly. For example, some critical develop-mental stages necessitate environmental stimuli or specic environmental conditions (e.g., sunlight, gravitational pull). Changes in the environ-ment caused by the organism can aect it later on, so the relationship is interactive. No less important is the developmental exibility exhibited by most organisms that allows them to thrive despite certain environ-mental conditions or constraints. e observations made by Slijper in the 1940s of a goat born without its front legs, a situation that would usually spell imminent death, are a particularly instructive example. Amazingly, the goat learned to walk on its hindquarters. Aer it got killed in a road accident, an autopsy was performed, and substantial changes were found in the goat’s skeletal structure, its musculature, and joints: all its systems had adapted to walking upright, although it is clear that no prior genetic information in the goat’s genotype was waiting to take over in such a situ-ation, since it is unlikely that evolution had to deal with this predicament frequently enough and for enough generations.Such examples demonstrate that the role of the environment is not lim-ited to selecting individuals and that it has a signicant impact on the development of organisms. e capability of organisms to adapt to chang-ing conditions is called developmental plasticity, and, as the goat story suggests, can have a major impact on the tness of individuals (and hence on their evolutionary success). Developmental plasticity is a mechanism for creating variations. However, it is important to note that in the absence of other mechanisms these changes are not inherited, and therefore devel-opmental plasticity is not a mechanism for creating heritable variability.
128    ◾    Biological ComputationHaving compared the genetic information with a computer program, it is important to keep in mind that biological control is rather more com-plicated than the analogy with a sequential computer program would have us believe. Instead of a master control program, each cell and system operates semi-independently of others, and indeed so do the proteins and gene networks within each cell. e control is distributed and reactive to stimuli on a variety of levels of organization, and the resulting behavior is a complicated outcome of many localized interactions. is fact is relevant for understanding many of the phenomena we discussed, from develop-mental plasticity to the diculties in the notion of inheriting acquired characteristics. In Chapter 2 we saw how simple local rules can lead to complicated and coordinated behavior. We return to this topic again in Chapter 6.e genetic algorithms model discussed in this chapter is based on our understanding of the evolutionary process founded on genetic inheritance. Other mechanisms allowing information passing between generations are used in many situations. A fundamental example is the capability of cells in multicellular organisms to dierentiate into dierent cell types such as nerve cells and blood cells. Recall that, since all cells carry the same genetic information, the dierences between the cell types occurs because a dierent set of genes is expressed in each type. In general, the decision of which genes will be expressed in each cell in any given time is not based on changes in the genetic information itself (the DNA sequence) and is there-fore called epigenetic. e epigenetic variations that create the phenotypic dierences between the cells are dependent on developmental conditions for each family of cells. e changes can remain stable for long periods of time in the life of the cell and can be passed on via various processes col-lectively called epigenetic inheritance to the next generation of cells: for example, liver cells will create new liver cells. Another way for one genera-tion to impact the next generation is by creating environmental changes. For instance, the dams a beaver builds impact the environment of its descendants and thereby the selection pressure and developmental cues they will have to deal with. It is interesting to observe that such environ-mental changes (called niche construction) impact not only the descen-dants of a particular individual but also the ospring of other individuals and even of other species. In this way the shared environment allows dif-ferent species to mutually aect each other over many generations and for sustained periods of time.
Evolutionary Computation    ◾    129Another route for passing information between generations is social learning and imitation. Social animals, including humans, imitate and learn from one another, which allows variations to spread within and between gen-erations. As a nal example, note that another way of passing information between generations is inheriting immunity to pathogens from the mother. In many species of mammals the mother passes antigens via the placenta and milk. Passing on this information (which has mainly been acquired by the mother during her life as a reaction to infections and is thus similar to pass-ing acquired characteristics), allows the descendants to gain protection from pathogens in the environment without the dangers associated with infection.Eva Jablonka and Marion Lamb proposed that the existence of such inheritance processes in addition to genetic inheritance suggests that in some cases heritable variations of these kinds are more advantageous than genetic variations (Jablonka and Lamb, 2005); we should ask ourselves how we can adopt similar processes for evolutionary computation.3.7.2  SelectionSelection is the mechanism that turns random variation into cumulative evolutionary change. roughout this chapter we assumed that selection is the main mechanism for evolutionary change that leads to individuals adapted to their environment. e question as to whether this really is the main mechanism leading to evolutionary change in nature and how important other processes, such as the previously described variational mechanisms, are to the direction of evolution is a major area of debate between researchers. A related debate is on the importance of processes in which members of a random subset of a population, not determined by tness, become parents to the next generation. We can consider such pro-cesses as sampling processes, since only a random sample of the population becomes the genetic source of the next generation. A simple example of this occurs when the environment changes signicantly enough so that no indi-vidual is better adapted to the new conditions than other individuals and most of the population perishes. e remaining population is composed of the “luckier” individuals and not necessarily those with a better genetic makeup. Another example is the situation where a small random sample of the population moves to a distant and isolated location (e.g., an island) and continues reproducing there (the technique of niching introduced above is somewhat similar to this situation). If the original and new environments are dierent, then the resulting dierences between the two populations may be due to selection. However, even if the two habitats are identical, 
130    ◾    Biological Computationdierences between the two populations may appear because genetic vari-ability that exists in the island population is small relative to the genetic variability in the original population. Sampling processes such as these are called dri. eir role in evolution and relation to selection remain contro-versial. Clearly, the smaller the population, the higher the risk that random dri will aect the evolution of the population. To simplify analysis, many theoretical models of evolution assume an innite population, but in many real-life situations population sizes are in fact small. Experience shows that population size is also an important factor in evolutionary computation.Finally, note that the tness landscape in nature is not xed, in con-trast to the way we portrayed it throughout this chapter. In fact, it changes due to changes in the environment, the impact of other organisms in the environment, and even due to changes in the environment that are the result of the activities of the organism (e.g., beaver dams). All these fac-tors may be incorporated into evolutionary computational techniques or arise there because of unforeseen interactions between elements of the computational model. It is not a simple climb on the tness slope since the slope shis and changes under the organisms’ feet!3.8  SUMMARYWe discussed computational strategies inspired by biological evolution and in particular by natural selection. Most of the discussion in this chapter was devoted to the classic genetic algorithm developed by John Holland. We described a range of variations on the basic algorithm, which in some cases show superior performance. As we saw, the representation of solutions can have a signicant impact on the success of the evolution-ary search, and many problems are naturally represented in formats other than binary chromosomes.We showed how the behavior of genetic algorithms can be analyzed for-mally and explained the proof of Holland’s schema theorem. is discus-sion elaborated on Holland’s building block hypothesis and the implicit parallelism that characterizes genetic algorithms.e generic structure of evolutionary computation lends itself naturally to many variations. We discussed two major ideas—Lamarckian evolution and genetic programming—but many other models are described in the literature.e chapter concluded with a short digression about evolution in nature, with the goal of showing the richness of the evolutionary processes in nature, large parts of which are not represented directly in the classic genetic algorithm model.
Evolutionary Computation    ◾    1313.9  PSEUDO-CODE// Generic code for implementing a simple genetic algorithm INIT_POPULATION(pop) // Create initial population WHILE not END_CONDITION(pop) BEGIN // The end condition can be any of the conditions described in // section 3.2 REPORT(pop) // report properties of current population new_pop:=NEXT_GENERATION(pop) // create next generation pop:=new_pop ENDREPORT(pop) // report properties of final population *HQHULFFRGHIRUJHQHUDWLQJDQHZJHQHUDWLRQNEXT_GENERATION(SRS) QHZBSRS ^` CALCULATE_FITNESS_OF_INDIVIDUALS(SRS) WHILE QRW FULL(QHZBSRS) BEGIN 6HOHFWDSDLURILQGLYLGXDOVIRUPDWLQJSDUHQW SELECT(SRS)  SDUHQW SELECT(SRS)  RIIVSULQJ CROSSOVER(SDUHQWSDUHQW)'HSHQGVRQ3F  RIIVSULQJ MUTATE(RIIVSULQJ)'HSHQGVRQ3P  INSERT(QHZBSRSRIIVSULQJ) END  RETURN QHZBSRS$VLPSOHZD\WRLPSOHPHQWURXOHWWHZKHHOVHOHFWLRQ0HWKRG6WHSWKURXJKWKHZKHHOXQWLOWKHVXPRIILWQHVVYDOXHVHQFRXQWHUHGLVJUHDWHURUHTXDOWRDUDQGRPVWRSSLQJSRLQW%\VXPPLQJILWQHVVYDOXHVZHLQHIIHFWXVHWKHILWQHVVYDOXHDVWKHVL]HRIHDFKVORWLQWKHZKHHOrand() UHWXUQVDUDQGRPQXPEHULQWKHLQWHUYDO>@)LWQHVVLVQRQQHJDWLYHSELECT(SRS) VXPWKHILWQHVVYDOXHVRIDOOLQGLYLGXDOV WRWDOBILWQHVV:=SUM_FITNESS(SRS) ZKHHOBORFDWLRQ:=rand() *WRWDOBILWQHVVLQGH[:=SRLQWWRILUVWLQGLYLGXDOLQSRSFXUUHQWBVXP:= FITNESS(SRS>LQGH[@)XVHGWRVXPILWQHVVYDOXHV WHILE FXUUHQWBVXPZKHHOBORFDWLRQDQGLQGH[SRSXODWLRQBVL]HBEGINLQGH[ LQGH[FXUUHQWBVXP FXUUHQWBVXPFITNESS(SRS>LQGH[@) END  RETURN SRS>LQGH[@


===== [34/72] chapter-34.html =====

132    ◾    Biological Computation3.10  FURTHER READINGBagchi, Tapan P. 1999. Multiobjective Scheduling by Genetic Algorithms. Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.Cavicchio, Daniel Joseph. 1970. Adaptive search using simulated evolution. Ph.D. thesis, University of Michigan.Coello, Carlos A. 2000. An updated survey of GA-based multiobjective optimiza-tion techniques. ACM Computing Surveys 32, no. 2, 109–143.Doerr, Benjamin, Nils Hebbinghaus, and Frank Neumann. 2007. Speeding up evo-lutionary algorithms through asymetrical mutation operators. Evolutionary Computation, 15, no. 4 (December 1): 401–410. Goldberg, David E. 1989. Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization and Machine Learning. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.Holland, John H. 1975. Adaptation in Natural and Articial Systems: An Introductory Analysis with Applications to Biology, Control, and Articial Intelligence. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Jablonka, Eva and Marion J. Lamb. 2005. Evolution in Four Dimensions: Genetic, Epigenetic, Behavioral, and Symbolic Variation in the History of Life. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Koza, John R. 1992. Genetic Programming: On the Programming of Computers by Means of Natural Selection. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Langdon, William B. and Andrew P. Harrison. 2008. Evolving regular expressions for GeneChip Probe performance prediction. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Parallel Problem Solving from Nature: PPSN X, 1061–1070. Dortmund, Germany: Springer-Verlag.Miller, Georey F., Peter M. Todd, and Shailesh U. Hegde. 1989. Designing neu-ral networks using genetic algorithms. In J. Schaer (Ed.), Proceedings of the ird International Conference on Genetic Algorithms, 379–384. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann.Mitchell, Melanie. 1998. Computation in cellular automata: A selected review. In T. Gramss, S. Bornholdt, M. Gross, M. Mitchell, and T. Pellizzari, Nonstandard Computation, 95–140. VCH Verlagsgesellscha.Mitchell, Melanie and Charles E. Taylor. 1999. Evolutionary computation: An overview. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics, 30, 593–616.Poli, Ricardo, William B. Langdon, and Nicholas F. McPhee (with contributions by John R. Koza). 2008. A Field Guide to Genetic Programming. Available at: http://lulu.com and freely available at http://www.gp-eld-guide.org.uk.3.11  EXERCISES3.11.1  Evolutionary Computation 1. Discuss how a genetic algorithm should deal with the situation where, aer a large number of generations, no good enough solu-tion for a problem has been found. Try to suggest ways for a system designer to attempt to increase the probability of nding a solution when such a situation occurs.
Evolutionary Computation    ◾    1333.11.2  Genetic Algorithms 2. Is it a good idea to choose a large pm (close to 1)? 3. In the general algorithm we described, pm determined whether to ip a bit. In another description of genetic algorithms, pm determines whether to replace the bit with a new bit, and if so the new bit is cre-ated as a 1 with probability 0.5 and as a 0 with probability 0.5. Are these two algorithms fundamentally dierent, or are they the same up to simple adjustments of parameters? 4. Describe in detail how to nd the values of x ∈ [31,..,62], y ∈ [0,..,31], which minimize the function g(x,y) = x2 + 2xy – y2 using a genetic algorithm. Consider how the selection method and population size may aect the rate of convergence and minimize the dangers of pre-mature convergence. 5. An ant walks on a rectangular two-dimensional grid containing obstacles. All steps are of length 1 on the grid. Before each step the ant can change its direction to one of the four possible directions (north, south, east, or west). A path is composed of ten such steps (consisting of a turn and a move). When an ant hits an obstacle it cannot move further and remains stuck in place. a. Propose a way for representing possible paths as a chromosome of bits. b. Show how to use a genetic algorithm to nd the maxi-mal Euclidean distance from the beginning of the path (i.e., the maximal distance between the start and end points of a path) an ant may reach in ten steps.3.11.3  Selection and Fitness 6. Aer an individual is chosen to serve as parent, it may either be dis-carded or returned to the population so that it can be selected again. How does this choice aect selection pressure (for concreteness, con-sider each selection mechanism separately)? 7. a. Express the probability P(i) of choosing individual i as a parent using fi (i=1..n), for roulette wheel selection.
134    ◾    Biological Computation b. Using (a) derive the expected number of ospring for individual i assuming the size of the population is n. 8. Show that the values of the probability function P(i) derived for rou-lette wheel selection are between 0 and 1 and that their sum is 1. 9. a. In Tournament selection does the selection pressure increase or decrease when the size of the set k is increased? b. If two individuals are selected to be compared and the individ-ual with the higher tness is chosen as parent with probability p while the individual with the lower tness is chosen as par-ent with probability 1 – p, will the use of a smaller p increase or decrease the selection pressure? 10. We can add an elitism mechanism to any of the selection methods, whereby in each generation a number of individuals with high tness are chosen and passed as is to the next generation (similar to what happens to most individuals in steady-state selection). One of the advantages this oers is that it guarantees the monotonicityof the maximal tness in the population (as it clearly can only increase). Does this raise or lower the selection pressure? 11. Try to nd biological examples analogous to each of the selection techniques presented. Try to speculate whether these techniques were developed based on biological observation or as an attempt to improve the performance of genetic algorithms.3.11.4  Genetic Operators and the Representation of Solutions 12. A chromosome is composed of two consecutive genes A and B, each of which is represented by ve bits. ere are two values (alleles) of A and two alleles of B in the population. e two alleles dier in every bit. Each allele of each gene appears in 50% of the population. What is the probability that a crossover between two chromosomes will give rise to a new allele of A that did not exist in the original population? 13. Repeat the analysis in question 12 for chromosomes of length 100, where A is on the le end of the chromosome, B on its right and there 
Evolutionary Computation    ◾    135are the 90 bits between them all with value 0 for every individual in the population. 14. One can change the “rate” of mutations pm during the execution of a genetic algorithm. What would be the advantage of doing so? How should one change pm as the execution progresses?3.11.5  Analysis of the Behavior of Genetic Algorithms 15. Given the schema H = 1***01*, compute o(H) and d(H). How many possible instances are there of H? 16. Compute the number of schemas for which a given chromosome of length l can be an instance. 17. Prove that not every subset of chromosomes of length l is uniquely dened by a schema. 18. Assume a genetic algorithm or hill-climbing algorithm that repre-sents the solutions as a real number x rather than a chromosome made up of bits. How would you implement mutations in this repre-sentation? (Hint: think of the denition of the derivative.) 19. Explain why the niche method lowers the risk of early convergence. 20. e following observation lowers the bound given by the schema theorem: a crossover cannot destroy a schema if both parents are instances of the schema, regardless of the crossover point. Rene the bound we derived using this observation. Hint: derive an expression that computes the probability that at time t the second parent will belong to H, under the assumption that the rst parent belongs to H. We are interested in the complement of this situation. Combine this expression with the expression dealing with crossovers in the proof we presented for the schema theorem. 21. We can deduce from the schema theorem that the success of a par-ticular schema is independent of the success of other schemas in the population and depends only on its average tness and the average tness of the population as a whole. Explain this statement and why it supports the idea of implicit parallelism. Based on the discussion of the schema theorem in the chapter, qualify this conclusion.
136    ◾    Biological Computation3.11.6  Genetic Programming 22. Consider a case in which genetic programming is used for a problem of nding a mathematical function that goes through a given set of x,y points (numerical regression). Suppose additionally that the solution must be of the specic form such as a*sin(x) + b*cos(x), where a and b may be any arithmetic expressions not involving x. Suggest ways to use genetic programming to nd solutions that have the desired form.3.11.7  Programming Exercises 23. Given 10 cards numbered 1 through 10, divide them into two piles, such that the sum of the card values in the rst pile will be as close as possible to 36 and the product of the card values in the second pile will be as close as possible to 360. a. Suggest a way to solve this problem using a genetic algorithm, and describe all its components. It is recommended to write a whole computer program to implement the evolutionary computation. b. Do you think that genetic algorithms are suitable for solving this problem? Did you change your mind aer you experimented with the program? 24. Given x,y coordinates of 10 cities and assuming an Euclidian dis-tance between each pair of cities, use a genetic algorithm to nd the shortest path through all of the cities (the traveling salesman problem). 25. Sorting networks are hardware components used to sort sequences of numbers. eir advantage is their simplicity and their high par-allelism. ey operate as follows. Every number in the sequence FIGURE 3.10


===== [35/72] chapter-35.html =====

Evolutionary Computation    ◾    137is put in a channel (the number of channels equals the sequence length). Every two channels are connected with a comparator ele-ment, a component that compares two numbers and exchanges them as needed so that the number in the lower-indexed channel is the smaller one. e numbers in the sequence move along the channels and are exchanged if need be. e goal is that at the end of execution the channels will contain a sorted sequence. e network in Figure3.10 sorts 10 elements (the horizontal lines are the chan-nels, and the vertical lines are the comparators). e depth of the network is dened by the number of nonparallel exchanges, so in this example the network contains 29 comparators and has a depth of 16. A good network will use a small number of comparators and will have a low depth. In this exercise we will attempt to nd a net-work that will correctly sort any possible input and will have a small number of comparators using a genetic algorithm (you can ignore the low depth requirement). a. Design and implement a genetic algorithm for designing a sort-ing network of sequences of numbers of length 12. Analyze the behavior of the algorithm in relation to the following points: i. How did you deal with the huge number of possible input sequences? How did you determine when to stop searching for a solution? ii. How did you represent the solution? What were the genetic operators, and the evaluation function, and how did these decisions impact the behavior of the algorithm? iii. How would you modify the representation if you were trying to also minimize the depth of the network? iv. What did you do to avoid local maxima? b. To escape from local optimums, we can use the following tech-nique: in addition to the population networks, we will run in par-allel an evolutionary process for a population of test sequences that the networks have to sort correctly (the more sequences are sorted correctly, the higher the tness of the sorting network). e “goal” of the sequences is to hinder the performance of the sorting network, so a tness of a sequence will be higher if net-works fail in sorting it. Implement this idea, and test its impact 
138    ◾    Biological Computationon the performance of the sorting networks. How would you describe this change in terms of what it does to the tness land-scape of sorting networks? 26. Given 100 points on the plane represented as 2-tuples (x,y), use a genetic algorithm to sort them into ve clusters. Use the two repre-sentations described in Section 3.2.3 and compare the behavior of the algorithm and the quality of the results. 27. Given an undirected connected graph G = (V,E), compute a cycle (a path that starts and ends on the same vertex) such that every edge is used exactly once (such a cycle is called an Eulerian cycle if such a cycle exists). Let m be the number of edges. We want to solve this problem using two evolutionary algorithms, with no crossover operations—that is, only the mutation operator is involved. A solu-tion is represented as a permutation of the edges of G (and not as a binary chromosome). e tness is dened to be the length of the longest prex of the solution that is connected (adjacent edges that share a vertex). If the tness equals the number of edges then the solution represents an Eulerian cycle. It was claimed that an asym-metric mutation operator may be more eective than a symmetric one (Doerr et al., 2007). In this exercise we will investigage this claim. Solution 1—Asymmetric mutation operator: i. Choose a random permutation of edges π as the initial solution. ii. Choose 1 ≤ i ≤ m uniformly at random. Let π’ be the result of moving the element at position i of π to position 1 and shiing the elements between position 1 and position i one position to the right. For example, jump(5) applied to (6,4,3,1,7,2,5) produces (7,6,4,3,1,2,5). iii. Replace π by π’ if π’ has higher tness. iv. Repeat Steps 2 and 3 forever. Solution 2—Symmetric mutation operator: i. Choose a random permutation of edges π as the initial solution.
Evolutionary Computation    ◾    139 ii. Choose 1 ≤ i,j ≤ m uniformly at random. Let π’ be the result of jump (i,j) applied to π, where the element at position i is moved to position j while the other elements between posi-tion i and position j are shied in the appropriate direction. For example, jump(5,2) applied to (6,4,3,1,7,2,5) produces (6,7,4,3,1,2,5). iii. Replace π by π’ if π’ has higher tness. iv. Repeat Steps 2 and 3 forever. Implement both solutions and compare their performance. 28. Use a genetic algorithm to solve sudoku puzzles, and analyze the eect of Lamarckian evolution of the performance of the algorithm. Given a sudoku board, choose a population of solutions randomly (the population can be of any size, but a size between 50 and 100 seems most appropriate), which will comprise the rst generation. e algorithm will generate the subsequent generations. You have to decide on the following elements of the genetic algorithm: a. Solution representation. b. e evaluation function. c. How to perform crossover between solutions. d. What mutations will consist of. e. How to select the individuals which will be passed on to the next generation. e main objective of this exercise is to determine the inuence of Lamarckian evolution on the performance of the genetic algorithm—that is, determine the eects of allowing the inheritance of acquired characteristics. To this end, we will allow every solution to optimize its tness and the passing of the improved solutions from one gen-eration to the next. Optimization can be implemented, for example, by the following procedure: assume you chose to represent the solu-tion using a 9 × 9 matrix. A solution is modied by exchanging two cells in the matrix. Optimization can be performed by nding the pair of cells that when exchanged will give rise to the best improve-ment in the evaluation function. We will allow 100 optimization 
140    ◾    Biological Computationsteps for each solution. e representation and the optimization sug-gested here are only examples, and you are free to choose other rea-sonable approaches; however, the number of optimization steps for each individual has to be to the same. Compare the following three policies: a. e usual genetic algorithm. b. A genetic algorithm where each solution is optimized directly, the tness is evaluated aer the optimization step, but the solu-tions used for generating the next generation are the original, nonoptimized solutions. c. A complete Lamarckian algorithm, where each solution is fully optimized, tness is evaluated aer the optimization step, and the optimized solutions are used to generate the next generation.Game boards can be found at http://www.sudokupuzz.com and many other places. e program has to deal with boards classied as easy, medium, and hard.Compare the algorithm’s performance under the dierent inheritance policies and dierent levels of diculty of a sudoku game.3.12  ANSWERS TO SELECTED EXERCISES 2. Usually not. If the mutation rate is too high, the properties of the good solutions will not be preserved from one generation to the next. 3. ere is no signicant dierence. e second algorithm behaves exactly like the original for a pm twice as small. 7. If we denote by fi the evaluation value of i and byˆfithe tness value of i, then P iffffffffffikknikknikkn( )ˆˆ= = = == = =∑ ∑ ∑1 1 111fffikkn=∑1
Evolutionary Computation    ◾    141 erefore, we deduce that with this selection mechanism and deni-tion of tness we can use the evaluation function directly when cal-culating the probability of reproduction without rst computing the tness value separately. Using the probability P(i) we can estimate the expected number of descendants for i: in the population of size n as nP inffnfnfffikkni i( ) = = ==∑1 is is exactly the tness value! 9. a. e selection pressure increases as k increases. b. Lowering p will decrease the selection pressure. 10. As elitism maintains the solutions with the highest tness and reduces the number of new ospring it raises the selection pressure. 15. d(H) = 6, o(H) = 3. ere are 16 (= 24) instances of the schema. 16. A chromosome of length l belongs to 2l schemas since a matching symbol in the schema can be either the same symbol as in the chro-mosome or *. 17. ere are 22lsubsets and only 3l possible schemas. 20. A rened expression for the schema theorem:E m H tu H tf tm H t pd Hlmc[ ( , )]( , )( )( , )( ) (+ ≥ −−−1 111HH t u H tnf tpmo H, ) ( , )( )( )( )−1 where n is the size of the population. 21. e formula we derived shows that the rate of growth of the number of instances of a schema depends only on the schema’s average tness and on the average tness of the population. So we can consider the evolutionary process as dealing with schemas rather than individuals (i.e., the tness of schemas rather than the tness of individuals). But


===== [36/72] chapter-36.html =====

142    ◾    Biological Computationin practice the algorithm tests the tness of individuals and only indi-rectly the tness of schemas; therefore, a small number of individuals represent a larger number of possible schemas, and we have implicit parallelism. On the other hand, if the population is too small, the sampling of schemas it provides may be insucient and hence prob-ably biased. 23. a. e natural way is to represent solutions as binary chromosomes of length 10. If a bit has value 1, the card belongs to the rst pile and otherwise to the second pile. To compute the tness of a solu-tion we will construct an error function and attempt to minimize it. e function has to take into account both piles relative to their target values (the absolute value of the dierence from the targets), making this a multiobjective optimization problem. e products are bigger than the sums, so the function has to account for this when combining the values (by multiplying the term for the sum by an appropriate factor). b. e search domain is small (1024 possibilities), and the tness landscape is not smooth and hard to climb due to the dependence between the components of the problem. erefore, it is probable that on average a genetic algorithm will be less ecient than an ordered search or even a random search (this can be tested by increasing the rate of mutations). 24. A possible way to represent the path to the genetic algorithm is by using a chromosome containing 10 numbers that determine the order of traveling between the cities. For example: 10 1 5 3 2 6 4 7 9 8 is a path starting at city 10, then city 1, then city 5 and so forth until it ends at city 8. A mutation would be a swap of two cities, and a crossover will be cut and paste of two permutations. Note that such a crossover does not guarantee that only valid paths (i.e., a real permutation) will be produced; thus, there is a need to go over each ospring, to check its validity, and where necessary to correct it (e.g., by randomly replacing cities that appear twice by cities that did not appear at all).


===== [37/72] chapter-37.html =====

143C h a p t e r 4Artificial Neural NetworksU    have dealt with computational models inspired by biological systems, and our discussions have been focused on their computational capabilities, that is, their abilities to solve dicult compu-tational problems. In this chapter we will again look at a model inspired by a biological system (the brain and the nervous system), but we will focus on a specic capability of this model, namely, its learning capability.Articial neural networks (ANN) are a family of computational models inspired by various aspects of the nervous system and the brain. A neu-ral net is a set of interconnected simple computational units, similar to the brain, which is composed of a large number (on the order of 1011) of neurons that are interconnected. Articial neural nets are interesting in part due to the large number of technological applications they have and in particular because neural nets are extremely useful tools for solving problems that require learning or generalizing from examples.4.1  BIOLOGICAL BACKGROUNDe atomic units of the nervous system are nerve cells, also known as neu-rons. Neurons come in many dierent forms, but they all share some char-acteristics: they have components called dendrites that act as “antennas” and are composed of extensions that receive signals from various sources (mainly from other neurons) and another component called an axon that transmits output signals (Figure4.1). A single neuron has many inputs, averaging between 1000 and 10,000 dendrites, but only a single output axon, which splits up at its end to allow it to connect to the dendrites of several other neurons. e dendrites are relatively short, but axons can be 
144    ◾    Biological Computationvery long. For instance, in humans, the axon in neurons connecting the spinal cord to the foot is about 1 meter long.When neurons are activated, certain physical changes happen in them, and an output signal is generated. For example, photo-sensitive cells in the eye react to light by creating neural signals that are then acted upon by the nervous system and the brain. How are the signals inside a neuron and between neurons transmitted? Signals propagating along the axon are electric, whereas the signals received by the dendrites are chemical in nature. ese signals are translated into electric signals by using a com-plex array of gates and pumps that control the ionic balance in the cell and generate electric signals. When the sum of signals in the dendrites surpasses a certain threshold, the cell body (or soma) generates an electric signal that propagates along the axon. is is called a nerve impulse. One of the reasons the signal does not decay along the axon is that the axon is sheathed by an insulating material called myelin. In patients suering from multiple sclerosis, the myelin sheath is defective; therefore, in these patients the nervous system is severely impaired.In contrast to this electrical conductivity, signals are passed between one neuron’s axon to other neurons’ dendrites using chemical molecules called neurotransmitters that cross the gap between the axon and the den-drite, called a chemical synapse, or just synapse. e sending neuron is called the presynaptic neuron, and the receiving neuron is the postsyn-aptic neuron. Vesicles containing neurotransmitters are at the end of the axon. e electrical impulse triggers the fusion of the vesicles to the outer membrane and changes the permeability of the vesicles, thereby causing the release of the neurotransmitters into the synapse. e neurotransmit-ters then defuse to the other side of the synapse, bind onto receptors on the DendriteNucleusAxonMyelin sheathAxon TerminalFIGURE4.1  A schematic description of the structure of nerve cell. e dendrites are the inputs of the cell, and the long axon is the output.
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    145dendrites, and cause them to activate and start the electrical signaling in the neighboring cell, or modulate it. About 100 dierent molecules acting as neurotransmitters have been identied in the human brain.is complex signaling mechanism has several advantages. e transla-tion from an electrical signal to a chemical signal and back again allows for signal amplication and prevents signal decay. Moreover, dierent neurotransmitters have dierent anities to the postsynaptic receptors, leading, for example, to dierent rates of signal transmission, and as a result aect postsynaptic neurons in a dierential way. us, the vast array of neurotransmitters allow for ne-tuned control over the function of the nervous system.e brain size of animals varies widely—from the 0.001 gr brain of honeybees to the 10 kg brain of whales. Generally, there is a good correla-tion between the size (either mass or volume) of the brain and the size of the body of animals; the human brain, which typically weighs around 1.2 to 1.4 kg, stands out with a high brain-to-body ratio. However, although it is common in comparative studies to normalize the size of the brain to the size of the body, the absolute size of the brain must also play a role, as there might be a limit to how much the brain circuitry can be miniaturized. us, it is fascinating that honeybees, whose brain size is only about 0.001 gr (compared with a body mass of about 0.1 gr) are capable of sophisti-cated social behavior. Readers interested in this subject are referred to a recent review (Chittka and Niven, 2009). In general, the sophistication of the brain depends not only on its size but also on its structure and level of interconnectivity.We already mentioned that neurons are highly connected. A neuron can receive input from tens of thousands of neurons and output signals to hundreds of other neurons. e strength of the system is due to its high connectivity. e human brain is highly connected; it consists of the order of 1011 neurons interconnected by the order of 1014 synapses, thereby allow-ing for complex collective computations.e development of the nervous system can be understood as consist-ing of two components. First, neurons are created, and their axons grow in various directions. is determines the overall topology of the neural network. Next, the strength of connections at each synapse is rened due to the signals passing between adjacent neurons. Neurons live for a long time, and in a certain sense the brain continues to develop as long as the organism is alive. us, synapses are generated, strengthened, weakened, or eliminated. We do not understand all these processes in full detail, but 
146    ◾    Biological Computationit is known that these processes are at the core of the amazing ability of the human brain to learn and remember.Articial neural nets are a simplication of the biological system. We will use very simple “neurons” that can sum up their inputs and can pro-duce a corresponding output. In these articial networks, like real neural networks, the system gains its strength from the connections between the single cells, and the challenge is to design a system that can learn, remem-ber, and perform complex computations.4.1.1  Neural Networks as Computational ModelIn addition to scientic curiosity, researchers try to mimic the brain when designing computational systems for many practical reasons. e brain presents many desirable properties that are hard to achieve in standard digital computational systems:• Fault tolerance and robustness: Individual nerve cells can die with-out aecting the functionality of the system. In fact, the brain can withstand damage that is rather widespread.• e ability to deal with inconsistent, noisy, or unreliable data: Our daily experience shows that the brain is capable of reaching correct decisions, at least most of the time, under conditions where the rel-evant data are far from being complete and entirely reliable.• Parallelism: Computation in the brain happens simultaneously in dierent regions and is based on the local interaction between neu-rons connected to each other.• Asynchronous: e brain does not contain a clock that synchro-nizes the dierent computational processes and nonetheless can compute eectively.• Learning ability: e human brain, as well as brains of simpler organisms, can adapt the organism’s behavior to changing environ-ments. is is in stark contrast to computers, which have to be repro-grammed when computational challenges change.4.2  LEARNINGOne of the main characteristics of animals is their ability to learn. One can see this ability even in simple bacteria (which are simpler than the 
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    147simplest animals) that can adapt to their environment both as individu-als and as colonies (see Chapter 2). Higher organisms can perform dierent types of learning based on either their own experiences or by learning from teachers, such as young animals imitating their mothers, dogs being trained, or learning abstract ideas through reading as is happening between the readers of this book and its authors. Realizing the advantages of learning, scientists were motivated to design articial systems that can learn, and this gave rise to various approaches to machine learning. It is customary to distinguish between two types of machine learning:• Supervised learning: Animals tend to learn by example, such as when a cub learns from its mother to distinguish between danger-ous and benign animals. In this case the mother is the “supervisor” that supplies the correct answers. Similarly, in a supervised learning system, the system’s output is compared with answers known to be correct, and then the internal parameters are tweaked in an eort to make its output correspond better to the correct answers. e obvi-ous goal is for the system to internalize and generalize the answers so that eventually it will be able to give correct answers to questions that are not in the training set. Supervised learning comes in two avors: either the trainer provides the correct answer to the trainee, or the trainer merely indicates whether the solution is correct and grades it.• Unsupervised learning: In addition to supervised learning, higher animals and in particular humans are capable of independent learn-ing. In this process there is no trainer to grade the answers, and in fact there is no a priori denition of correct and incorrect answers. Still, humans learn by attempting to discover consistent patterns in phenomena they encounter. Similarly, in unsupervised learning a computational system is tasked with discovering interesting pat-terns in its input that have statistical signicance. Discovering such patterns allows, for example, the machine to make correct decisions based on the input data and to successfully forecast future inputs.Most of this chapter will deal with supervised learning, but we will pro-vide one example of unsupervised learning, self-organizing maps (SOMs).Machine learning can be implemented using standard computational techniques, but as articial neural networks are computational models


===== [38/72] chapter-38.html =====

148    ◾    Biological Computationemulating natural learning systems, they are particularly well suited to such tasks. is chapter deals with such articial neural networks and their usage as learning systems.4.3  ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS4.3.1  General Structure of Artiﬁcial Neural Networkse atomic unit of the simplest articial neural network is an idealized neuron called the McCulloch–Pitts neuron, shown in Figure 4.2. e neuron can be in one of two states: (1) the ring state (denoted by the value 1); and (2) the nonring state (denoted by the value 0). e state of the neuron changes according to signals it receives from the neurons feeding into it: e value ni of neuron i at time t + 1 is calculated by the following formula: n t w n ti ij j ij( ) ( )+ = −∑1 Θθwhere the function Θ is dened as follows: Θ( )XXX=≥<1 00 0e step function Θ is called the threshold function or the activation function of the neuron.e value θ denes the threshold required to activate the neuron, and wij are the weights that dene how strongly the input from neuron j wikwijwiliθijklFIGURE4.2  A simple articial neuron. e neuron sums the inputs (each mul-tiplied by the relevant weight). If the weighted sum is larger than the threshold θ then the neuron will have output of 1; otherwise the output will be 0.
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    149inuences neuron i. (Note that the common convention is to denote the weight leading from j to i by wij). e weighted sum of the input signals arriving at time t has to be above the threshold θi for neuron i to re at time t + 1. e outputs of the neurons are binary values, but as these val-ues are multiplied by the weights, which are real numbers, the inputs of the neurons are real numbers. e binary values are usually 1 and 0 (as indicated in the previous formula), although for some of the analysis that we will show it will be simpler to use the sign function instead of the Θ function and represent the output by 1 and –1.A neural network is a collection of neurons that are connected to each other. Simple networks are single layered, and we will discuss them rst. In these networks the neurons representing the input are connected directly to the neurons representing the output. Other networks are multilayered, which means there are one or more layers of neurons between the inputs and the outputs. Other networks have a topology that is not layered at all, for instance, a network where each neuron is connected to all other neurons. In every network every connection (oen called an edge) has a weight that determines how active this connection is, and these weights wij determine how the neurons’ states will change aer setting the network’s initial conditions.It is easy to see that the network shown in Figure4.3 computes the majority function: if two or more of the inputs are of value 1, the weighted sum of the inputs to the neuron will be larger than the threshold value (θ = 1), and its output will be 1. For instance, if X1 = 1, X2 = 0, X3 = 1 then the weighted sum of these values is 0.8 × 1 + 0.7 × 0 + 0.6 × 1 = 1.4, which is larger than the threshold value of 1. If only one input has the value 1, or all of the inputs are 0, the weighted average will be less than 1, and the neuron’s output will be 0. In this example, the weights were chosen so the network computes the desired function, but as we will see one of the θ = 10.80.70.6x2x1x3FIGURE4.3  A very simple network comprised of one neuron that implements the majority function. If two inputs or more have the value 1 then the output will be 1; otherwise it will be 0.
150    ◾    Biological Computationmain challenges in working with neural networks is to nd a way for the network to self-adjust the weights so as to compute a given function.is simple model of neurons simplies away most of the complexity of biological neurons, but it allows us to build useful neural networks. Despite the simplicity of the single neuron, the theoretical analysis of networks of these neurons poses complicated challenges. is approach to articial neuronal networks was suggested in 1943 by McCulloch and Pitts. ey showed that it is possible to build a universal computer using such neurons, thereby demonstrating that simple units such as these are computationally strong when combined in networks.A few of the dierences between biological neurons and the abstract McCulloch–Pitts neurons are as follows:• McCulloch–Pitts neurons follow a step function and thus have a dis-continuous reaction (i.e., they don’t react below the threshold and then switch to full activity). e response of real neurons is con-tinuous although they may have rapid change of activity at some point. Some articial neurons use continuous functions, and we will describe them and their properties when we talk about multilayer networks.• Some real neurons address their input in a sophisticated manner rather than simple linear summation. For example, if the input from a certain source rises above a certain threshold, then this input is no longer taken into account. Examples of dierential treatment can be found in the sensory system. For example, some neurons are responsible for distinguishing between sounds that reach both ears simultaneously. e neurons can distinguish between an increased volume in one ear (one input) and the same increase into both ears, even when the sum of the inputs is the same in both cases (Segev, 1998). One can model such properties of single neurons by a collec-tion of McCulloch–Pitts neurons.• e output of real neurons is a sequence of pulses (spikes) rather than an output of a constant level. Biological neurons can represent information not only by the level of the output but also by the rate in which the pulses are emitted. Recently articial neural networks using such spike neurons as their basic elements have been proposed, but we will not discuss these networks here.
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    1514.3.2  Training an Artiﬁcial Neural NetworkIn neural networks, learning is achieved by updating the values of the weights. As the weights determine the result of the computation, we have to set the weights so that they produce the correct output for the learning samples. In most situations this is achieved by setting initial random val-ues for the weights and then modifying them so that the network will pro-duce the required results. We will discuss how this process is performed in dierent kinds of neural networks.In supervised learning we assume that there exists a training set of inputs for which the desired result of the computation is known. Although neural nets can produce numerical results (e.g., multiply two numbers), we will usually deal with networks whose computational goal is classi-cation. erefore, it is common to deal with input with a known clas-sication into subsets, and the goal of the training phase is to teach the network to classify the input patterns by adjusting its weights. To demon-strate the relevant ideas, it oen suces to discuss a network that outputs a single bit, which classies the data into two subsets. Obviously, by using more output neurons the data can be separated into more classes.During the training phase, each input item from the training set is pre-sented to the network, and the network computes the output. If the result diers from the correct answer, the weights are updated in an attempt to x the error. is process is executed repeatedly. One pass through all the training data is called an epoch. As the weights are constantly being updated, there is no guarantee that input data producing a correct result will continue doing so at the end of the epoch. Similarly, there is no guar-antee that the updated weights will result in a correct result when applied to an input set that had originally produced an error. erefore, more passes through the training set may be needed. If the network produced the correct answers for all the input elements, then the training phase is completed.We will see that there are problems and learning algorithms for which one can prove that this process converges and produces the correct weights. Nonetheless, in most cases we have no guarantee that the process will con-verge, so deciding when to terminate the training phase and make do with a network that does not always produce the correct classication is of the utmost importance.It is important to realize that in the learning stage the system can sim-ply “memorize” the input rather than extracting features that character-ize the input. ere are existing networks, such as the Hopeld network 
152    ◾    Biological Computationdiscussed later, whose main task is to memorize. However, learning net-works are judged by their ability to give correct answers to new inputs for which no solutions were given. For example, assume that the training set consists of two sets of binary strings of xed length. One set con-tains strings all having an even number of 1’s, and the other contains strings all having an odd number of 1’s. Our goal is that, aer the train-ing phase on the training data including specic strings, the network will be capable of classifying correctly as many strings that were not part of the training set.To determine how well a network has learned we dene a test set containing input items not presented to the network during the train-ing phase but for which the correct answer is known. e success (i.e., comparing the network’s result with the correct answer) of the network in classifying these items is the metric for evaluating the success of the network.4.4  THE PERCEPTRONOne of the simplest types of a neural network that has learning capabili-ties is called the perceptron and was among the rst to be studied (Minsky and Papert, 1969). Perceptrons are used to solve classication problems—that is, given an input, the network has to determine the class to which the input belongs. We will present a learning rule used to update the weights as more classication samples are presented to the network, and we will prove that this rule allows the network to converge to correct weights, if a set of correct weights exists.4.4.1  Deﬁnition of a PerceptronIn a simple perceptron the input cells are directly connected to the output cells as seen in Figure4.4 (we will describe more complex archi-tectures later). In Figure4.4(a) a number of input cells (marked as X1, X2,…,X5) are connected to a number of output cells (O1,O2,O3). For simplicity we will usually consider perceptrons with a single output cell as seen in Figure4.4(b). Such a network can obviously classify only into two sets, but it is not hard to extend the discussion to larger num-ber of output neurons and a correspondingly larger number of classes since output neurons are independent. Note that in a network with a single output neuron, it suffices to index the weights using a single index, wi.


===== [39/72] chapter-39.html =====

Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    153The Perceptron’s Computatione weighted input of the neuron in Figure4.4(b) is the dierence between the weighted sum of the incoming edges and the threshold value: w xi iip−=∑θ1e value of the output neuron will be O w xi iip= −=∑Θ θ1where Θ( )XXX=≥<1 00 0Note that a threshold level of θ can be achieved by a neuron with a thresh-old level of 0 by adding another input whose value is the constant –1 and the weight of the edge between it and the output neuron is θ. Adding the additional input without xing the weight that connects it to the neuron allows the network to determine the threshold level according to the same learning procedure used for adjusting the network weights.wpw2w1OutputresholdθInputs(a) (b)w11w21w35x2x3x4x5x1x2x1xpFIGURE4.4  A simple perceptron. e general model (a) shows several inputs and outputs. However, since each output is independently calculated, we will analyze the behavior of a simple perceptron with a single output (b).
154    ◾    Biological ComputationIf we consider each input set as a point in an p-dimensional space, where each dimension represents one of the inputs 1,2,…,p, we see that the simple preceptron divides the space into two separate regions separated by a hyperplane of p – 1 dimensions dened by w xi iip−=∑θ1In Figure4.5 we can see how the network behaves with two inputs x1 and x2. If the point (x1,x2) is above the separating line then it belongs to Class 1; otherwise it belongs to Class 2. e boundary line is dened by w1x1 + w2x2 – θ = 0. e slope of the boundary line is –w1/w2, and θ deter-mines the distance from the origin. In particular, if θ = 0, the boundary line passes through the origin.In the two-dimensional (2-D) case depicted in Figure4.5 the boundary is a one-dimensional (1-D) line. In the three-dimensional (3-D) case the boundary is a 2-D plane, and for more than three dimensions (i.e., more than three inputs), the boundary is a hyperplane. Note that the dimension of the hyperplane is always one less that the dimension of the input space. Separation by a hyperplane is called a linear separation.Let us investigate using a simple perceptron to compute the values of Boolean functions, starting with the AND and OR functions. eir truth values appear in Table4.1. If we consider X1 and X2 as coordinates on a two-dimensional plane and want to separate the points by their truth values we will get the situation depicted in Figure4.6. is g-ure demonstrates the existence of a line separating the points with the 0x1x2Decision boundaryw1x1 + w2x2 – θ = 0Class 1Class 2FIGURE4.5  e weights of the perceptron dene a line (in the two-dimensional case) that separates the data into two classes.
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    155value 0 from the points with the value 1. For instance, the line x1 + x2 – 1.5 (i.e., w1 = w2 = 1, θ = 1.5) describes the function AND, and the line x1 + x2 – 0.5 describes the OR function. An innite set of lines achieves each separation.Consider now the XOR function, which outputs 1 if exactly one of its inputs is a 1. e truth table for XOR is given in Table4.2, and Figure4.7 shows it graphically. It is impossible to nd a straight line with the black points on one side of it and the white points on the other side. In other words, the values of the XOR function cannot be linearly separated.x1x2x2ORx1AND0 011.1 1.1111FIGURE4.6  For the Boolean functions AND and OR, the coordinates (x1,x2) of each point represent the input values, and the color of the point represents the output (black circle for 1 and white circle for 0). It is easy to see that there are lines separating the 1’s from the 0’s.TABLE4.1  Truth table of AND and ORX1X2Result X1X2Result0 0 0 0 0 00 1 0 0 1 11 0 0 1 0 11 1 1 1 1 1AND ORTABLE4.2  Truth Table of XORX1X2Result0 0 00 1 11 0 11 1 0XOR
156    ◾    Biological Computation4.4.2  Formal Description of the Behavior of a PerceptronTo make the description simpler we will use the sign function instead of the Θ function and represent the output by 1 and –1 instead of 1 and 0.Let p be the number of input neurons in the network. We describe the weights of all the connections of the inputs to the output neuron as a p-dimensional vector w. Each input pattern x(i) will also be described as a p-dimensional vector (i is the ordinal number of the pattern). In vector nota-tion, the value of the output neuron is O = sign(w  x(i))where w  x(i) is the inner product of the two vectors, ww xxj jjp( )i=∑1Recall that even though it would seem we have xed the threshold value θ of the neuron to be 0, we can assume that one of the p inputs was included to take care of the threshold level.Let O(i) be the correct output for x(i), that is, it is +1 if the input pattern belongs to the rst class, and –1 if it belongs to the second x2x1XOR01,111FIGURE4.7  A simple perceptron cannot compute the XOR function. Note that it is impossible for a straight line to separate the 1 values (black circles) from the 0 values (the white circles).
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    157class. erefore, we are looking for weight vector w that will satisfy O(i)=sign(w·x(i)).e boundary between the positive and negative classes is the multi-dimensional plane described by the equation w·x(i) = 0 which passes through the origin and is perpendicular to w. e product w·x(i) is equal to ||w||||x(i)||cos and has the value 0 when the two vectors are perpendic-ular, that is, when the angle  between them is 90 degrees. As can be seen in Figure 4.8, the weight vector w has to be perpendicular to the separat-ing line (or in the higher-dimensional case, the hyperplane) so that it can separate between the inputs whose output is +1 and those whose output is –1.e geometrical meaning (Figure 4.8) is that one has to choose the weight vector w such that the projection of all input vectors x(i) on w has the same sign as O(i).Recall that the projection of the vector x(i) on w is: || |||| (i)|||| ||w xwcosφwhere ϕ is the angle between the vectors and ||v|| denotes the norm of the vector v. e norm or vector length is dened as || ||vv ==∑viin21x1x2ACGEHFDWBFIGURE4.8  e weight vector w is perpendicular to the separation line between the two classes.


===== [40/72] chapter-40.html =====

158    ◾    Biological ComputationNote that even when the network has more than one output neu-ron, the computation for each output neuron is independent from the computations for the other output neurons (as each output neuron has a separate weight vector w), and therefore one can generalize the discus-sion of a perceptron with a single output neuron to perceptrons with a higher number of output neurons, such as the perceptron described in Figure4.4(a).4.4.3  The Perceptron Learning RuleWe have seen that if the input can be linearly separated a weights vector achieving the separation is present. In this section we limit our discus-sion to problems that are linearly separable and present a learning rule for a perceptron with a single output neuron, that is, a perceptron clas-sifying the inputs into one of two possible classes. e rule will allow us to determine, iteratively, weights achieving the desired classication.Since we are dealing with supervised learning, there is a training set containing samples for which the classication is known. Learning is achieved by feeding these examples to the network iteratively. If the network outputs the correct classication (where +1 represents the rst class and –1 the second class), the weights are not changed. If the output is wrong, the weights leading from the inputs to the neuron are slightly modied to achieve the desired output.As previously discussed we consider the threshold value θ as another input neuron with a value of –1, and for convenience this neuron will always appear rst in the vectors, so all our input patterns will start with –1. e training set will be denoted by X. Let X’ be the set of patterns belonging to the rst class and X’’ the set of patterns belonging to the sec-ond class (X = X’ ∪ X’’). e goal of the training phase is to nd a weight vector w such that w·x ≥ 0 for every vector x ∈ X’and w·x < 0 for every vector x ∈ X’’Let w(i) be the weight vector at the i-th iteration of training, and let w(0) = 0. (In practice, it is advantageous to start with a weight vector consist-ing of small random weights rather than with an all 0 vector). We denote by x(i) the i-th training input pattern, and t(i) is the target output (i.e., the required correct output) for this pattern.
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    159e training is performed as follows for i = 0,1,2,…: 1. Compute the output of the perceptron for pattern i: o( ) ( ) ( )i sign i i=( )ww xx 2. Determine the updated weight vector w(i +1), as follows: ww ww xx( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )i i i i i+ = + −1 α t o where 0 ≤ α ≤ 1 is a constant that determines the learning rate. 3. Continue to pattern i + 1. 4. e training terminates if the weights are not updated during an entire epoch; otherwise, return to step 1 for another epoch.When the pattern x(i) is classied correctly, the dierence t o( ) ( )i i− is 0, and therefore w(i + 1) = w(i). If the pattern is misclassied, the weights are updated by adding or subtracting the quantity α t o( ) ( ) ( )i i i− xx .e learning rate constant α determines how big the weight changes are. If α is too large, the learning might be too “jagged”: a low weight can increase to a value that will be too high and will misclassify the next pattern, and then the weight will decrease too sharply, causing more misclassications, and so on. On the other hand, if α is too small, the training may be too slow and ineective. ere are no good rules for determining the value of α, and one has to resort to trial and error in each particular case.To use a perceptron with more than one output neuron, the same train-ing algorithm is applied to each output neuron separately. If the output is linearly separable for each output neuron, this will result in an appropriate set of weight vectors.4.4.4  Proving the Convergence of the Perceptron Learning AlgorithmIn the previous section we presented the algorithm for updating the weights of the perceptron. It is not clear that this algorithm always converges; in principle we can envision a situation in which the weights will be updated 
160    ◾    Biological Computationindenitely, sometimes undershooting and sometimes overshooting the desired output. Fortunately, a mathematical proof is available to show that when the input is linearly separable the algorithm will converge. We will prove convergence for w(0) = 0 and α = 1.e idea behind the proof is to follow the changes to the size of the weight vector w during the updates made by the perceptron learning rule. We will show that the size ||w|| of the weight vector grows faster than or equal to a term dependent on n2, where n is the number of learning itera-tions (note that n may be larger than the number of patterns). On the other hand we will show that size of the weight vector grows slower than or equal to a term dependent on n. Since asymptotically a term dependent on n2 will surpass a term dependent on n, there must exist an iteration where these two bounds meet, and the weight vector will not change further.We note that the algorithm will behave identically for the problem of nding a vector w separating X’ and X’’ and the problem of nding a vec-tor w that satises w  x(i) ≥ 0 for all the vectors x(i) belonging to the set consisting of X’ and all the negatives (i.e., –x(i)) of the vectors belonging to the set X’’. us, we can assume for the proof that all the n inputs that were misclassied are misclassication of the form w(i) · x(i) < 0 for i = 1,2,…,n, where x(i) ∈ X’.Given that we have started with w(0) = 0, according to the learning rule w(n + 1) = x(1) + x(2) + … + x(n) (4.1)Since we assume that the input is linearly separable, there exists a weights vector w* such that w*·x ≥ 0 for x ∈ X’, and w*·x < 0 for x ∈ X’’.Multiply equation (4.1) by w* (the products are inner products): w*·w(n + 1) = w*x(1) + w*x(2) + … + w*x(n) (4.2)Pick the minimal term on the right-hand side of (4.2) and denote it by p: ==p nmin( )ww xx⋅∈( )x n XSo, from equation (4.2) ww ww*⋅( +1)n≥ np
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    161Squaring, we get ww ww*⋅ ( +1)n ≥22 2n p (4.3)Recall that the product of the norms of two vectors is at least as large as their inner product (Cauchy–Schwartz inequality) and thus || * || ||ww ww ww ** ww||2 22( + 1) ( + 1)n n≥ ⋅ (4.4)Combining (4.3) and (4.4) we get || * || ||ww ww|| ( +1)2 2 2 2n n p≥or || |||| *||wwww( +1)n22 22≥n p (4.5)Now we turn to show an upper bound on the growth of w.For every k = 1,…,n w(k + 1) = w(k) + x(k)erefore, aer taking the square of the Euclidian norm, we get || ( )|| || ( )|| || ( )|| ( ) ( )ww ww xx ww xxk k k k k+ = + + ⋅1 22 2 2 (4.6)We assumed that the perceptron misclassied x(k), that is, w(k)  x(k) < 0 and therefore (4.6) implies that: || ( )|| || ( )|| || ( )||ww ww xxk k k+ ≤ +12 2 2or || ( )|| || ( )|| || ( )||ww ww xxk k k+ − ≤12 2 2If we sum these inequalities for k = 1,…,n, assuming w(0) = 0, we see that most terms of the le-hand side cancel each other, and we are le with
162    ◾    Biological Computation || ( )|| || ( )||ww xxn kkn+ ≤=∑1212 (4.7)Pick the maximal term of the summation on the right-hand side of (4.7) and denote it by q: q x k( )( )=∈max2x k X (4.8)From (4.7) and (4.8) we get || ( )||ww n nq+ ≤12 (4.9)From (4.9) we see that the growth of the length of the vector w is bounded from above by a term linear in n. Recall from (4.5) that the length of the vector is bound from below by a term dependent on n2. Since asymptoti-cally a term dependent on n2 will surpass a term dependent on n, it is clear that there exists an iteration nmax for which n pn qmaxmax||2 2ww*||2= or nqpmax||=ww*||22 erefore, we have shown that for w(0) = 0 and α = 1, and under the assumption that there exists a solution vector w* the learning algorithm has to terminate aer at most nmax iterations.4.5  LEARNING IN A MULTILAYERED NETWORK4.5.1  The Backpropagation AlgorithmWe turn now to study multilayer networks in which layers of internal neu-rons exist between the input and the output layers. Such layers are oen called hidden layers, since they are not “visible” from outside the network.


===== [41/72] chapter-41.html =====

Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    163We have seen the limited computational powers of the simple single-layered perceptron: it can classify only patterns that are linearly separable. In their book Minsky and Papert (1969) showed that multilayered neural networks can compute functions that cannot be computed by a single-layer preceptron. For instance, it is enough to add one hidden layer to com-pute the XOR function, which is not computable by a simple perceptron. Multilayered networks’ greater computing power is an attractive property, but they are much harder to engineer. Designing a suitable layout for a multilayered network and nding the appropriate network weights can be dicult. Finding an ecient learning rule for updating the weights of a multilayered network automatically was thus an important goal, but nd-ing such a learning rule proved to be a real challenge. e challenge was solved by Rumelhart et al. (1986), who proposed an algorithm called feed-forward–backpropagation. Feedforward is an obvious property of multi-layered networks where the computation results are fed forward layer aer layer from the input layer to the hidden layers and from them to the output layer. e term backpropagation characterizes Rumelhart et al.’s learning procedure, which is based on percolating the weight updates from the out-put level back to the input layer. For short, this algorithm is oen called backpropagation.e algorithm is based on examining the error in the output neuron by comparing it with the target value. If the value is incorrect, and hence the network weights need to be adjusted, the adjustments are backpropagated from one intermediate level to the previous one. At every level, we can dene an error function for each node and try to minimize it. is can be done by a gradient descent algorithm. is algorithm uses the derivatives of the error function to calculate the change in the direction and magni-tude of the weight vector that will minimize the error.Recall that the activation function Θ we used to dene the behavior of the output neuron in the simple perceptron is a threshold function and as such is neither continuous nor dierentiable. We would like to replace it with a dierentiable function with similar characteristics, that is, a function that returns one value (e.g., 0) for inputs that are smaller than the threshold value and another value (e.g., 1) for inputs larger than the threshold value with the added stipulation that the transition between the two values is as abrupt as possible, yet continuous. A function with such properties is the sigmoid function:
164    ◾    Biological Computation y f xesigmoidx= =+−( )11Figure4.9 plots the sigmoid in the range [–5,5], and it is easy to see that it has the desired propertiesWe could adjust its slope by looking at the more general sigmoid ye=+−11βxwhere β is a parameter.A useful property of the sigmoid function is that its derivative can eas-ily be expressed using the value of the function itself. is property will be useful later on: ye ey yx x' ( ) ( )=+⋅ −+= −− −111111Other functions such as the hyperbolic tangent function yeexx=−+22110 1–1 2–2 3–3 4–4 5–51FIGURE4.9  e sigmoid function has the property of a sharp transition between 0 and 1.
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    165that returns values between –1 and +1 can be used, but the sigmoid func-tion is most commonly used.e output neurons will be denoted by the vector O (a single neuron will denoted by Oi). e output value of the hidden neurons in layer k will be denoted by Vk (and a single neuron byVik), and the weight of the edge between neuron j in layer k–1 to neuron i in layer k will be denoted by Wi,jk (so the weights between the inputs and the rst hidden layer are Wi,j1). e vector X will denote the inputs. e values of the output neurons can be either binary or any real numbers. We assume N inputs, L patterns in the training set, and M layers (in addition to the input layer, designated as layer 0) in the network (Figure4.10).We set initial random values for all the weights and the network com-putes in a feedforward fashion similar to the operation of the single- layer perceptron, where each layer is evaluated aer the evaluation of the previous layer except that the activation function is now the previously described sigmoid.e input to a neuronVikis W Vi jkjk,all edges thatenter the nodeji∑−−1erefore, the output value of that neuron will bexw11,1w22,3v1v2oLevel 0 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3FIGURE4.10  Articial multilayer neural network.
166    ◾    Biological Computation V f Wiksigmoid i jk=,all edges thatenter thejnode i∑−=+ −∑VjkWi jkjVjk111 exp(,−−1)While the computation of a multilayered network is quite similar to the computation of a simple perceptron (with the notable change of using the sigmoid function), the learning procedure (i.e., the way the weights are adjusted) is quite dierent.e weights update stages are as follows: 1. Dene the error function e for the output layer by eiMi iT O= −122( ) where Oi is the actual output and Ti is the required output in the out-put i. 2. e derivative of the error function is used to compute the correc-tion values that will be used to update the weights. Note that this involves taking partial derivatives, since the error function depends on the output of the nodes, which in turn depend on their input, which depends on the weights, and we are interested in the eect of each weight. As these derivations require application of the chain rule and are somewhat involved mathematically, we will not get into the details here and present only the nal formulas, which are as follows: a. For the edges going into an output neuron compute the required corrections values as follows δiMi ii iT O O O= − −( ) ( )1 b. To compute the correction values δ for previous layers, recall that the correction percolates down from the output layer; therefore, the correction for a neuron in a particular layer m–1 should take into account the corrections already calculated for neurons in layer m.
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    167 jmjmjmi jmimVV W−−−=−( )1111δ δ,all edgesthiaat leave j∑ for m = M–1,M–2,…,1. An example of the calculation for a specic neuron is shown in Figure 4.11. 3. e needed changes to the weights are then i jmimjmW V,=−αδ1 Note that the correction for a weight is proportional to the activity of the previous node and the correction value reecting the propagated error as computed by the formulas above. Like in the simple percep-tron algorithm, α is a constant that determines the rate of learning. 4. e nal update of all the weights in the network is simply i jnewi joldi jW W W, , ,= + See an example in Figure4.12.1010.5–0.20.30.40.7–0.5–0.1–0.50.40.30.60.40.50.7O = 0.672δ = 0.0723V13 = 0.476δ = 0.00898V23 = 0.683δ = 0.01096V12 = 0.69δ = (0.69*(1 – 0.69))[– 0.5*0.00898 + 0.3*0.01096] = –0.000257FIGURE4.11  An example of the backpropagation algorithm. Assume that the output value should have been 1 but the network computed the value of 0.672. e algorithm calculates back (i.e., from the output layer at the right) the cor-rection values δ for each node in the network according to the formulas given in Stage 3. In the example we detailed the computation of the correction needed for the top node in the rst hidden layer, based on its output activity V and the δ values that propagate back from the two nodes in the second hidden layer.


===== [42/72] chapter-42.html =====

168    ◾    Biological Computation 5. Repeat all the previous steps for the next input pattern in the training set. 6. Repeat all the previous steps for the whole training set for the next epoch.Unlike in the simple perceptron case, for the backpropagation algo-rithm we don’t have guaranteed convergence. us, the obvious ques-tion is when we should stop training the network—or how many epochs to run. We can choose among several halting criteria: halt when the error on the training set is small enough; halt when the size of the weight updates for each epoch is small enough; halt when the network gives satisfactory results on the test set. e latter is usually the pre-ferred criterion.We have presented the simplest and most popular version of the back-propagation algorithm. is learning algorithm is probably the most common and most studied algorithm in the eld of articial neural net-works. us, many variations of this basic algorithm have been suggested over the years such as using a method dierent from gradient descent for determining the weights or changing the parameters of the algorithm during the run—for example, accelerating the rate of weight change for edges whose weights has grown consistently over the previous iterations and slowing the rate of changing the weights of edges whose weights have oscillated during the last iterations.101–0.20.30.40.7–0.5–0.1–0.50.40.30.60.40.50.7O = 0.672δ = 0.0723V13 = 0.476δ = 0.00898V12 = 0.69δ = –0.000257V23 = 0.683δ = 0.010960.5+0.5*1*(-0.000257)=0.4998715FIGURE4.12  Updating the value of the weight between the top input node to the top node of the hidden layer according to the formula given in Stage 5 when α = 0.5.
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    169As with other optimization algorithms (e.g., genetic algorithms), we have to consider the possibility of hitting a local minimum (or maximum) when using backpropagation, a situation where the weights cannot be changed further by applying the learning algorithm even though a better weight vector exists. If we focus on the error function of the output neu-ron, we can think of these situations as being trapped in a local minimum of the output neuron error function instead of nding the global mini-mum for which the learning algorithm searches.Several techniques can be used to address this problem. One reason for local minima might be choosing bad initial weights. If they are too large, the function will tend to consistently overshoot and produce a value of 1, which may make training dicult. erefore, it is advantageous to choose initial weights such that a typical neural input will have a value smaller than 1.An important approach for avoiding local minima is to increase ran-domness. is increases the region of all possible weights sampled during training and can be achieved in dierent ways:• Train the network by selecting randomly the order in which the input patterns from the training set are presented to the network. is decreases the probability that patterns close to each other in the training set will cancel each other’s inuence.• Modify the algorithm so that during training it will occasionally (but rarely) change the weights to increase the error function. While it seems that this would decrease the probability that the network will converge to the correct values, it turns out that this technique can prevent the algorithm from being trapped in a local minimum. Clearly, such uphill moves should be performed infrequently. It is reasonable to reduce the probability of performing this operation as the learning progresses to minimize the damage such moves make to the learning that has been already achieved.• Add noise to the system. In this method, the weights are occasion-ally changed randomly. e random change is small to avoid dis-turbing the learning that has already been achieved. On the other hand, a small change in weights may be enough to move away from a local minimum. Another way of adding noise is randomly changing the value of the input patterns presented to the network. Experience shows that adding noise in either way can improve the ability of the 
170    ◾    Biological Computationnetwork to generalize (i.e., produce good results on the patterns in the test set).4.5.2  Analysis of Learning AlgorithmsIt is important to note that learning is an unusual algorithmic problem. It may even be viewed as an ill-dened problem. e reason is that the input (i.e., the training set) does not necessarily dene a single solution. Oen many solutions perform well on the training set, but it is impossible to forecast how well they will do on the test set and in the real world. e goal of learning is to nd a model that will represent the input data well, but many such models may perform well on the training set. Dierent learning algorithms will give rise to dierent results for the same training set in accordance with the properties of the algorithms.It is useful to consider two types of learning errors: (1) training errors, which are errors in dealing with patterns in the training set; and (2) generalization errors, which are errors in dealing with new patterns from the test set. Despite the fact that the goal is to minimize both kinds of errors, it turns out that minimizing one type can increase the prevalence of the other type, so in fact one has to nd a way to bal-ance these goals. e reason for this trade-o is that one can build a model that ts the training set members well, at the cost of creating a model that is very specic to this set and does not perform well on new samples. In general, at the beginning of the learning process both the training error and the generalization error will decrease, but aer a certain point, as members from the learning set are learned again and again the network performs better on them, thereby decreasing the training error but at the price of increasing the generalization error as can be seen in Figure4.13.A simple example of this situation is nding a curve to t a dataset. Look at the two situations depicted in Figure4.14. Both graphs attempt to describe the four points, but while the le curve passes exactly through the points, the right one does not pass through any of them. Nonetheless, it is reasonable to believe that it will model better new data points. On the other hand, while a straight line seems to be a good approximation for the current points, we do not know if the sample set is a good representative of the data, and introducing more points might lead us to prefer a more complex model that is not a straight line.
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    171In general, the closer we get to the desired answers for the training set, the larger the danger of overtting, that is, a situation where the model describes the training set exactly, yet lacks generality (as is the case in the le panel of Figure4.14). e opposite case where the model contains too little data to describe the training set is called undertting. Due to the danger of overtting it is typical not to continue to train the network until it is very successful on the training set but to stop training before that to increase the chances of obtaining good results on the test set.Training errorGeneralization errorNumber of epochsOverﬁttingUnderﬁttingError rateFIGURE 4.13  Increasing the length of training improves the performance on the training set but may adversely aect the performance on the test set as the network starts to overt the data.(a) (b)FIGURE4.14  Two types of lines that describe the given data points. e line on the le (a) goes through all the points, and the line on the right (b) does not go through any of them. Nevertheless, in many situations the description provided by the straight line on the right is more informative as it captures the trend in the data and allows a better prediction of the value of additional points.
172    ◾    Biological ComputationIncreasing the number of neurons in the network (and in particular the number of neurons in the hidden layers) can also cause overtting. is puts the designer of the network in a delicate position: the network cannot be too small, since this may cause undertting, or too large, in which case it can learn the training set too well, leading to overtting. Adding noise, which we previously described as a way to avoid the con-vergence of the weights to local minima, can also be useful tool to reduce the risk of overtting. For example, one can, on occasion, supply the learning process with a wrong classication for a member of the train-ing set. By reducing the probability of converging to an exact solution for the training set, this seemingly strange tactic can actually improve generalization.4.5.3  Network DesignSo far we have assumed that the architecture of a network is given and the goal of the learning process was to determine the weights of the edges. An obvious question is how to design the network—that is, how to decide how many hidden layers it will have and which pairs of neurons to con-nect with one another. Experience shows that usually it is not benecial to deal with networks with too many layers of hidden neurons, and in fact that might harm performance. In practice it seems that two or three layers suce for most problems that can be solved by the backpropaga-tion method.As for connectivity, recall that in these networks neurons can commu-nicate only if they are in consecutive layers, but it is not always necessary to connect every neuron in one layer with every neuron in the consecu-tive layer. Obviously, the more connections, the more weights have to be determined, a situation which may hinder the network’s ability to learn in a reasonable time and may also cause overtting. One way of dealing with this situation is to train the network for a relatively short period of time and then to sever the connections that have weights close to 0. Next, the network is retrained, and the other weights are updated. is process can be repeated until the network has a “reasonable” number of edges.Another way to design a network is by using an external algorithm that will design the network optimally. For instance, one could use a genetic algorithm that deals with a population of neural network of dierent archi-tectures. At every generation of the genetic algorithm, the performance of the neural nets will be assessed (e.g., by testing how well they do on the test set), so that selection will prefer the more successful networks.


===== [43/72] chapter-43.html =====

Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    173Another important question is that of data representation. e net-work designers have to decide how to represent the data as an input to the network, and even more importantly they have to decide which data to present the network so that it succeeds in learning. is is true for both the input and the output. is is similar to the situation we encountered in the discussion of genetic algorithms where it is important to consider how to represent each solution as a chromosome. In both cases there are no recipes for solving these issues, and the designer has to rely on experience and understanding of the problem domain.We will start with a simple example. Assume that we want to classify a set of data points into n subclasses. In principle we can use log2n output bits to represent the output. us, if we want to classify data into eight subclasses, we can use binary representation of three bits. However, this requires the network to “learn” the binary code in addition to solving the particular classication problem it encounters. Oen, especially when the number of input examples in not very large, this is beyond the capabilities of the network. us, when the goal is to classify a dataset into n subsets, it is better to work with n output neurons and a unary representation, so that if neuron k has the value 1 and all other n–1 neu-rons have the value 0, the result of the classication is k.Another more fundamental example for the importance of repre-sentation comes from image processing. If the image consists of 1000 × 1000 24-bit values pixels, it would seem one should use a network with 24,000,000 inputs. is is oen not practical because of the size of the net-work and the time required to learn the weights. erefore, it is reasonable to preprocess the data and try to extract features required for the com-putation. For example, one can locate lines, corners, and changes in the density of color. Actually, this is similar to the way the human brain which contains a large set of sensors that extract such features operates (Marr, 1982). It turns out that the retina contains cells whose electrical activ-ity depends on identifying a particular pattern of boundaries between light and darkness; that is, some cells are sensitive to lines and react only when the eld of vision contains lines but not surfaces of uniform color. Similarly, some neurons are sensitive to the movement of objects in the eld of vision and can even distinguish the direction of motion. Such bio-logical mechanisms suggest that similar ideas should be used by articial neural networks as well.
174    ◾    Biological Computation4.5.4  Examples of ApplicationsWe now present a few classic examples of using neural networks. Most of these are of multilayered networks trained using backpropagation. Nonetheless, in many of the examples we discuss, some deviations from the standard algorithm were used to adapt the network to the requirements of the problem.NetTalke goal of this project (Sejnowski and Rosenberg, 1987) was to build a network that translates written text into speech. e input was seven char-acters from the text, and the network had to determine the pronunciation of the middle character. e seven-character window through the text is used to allow the network to determine the pronunciation based on the context of each character, as seen in Figure4.15. Two forms of data were considered. In the rst, the text in fact came from a transcript of recorded continuous speech that was moved along the window such that more than one word could be included at the same time in the window (as can be seen in Figure4.15). In the second dataset, dictionary words were fed into the system one at a time.For every seven characters, the network determined what sound (pho-neme) to make out of a set of 26 possible phonemes. e network con-tained 29 × 7 = 203 inputs: seven characters in the sliding window, where each character may be one of the 26 letters of the language and three punc-tuation marks; each character is represented by 29 neurons, one with the value 1 and all other neurons set to 0. e network contained 80 hidden neurons in one layer and 26 output neurons that specify the output sound. Aer 50 passes over the training set the network was 95% and 98% precise in its output for the rst and second datasets, respectively.\z\Hidden unitsOutput units(phoneme code)S i m p l e a s tha tFIGURE 4.15  A schematic representation of the network used by NetTalk to identify phonemes in a “text to speech” translation system.
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    175e self-organization of the network was quite interesting. It turns out that the network learned how to identify certain components of the input. It began by learning very general properties (e.g., the transition from word to word), and progressed to more subtle properties. Aer training, some of the hidden neurons were capable of identifying well-known properties, such as the distinction between vowels and conso-nants. e network was 78% accurate on new text (generalization)—a result that, while not very high, was still high enough to make the speech understandable.Another interesting test of the network was determining its fault toler-ance. We discussed already that fault tolerance is one of the main dier-ences between the brain and digital computers. And indeed, in this case a local fault in the network (the removal of some neurons) or a random change in weights caused a gradual degradation in the quality of the out-put rather than a catastrophic complete failure. Moreover, aer such fail-ures, retraining quickly enabled the network to recover.Handwriting RecognitionIn this example, a neural network was used for automatically reading zip codes o envelopes, as part of a system to automatically sort mail for the U.S. Postal Service (LeCun et al., 1989). e system made use of many tech-nologies, but we will discuss only the aspects related to the topics discussed in this chapter.e training set consisted of about 10,000 handwritten digits. Finding the zip code on the envelope and separating it into distinct digits are com-plex tasks that will not be discussed here. e task we will discuss is the nal stage of the process: identifying each separate digit.e input to the neural network was a 16 × 16 matrix of pixels rep-resenting the image of a digit. e characters were scaled as needed so that they were all the same size, regardless of the particular handwriting. Every pixel in the matrix was represented by an input neuron. e values of the inputs were continuous rather than binary (black or white) because the scaling may cause every pixel in the matrix to represent more than one pixel in the original image. Figure4.16 shows examples of the kind of handwritten digits presented to the neural network.e network contained three hidden layers and an output layer con-taining 10 neurons representing the digits 0–9. e output of the network was determined by the output neuron with the highest value. e organi-zation of the network can be seen in Figure4.17.
176    ◾    Biological Computatione rst two hidden layers are used to identify recurring features in the input images:• e rst hidden level contains 12 groups of 8 × 8 = 64 neurons each, which represent an 8 × 8 matrix tasked with identifying a specic feature. e input for each neuron in each group is a 5 × 5 neigh-borhood on the input matrix; the corresponding neurons in each of the feature detectors “observe” the same neighborhood on the input matrix. Adjacent neurons deal with neighborhoods that are two pixels FIGURE4.16  Example of handwritten digits. e task of the neural network is to identify such digits in spite of the large variability in how people are used to writing the dierent digits.
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    177apart in the input matrix. All the neurons in each group have the same weights. (Interestingly, even though the weights are the same, the threshold could dier from neuron to neuron.) Functionally, this means that all neurons in the group identify the same image feature, but in dierent regions of the input. is weight-sharing property decreases the number of weights the network has to learn, allowing the training set to be smaller.• e second hidden layer is quite similar to the rst layer. It contains 12 groups of 4 × 4 = 16 neurons that observe a region of 5 × 5 cells in the previous layer. e neurons receive their inputs from corresponding 10 output units30 units12 feature defectors(4 by 4)12 feature defectors(8 by 8)16 by 16 input9876543210FIGURE4.17  A schematic representation of the neural network’s architecture used to identify handwritten digits. (Adapted from LeCun, Yann, et al., IEEE Communications Magazine 27, no. 11, 41–46, 1989. With permission.)


===== [44/72] chapter-44.html =====

178    ◾    Biological Computationregions from 8 of the 12 groups in the rst layer. (Every group of 4 × 4 neurons observes a dierent combination of eight groups.)• e third hidden layer contains 30 neurons, all of which are con-nected to all the neurons in the previous layer.• e output layer contains 10 neurons representing each of the digits, all of which are connected to all the neurons in the previous layer. e identity of the input digit is determined by the identity of the most active output neuron.e network contained 1256 neurons, 64,600 edges and 9760 weights that had to be learned. e network was trained on 7300 digits and tested on 2000 images. e error rate was 1% on the training set and 5% on the test set. e latter could be reduced to 1% by rejecting cases where the value of the most active neuron is very close to that of the runner-up. ese cases would then have to be read by a human operator. is solution gave rise to 12% of the test inputs being rejected.Aer training, the system was implemented on standard signal pro-cessing hardware. e resulting system was capable of processing more than 10 digits per second (from photographing the image to identifying the digit by the neural network).BackgammonTo play well, a computer system must be able to determine which of the next possible moves in a game is the most advantageous. e ranking of moves is usually based on two elements: (1) a good function for static eval-uation of a given conguration of the board; and (2) an algorithm that can simulate the progression of the game a few moves ahead and can decide which move to select such that the position of the board will be, aer the next few moves, the best possible for the player the computer represents (the minimax algorithm is an example of how this idea is implemented). Writing good backgammon-playing soware poses a computational chal-lenge since the number of possible moves aer the die are tossed is usually rather large (about 20 moves on average), and there are 21 possible out-comes of the die toss. erefore, the space of possible moves grows expo-nentially fast—faster than chess.e approach we mention here (Tesauro and Sejnowski, 1989) does not explicitly look ahead: Given a position on the board and the dice value, the task of the network is to judge the quality of the possible moves.
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    179A neural network was used to grade each possible move. e network was trained to grade each triplet of the from {current board congura-tion, dice values, possible move} with values between –100 (bad) and 100 (excellent). e network was trained using about 3000 such triplets, where the grading provided by the training set was determined by a skilled back-gammon player. e inputs were the triplets and a few specic properties calculated from the state of the board (e.g., the number of blots, which are single checkers that can be hit). Altogether, 459 neurons were needed to represent the input. e network contained two hidden layers of 24 neu-rons each and one output neuron whose value was a real number between 0 and 1 that could be transformed to values in the range of –100 to 100 used to grade moves.An important element in training the network was the use of noisy input. e input contained a few moves whose grades were determined randomly to reduce the danger of overtting. is is critical for backgam-mon as the number of possible backgammon moves is much larger than the size of any reasonable training set. Cases where the network graded an input particularly badly were identied and rectied by adding correct-ing samples to the training set with the aim of reducing the occurrence of similar problems.When the trained network played against another computer program (not implemented using a neural network), it won in 59% of the games. Interestingly, when only the triplets of {current board, dice, move} were used as input to the network, without the additional information calculated from the board, the machine won only 41% of the games. is signicant drop in performance highlights the importance of preprocessing of the data presented to neural networks, since all of the additional features that were used could in principle be extracted automatically from the board, but apparently the system was not powerful enough to nd them. In addi-tion, it was noticed that, if no noisy data were included in the training set, the success rate dropped from 59% to 45%, indicating that noisy data are indeed useful in preventing overtting.The Bottleneck TechniqueNeural networks and backpropagation can be used for nding ecient representations for large sets of patterns and for identifying common properties. is can be achieved by training a network with N input and N output neurons and only one hidden layer with M neurons where M is 
180    ◾    Biological Computationsignicantly smaller than N. e goal of training is to nd weights for the hidden neurons so that each input pattern presented to the network will be reproduced as output. At rst glance this may seem a strange task. Why should we want to reproduce our input? e answer lies in the observa-tion that the hidden layer has to represent the input pattern so the output layer can reproduce it. us, if M is smaller than N and the training is successful, then we have actually found a way of representing the N input bits of information by a smaller set of M bits. In other words, if we have “squeezed” the data through a narrow bottleneck and were able to repro-duce it back, then the hidden layer must have found properties and inter-relationships in the dataset. is technique can be used for text or image compression or more generally for identifying features of a dataset.4.6 ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY4.6.1 Biological MemoryOur discussion so far has centered on using the computational capabilities of neural networks for solving problems such as classication. e human brain (as well as the brains of other species from mollusks to elephants) has another important role, namely, memory. Brains can remember and retrieve a huge number of data items. Despite the fact that conventional computers have very large memories, their memory capabilities are very dierent from those of animals. Aer many years of research and many insights that have been gained, many aspects of the memory capabilities of the brain are still not well understood. We will see how to implement some of the biological principles in a simple neural network architecture.As far as we know, in the brain there is no explicit distinction between the neurons used for computations and those used for memory. We know of no type of neurons whose specic function is memory. Nonetheless, certain brain regions are dedicated to memorizing, and patients who suer from damage (due to injury or illness) to these regions experience various types of memory loss while other cognitive functions are not impaired. It is common to classify memory to short-term memory (a few seconds long), which can store a very limited amount of data (the common claim is that it can store up to about seven data items), and long-term memory, which can potentially be retained for a lifetime (though obviously not all long-term memories are retained).It is common to discuss three facets of the memory system: (1) encod-ing; (2) storage; and (3) retrieval. Here, we will not discuss the encoding 
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    181(i.e., the way the information from the senses is converted into neural information that can be further analyzed by the brain), since it is specic to the biology of the brain and is less relevant to our discussion of articial neural networks.e brain’s storage system is distributed; that is, no single cell stores a particular data item. A centralized arrangement would have caused mem-ories to disappear with the natural death of the individual cell storing a particular datum of information. us, brains must have mechanisms to ensure robustness. One way of achieving robustness is to keep multiple com-plete copies of the data in dierent locations (similar to computer backups). However, evidence suggests that memories are stored in the brain in a dis-tributed fashion. For example, data items seem to be broken up into smaller units that can be reassembled, even if a few of the pieces are missing.From daily experience we know that memories are oen retrieved by association. For instance, we recall a person’s name when seeing his or her face, or a tune gives rise to memories of an event during which the tune was played. e retrieval can be instantaneous and not conscious, but occasionally we have to explicitly search our databanks to recall a data item. Associative memory allows us to recall data not by accessing a par-ticular location in memory (the way digital computers deal with memory) but rather by using partial content to access the rest of the data. is prop-erty is called content addressability.4.6.2 Hopﬁeld NetworksIn 1982, John Hopeld described an articial neural network that pro-vides associative memory. Rather than being organized in layers like the networks we discussed in previous sections, each neuron in a Hopeld net-work is connected to all other neurons. Moreover, there is no explicit dis-tinction between input and output neurons. We will see how the network remembers by updating the weights and how data retrieval is executed by an iterative process of updating the values of neurons connected by these weights. As no neurons represent the output, retrieval ends when all the neurons reach a steady state where their values no longer change.4.6.3 Memorization in a Hopﬁeld NetworkLet us start by dening the storage process and understanding the retrieval process. Assume we have to remember p strings U of N bits each. Let Uik 
182    ◾    Biological Computationbe the i-th bit of the k-th string. e values of the memory table will be computed as follows: T U Ui j ikjkkp,( , )==∑δ1 (4.10)where δ( ,U UU UU Uikjkikjkikjk)1==− ≠1 Formula (4.10) allows us to compute the weights for a network used to store a set of samples. Each neuron in the network corresponds to one of the p bits. e value Ti,j represents the strength of the connec-tion between the two neurons. If we are supplied with the set of sam-ples ahead of time, we can use formula (4.10) to compute the weights. Alternatively, the same value can be computed iteratively by consider-ing sequentially each sample and updating the strength of the connec-tions as required.Let us look at the following example. Suppose the goal is to memorize ve binary strings of length six: 001010, 111100, 101110, 010001, 011000 (Figure4.18).e strings will be stored in “associative memory,” which is a 6 × 6 matrix (6 is the length of the strings), where the value in cell (i,j) reects in how many of the strings bit i and bit j are identical (Figure4.19). For instance, the value of cell (1,2) reects the fact that the rst and second bits are equal in two of the ve samples and not equal in the other three, and therefore its value is 2 – 3 = –1. e rest of the table is lled up in a similar way. By denition the diagonal cells (i,i) are set to zero. e matrix 000110100010011101001111010100FIGURE4.18  An example of input strings presented in the Hopeld network.


===== [45/72] chapter-45.html =====

Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    183represents the data in a distributed fashion since each cell contains infor-mation which is aected by all the data samples. Note that the learning rule (4.10) ensures that the weights between neurons that typically have the same value will be high.is learning procedure is called Hebb’s rule, named aer the psy-chologist Donald Hebb who postulated that in the brain the connection strength between cells is correlated with the frequency of them being active together. is idea is oen summarized by the slogan “Neurons that re together wire together.” Obviously, the simple learning rule in (4.10) cannot adequately model the complicated process happening in the brain (which, moreover, is not well understood). For instance, in our model two inactive cells (bits with value 0) will have a strong connection, which is probably not the case in a biological system.4.6.4 Data Retrieval in a Hopﬁeld NetworkRetrieval is initiated by setting the value of the neurons in the network to the values of the corresponding bits in the string. e retrieval process should be such that, if the system is presented with one of the samples in memory the values of the neurons in the network will not be altered. If a slight variation is presented (i.e., a string where only one or two bits have been altered relative to the original), we want the network to come up with the appropriate (i.e., most similar) sample string. If an entirely new sample is presented, we usually have no expectations from the system.e retrieval of the memorized patterns is based on the fact that the weight matrix represents the strength of the connection between all pairs of bits. us, when we want to retrieve the value of a specic bit, we can look at the values of the other bits and see what their “recommendation” is. For example, if the values of other bits that are strongly coupled with 0–1–1–5–1–1–1011–51–1101–15–5110–11–1–5–1–10–1–1151–10654321654321FIGURE4.19  e weight matrix that is calculated for the input strings shown in Figure4.18.
184    ◾    Biological Computationthe given bit is 1, then we should set its value to 1. e actual calculation is achieved by the formula given in (4.11). UU TU TiNEWj i jjj i jj=≥∑∑1 00,,,<< 0, (4.11)We will now repeat the process for other randomly chosen neurons until the process stabilizes, that is, until no neuron is updated. Intuitively, at every step the chosen neuron “adopts” the value “recommended” by the other bits. For instance, consider the string 1 1 1 1 1 0 (which is similar to the string 1 1 1 1 0 0 in Figure4.18). Assume that we want to compute the value of the h bit: SUM5 = U1×T5,1 + U2×T5,2 + U3×T5,3 + U4×T5,4 + U5×T5,5 + U6×T5,6 = 1×1 + 1× (–5) + 1×1 + 1×1 + 1×0 + 0×(–1) = –2erefore UNEW50=is correction is indeed what we are hoping for, but it is only a step in the process. In general, we have to show that the process does indeed converge; that is, no innite loop can arise where the values of a cell will oscillate between 0 and 1, and the process will eventually halt and retrieve the correct value.Note that the process we have described is asynchronous, where at each time unit one cell is updated and its new value will be used to update the values of cells updated in subsequent time steps. is property is believed to be relevant to the situation in the brain where there is no master clock; therefore, the activity is not tightly synchronized. However, in principle one can also explore synchronous systems where all the values are changed simultaneously (similar to the synchronous updates in cellular automata 
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    185discussed in Chapter 2). Clearly, a synchronous system would require aux-iliary memory to prevent updating bits before they aected the other bits.4.6.5 The Convergence of the Process of Updating the NeuronsWe will prove the convergence of the process of updating the values of the neurons by dening a quantity called the total energy of the network: ET U Ui j j ii i jj= −≠∑∑,( )2We prove that the total energy is monotonic decreasing as the weights are updated. As the energy is additive, we can consider its component derived from bit j: E T U U U T Uj i j j ii jj i j ii j= − = −≠ ≠∑ ∑1212, ,When the value of Uj changes, all the other bits remain as they were, so the dierence in energy can come only from change in Uj. erefore,E E E U T Uj jnewjoldj i j ii j= − = −≠∑12,Note that if there was no correction to the value of Uj then Uj=0.Otherwise, the value of Uj has been changed by the update rule in one of the following two cases: if T Uij ii j≥≠∑0 then Uj ≥ 0 and if T Ui j ii j,<≠∑0 then Uj < 0In either case the product
186    ◾    Biological Computation U T Uj ij ii j≠∑will be positive; therefore, the total energy will decrease. As the system is nite, the energy cannot decrease ad innitum, so the network has to converge. Next, we need to show that the values the network converges on will be those strings the network is tasked with storing.4.6.6  Analyzing the Capacity of a Hopﬁeld NetworkWhy and under what conditions will the system give the expected results and be able to retrieve the input? We begin by examining a network designed to store a single input sample. In this case the weights of the network will be T U UU UU Ui j i ji ji j,( ,= ==− ≠δ )11Applying the neuron update rule and computing U Tj i jj i,≠∑for every bit in the sample does not cause any updates.In fact, the weights dene an energy surface as depicted in Figure4.20 where the saved string is an attractor for the network such that points close to the attractor will converge to the attractor. Obviously, if we start at the attractor (i.e., present a memorized sample to the network), the sys-tem will remain at the same point. Notice that, because of the symme-try between the 0 and 1 bits, the strength of all the connections will not change if we replace every 0 with 1 and every 1 with 0. erefore, when one pattern is memorized its complement is memorized too, as can be seen in Figure4.20.What happens when more than one string is to be memorized? e energy surface will be much more complex and may contain multiple minima. Intuitively, there must be a limit to the capacity of the network, so that if we attempt to memorize too many samples the attractors will overlap and patterns will be attracted to the wrong attractors.
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    187Let us determine how many patterns can be memorized such that small perturbations will be corrected by the dynamics of the network. To make the analysis more convenient we will discuss neurons with the values +1 and –1 rather than 0 and 1, so the sign of the product of two bits indicates whether the bits are equal (when their product is 1) or dierent (when their product is –1). Moreover, we will normalize the weights in (4.10) by multiplying by 1/N, where N is the number of bits in a string: TNU Ui j ikjkkp,==∑11 (4.12)Note that by this denition the main diagonal of the weight matrix is 1 and not 0 and that the normalization achieved by multiplying by the con-stant 1/N may aect the retrieval rate but not its result.We now consider one pattern U v and check if it is stable. It will be stable if no neuron changes due to the update rule; that is, for every i it holds that ivi jjvjUTU=∑sign,X0X1FIGURE4.20  e energy surface of a Hopeld network that stores a single input. e energy surface (reecting the energy function) is shaped such that the input data point will be at the minimum of the surface (X0) and nearby points will be attracted to the minimum. Note that for binary strings the symmetrical treat-ment of 1 and 0 bits results in a “shadow” minimum (X1) corresponding to a string where the bits are ipped.


===== [46/72] chapter-46.html =====

188    ◾    Biological Computationwhere the sign() function returns 1 for positive values and –1 for nega-tive values.By inserting the expression for Ti,j: ivi jjvjikjkkUTUNU U= =∑ ∑sign sign,1∑jvjUIsolating the k = v term and manipulating the equation gives UNU U U U Uivikjkivjvk vjj= +≠∑∑sign1ν UNU U UNU U Uivikjkk vjivjvjv= +( )≠∑sign1 1νjjj∑∑ U UNU U Uivivikjkk vjj= +≠∑∑sign1ν (4.13)If the second term is 0, U v is clearly stable. It will also be stable if the second term is small enough: if Uiv is 1, then if the second term is greater than or equal to –1 it cannot ip the sign of Uiv. Similarly, if Uiv is –1 then the second term will have to be greater than 1 to change the sign. Since the sum of random (+1/–1) bits will tend to be around 0, in most cases the sum will not be larger than N and the pattern will be stable, but the probability of this depends on the number of strings p and their length N.Let us determine the probability that 11NU U Uikjkk vjj ≠∑∑< −νsince in this case the sign of the expression in (4.13) will change. As a rst approximation, let us assume that the patterns and the weights 
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    189are random, so the question boils down to the question of what is the probability that the product of 1/N and the sum of Np random numbers whose values are –1 or +1 is less than –1. In other words, what is the probability that sum of Np random numbers whose values are –1/N or +1/N is less than –1?Assuming that p and N are large, by the central limit theorem this sum is distributed normally with a mean of 0 and variance of p/N, and the probability that it is less than –1 (as a function of p/N) appears in Table4.3. For example, to achieve a retrieval error smaller than 1%, we have to store less than 0.185N patterns. Note that this is only an upper bound. In reality the storage capacity may be lower.Indeed, Hopeld did not analyze the network capacity formally in his original paper but reported that empirical results show that the capacity of the network is about 0.15N, similar to the theoretical capacity we have derived. Further, more careful, theoretical analysis shows that the best achievable lower bound is about 0.138N.is analysis indicates a relatively low capacity. If we assume strings of length 100, the network can memorize at most 15 strings using 100 × 100 = 10,000 weights, whereas the data can be represented by 15 × 100 = 1500 bits. is means that in practice the Hopeld network is of limited use for storing patterns, but it is an interesting model of distributed memory and associative recall.4.6.7 Application of a Hopﬁeld NetworkWe now describe how a Hopeld network is used to memorize the shape of digits (Haykin, 1998). e digits are represented as patterns of size 10 × 12 as can be seen in Figure4.21. e network contains 120 neurons, where a black pixel is represented by the value +1 and an empty pixel by TABLE4.3  Error Probabilities and Network CapacityPNmaxPerror0.105 0.0010.138 0.00360.185 0.01 (= 1%)0.37 0.05 (= 5%)0.61 0.1 (= 10%)
190    ◾    Biological Computationthe value –1. e weights are computed according to the network learn-ing rule (4.10).In the rst phase of the experiment the memorized patterns were presented to the system, and as expected it remained in the stable con-gurations. In the second phase, altered patterns were presented to the system to see how it dealt with input errors. e value of each pixel in the pattern was ipped with probability 0.25. For instance, Figure4.22 shows how the network dealt with the pattern of the digit 6, which has been altered in this fashion: it managed to converge to the memorized pattern.Similar behavior was observed in other cases. Nonetheless, the network does fail occasionally in converging to the correct shape. For instance, in Pattern “0” Pattern “1” Pattern “2”Pattern “3” Pattern “4” Pattern “6”Pattern “9”Pattern “ ”FIGURE 4.21  Example of digits memorized by the Hopeld neural network. (Adapted from Haykin, Simon, Neural Networks: A Comprehensive Foundation, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998. With permission.)
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    191the example shown in Figure4.23 the network starts with an altered rep-resentation of the digit 2 and converges erroneously to 6. A more surpris-ing problem is the existence of stable erroneous states, that is, attractors that are not memorized patterns. ese are called spurious attractors. is situation can be seen in Figure4.24 where the network converged to a pattern similar to the pattern it was presented with (the digit 9 with alterations). e pattern it converged on was similar to the memorized 9 but not identical to it.4.6.8 Further Uses of the Hopﬁeld NetworkUp to now we have dealt with the memorizing and retrieval capabilities of Hopeld networks. However, Hopeld networks have additional uses. Initial corrupted 6 After 5 iterations After 10 iterationsAfter 15 iterations After 20 iterations After 25 iterationsAfter 37 iterationsAfter 30 iterationsFIGURE4.22  Example of the digit 6 where pixels were ipped with probability 0.25 that is gradually retrieved by the network. (Adapted from Haykin, Simon, Neural Networks: A Comprehensive Foundation, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998. With permission.)
192    ◾    Biological ComputationAssume that we present the input patterns shown in Figure4.25(a) to the network, and it produced the weight matrix depicted in Figure4.25(b).Observe the patterns to notice that the three rightmost and lemost bits in each pattern are mirror images, while the two middle bits are inde-pendent of any other bits in the pattern. When we initialized the network with the string 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 0, aer 3 update steps, computing bits from le to right, we come up with 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 which is the retrieval of one of the memorized patterns.On the other hand, if we start with 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 we will encounter an interesting situation. Aer three updates steps, the string 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 will be generated—a string that has not been memorized but has the properties Initial corrupted 2 After 5 iterations After 12 iterationsAfter 18 iterations After 24 iterations After 30 iterationsAfter 41 iterationsWrong answer!!After 36 iterationsFIGURE4.23  An example of erroneous retrieval. e network starts with a noisy version of the digit 2 (with 25% ipped pixels) and ends up retrieving the digit 6. (Adapted from Haykin, Simon, Neural Networks: A Comprehensive Foundation, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998. With permission.)


===== [47/72] chapter-47.html =====

Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    193we identied in the set of strings that was memorized. In other words, as the weights reect the types of relations between the bits, the network has succeeded in learning the rule governing the samples. Obviously, regular-ity can also be learned by the feedforward networks described earlier.Hopeld networks can also be used for optimizations. We saw in the proof of the convergence of the retrieval process that a set of weights corre-sponds to an energy function. is function is minimized by the process of updating the values of the neurons such that at the end of the process neu-rons connected by an edge with a positive weight will tend to have similar values, whereas neurons connected by an edge with a negative weight will tend to have opposite values. One can use a Hopeld network in the opposite Initial corrupted 9 After 4 iterations After 8 iterationsAfter 12 iterations After 16 iterations After 20 iterationsAfter 28 iterationsWrong answer!!After 24 iterationsFIGURE 4.24  An example of retrieval to a spurious attractor. e network converged to the digit 9, but note that this is not exactly the same digit pre-sented in the input data. (Adapted from Haykin, Simon, Neural Networks: A Comprehensive Foundation, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998. With permission.)
194    ◾    Biological Computationfashion: start with an energy function to be minimized, and build a network around it with weights derived from the function (a nontrivial task). If we perform a process similar to the retrieval process on this network, we will get values that are good solutions to the minimization problem. Hopeld and Tank (1986) implemented this idea for the traveling salesman problem (TSP). In this problem the input is a map of cities with known distances between them. A traveling salesman has to nd the shortest route allowing him to visit all the cities and each city exactly once. is problem is known to be an NP-complete problem, and therefore it is commonly believed that no algorithm can compute an optimal solution in a reasonable amount of time (i.e., in time that is not exponential in the number of cities). Hopeld and Tank represented the solution as a matrix representing the order of vis-iting the dierent cities (see Figure4.26). Since the representation does not ensure that the route is legal (e.g., two cities are designated as visited sec-ond in the route in Figure4.26(a)), the energy function penalized for illegal routes as well as for routes that are long. e challenge was to derive a weight matrix such that the computation will end in the shortest legal route (e.g., Figure4.26(b)). Hopeld and Tank reported good results for examples of 10 and 30 cities. Interested readers are referred to the paper for further detail.4.7 UNSUPERVISED LEARNINGUp to now we have discussed dierent forms of learning in which the neu-ral network is trained using example data to which the required output is known, and network learning is driven by comparing the output the net-work produces and the required output. Can learning be achieved with-out supplying the network with examples of previously classied data? Such learning can be achieved by analyzing the input and attempting to 0(a) (b)1001010001101000110011000010000000110001011010111000011010010100200‒82‒22‒4‒22082‒408‒2‒8208000‒220002‒20008002‒8‒2800‒428020‒2‒42‒202‒8000200 08765432187654321FIGURE 4.25  An example of input patterns (a) and weight matrix (b) for a Hopeld network.
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    195nd patterns, connections, and correlations between the data points. e standard approaches to unsupervised learning are statistical in nature and attempt to single out important features of the input. We now dis-cuss a technique based on a neural network called self-organizing maps (SOMs), or Kohonen networks, named aer Teuvo Kohonen (2001), who was the rst to describe such a network.4.7.1 Self-Organizing MapsSelf-organizing maps are used to produce a discrete low-dimensional rep-resentation of a set of input samples. e SOM network is based on com-petitive learning, where neurons compete with each other in an attempt to represent the input. e neurons are usually organized on a 2-D grid with a hexagonal structure. If each input pattern is of length N, then each neuron will hold a vector of length N. For example, if each input is a vec-tor of three numbers representing a point in 3-D space, then each neuron will contain a vector of three numbers. e initial values of the vectors held by the neurons are random, and the network seeks the neuron that best represents each input item. When a particular neuron is selected to JIHGFEDCBA10987654321JIHGFEDCBA10987654321CityPosition in pathPath = DHIFGEAJCB(a) (b)FIGURE4.26  e representation used by Tank and Hopeld to address the TSP problem using a Hopeld network. In this binary matrix representation the rst column represents which city is visited rst, the second column represents the city visited second, and so forth. Note that the representation does not ensure a legal path; that is, one city can be visited multiple times, or the route can visit in two cities simultaneously. e matrix in (a) depicts such an illegal route in the beginning of the optimization process, and the matrix in (b) shows the nal legal route, which happens to be the optimal route. (Adapted from Hopeld, John J. and David W. Tank, Science 233, no. 4764, 625–633, 1986. With permission.)
196    ◾    Biological Computationrepresent an input point, its value is further updated to be more similar to that input point. is process is iterated many times such that, when it ends, all the input points are mapped to neurons so that adjacent neurons will represent similar input points.e process is demonstrated schematically in Figure4.27. Assume that each input sample on the le contains values for ve properties and is there-fore represented as a vector of length 5. At the beginning of the process all the neurons in the hexagonal grid contain vectors of length 5 with random initial values. For each input sample we search for the neuron whose value is the most similar to that sample. “Similar” can be dened in dierent ways, but oen the Euclidean distance is used; that is, for the input sample Vj we will search for the neuron Ni that minimizes the expression V NjmimmV−( )=∑21| |whereVjmdenotes the m-th component of the vector Vj.Clearly, we do not expect to nd a good t at the beginning of this process as the initial values of the neurons are random; nonetheless, we can pick the neuron for which the value of the previous expression is the smallest. Assume this is the neuron Ni, colored black in Figure4.27. At this point, the value of neuron Ni is changed to be more similar to the sample Vj (see following formula). We dene a neighborhood for each neuron—in FIGURE4.27  A schematic description of the process of creating a self-organizing map. Each input vector is mapped to a neuron of the network (which usually has the layout of a two-dimensional hexagonal grid). In an iterative procedure, the values of the target neuron as well as neurons in its neighborhood are adjusted to reect the values of the input. us, the procedure achieves reduction in the dimensionality of the input—in this example, from ve to two.
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    197this example the neighborhood was chosen to be two layers deep. All neu-rons in the neighborhood of Ni are also updated to be more similar to Vj but to a lesser extent. So Ni is changed the most (marked in black), the neurons in the layer closest to it are changed in a weaker way (dark gray), and the neurons in the second layer are changed the least (light gray). e changes are given by the following formula: N t N t t h t V N tk k ki j k( ) ( ) ( ) ( )[ ( )]+ = + −1 αWe see that the value of a neuron in iteration t + 1 is the sum of its pre-vious value and a change term that is the product of three factors: (1) the dierence between its previous value and the input sample [Vj–Nk(t)]; (2) the learning rate function α(t), which is similar to the learning constant we have encountered previously but is represented as a function since it can be changed during the computation; and (3) hki(t), which determines if neuron Nk is in the neighborhood of Ni and if so how close they are to each other. Note that this factor is also time dependent and it is common to decrease the size of neighborhoods as the learning process progresses in order to rene it. Variations of this algorithm dene the neighborhood and the way neighborhood sizes change with time in dierent ways.Aer the neurons are updated, the next input point is selected, and the process is repeated. Note that the same neuron can represent more than one sample. In fact, if the number of samples is larger than the number of neurons this must be the case. is learning process, like the other learning procedures previously discussed, requires many learning epochs before it converges.We say that the network has converged when the mapping (i.e., which sample is represented by which neuron) does not change during an entire epoch. e learning process just described leads to a clustering of the input data. Since neurons are arranged on a 2-D grid, we can think of the algorithm as a way to reduce the dimensionality of the data from N to 2. In contrast to some of the networks we discussed earlier, we cannot prove mathematically that this network does indeed converge, but expe-rience shows that this process usually ends up with a stable mapping of the input samples to neurons such that similar inputs are represented by the same neuron or by adjacent neurons. Clearly, every execution of the learning algorithm will give rise to dierent solutions as the initial values of the neurons are chosen randomly. Each input point will be


===== [48/72] chapter-48.html =====

198    ◾    Biological Computationmapped to dierent neurons upon dierent choices of the initial val-ues, but we do expect the network to be similarly organized for dierent initial values. As it is common to repeat this process many times, we would like to be able to identify the best mapping. For this purpose two error metrics are used: (1) the quantization error; and (2) the topologi-cal error. e rst computes the average distance between each input vector and the neuron most similar to it, and it is obvious that we will prefer the maps with the smallest quantization error. e topological error computes the percentage of input samples for which the two most similar neurons are not adjacent on the grid. If the map self-organized into clusters, we expect that for most input vectors the neuron closest in value and the neuron second closest in value are adjacent on the grid, and therefore the topological error will be small. e combination of these two metrics allows us to identify the best mapping.4.7.2 WEBSOM: Example of Using SOMs for Document Text MiningOne of the most impressive examples of using self-organizing maps is WEBSOM, a system for mining very large document collections (Lagus, Kaski, and Kohonen, 2004). e largest implementation of the system so far contains 7 million patent abstracts mapped to a network of about 1 million nodes. In this system, each document is represented by a very long binary vector where each position in the vector represents one word in a predened vocabulary. e vector contains 1 in cells that correspond to words that appear in the document and 0 for words that do not. To reduce the huge size of such vectors, the vocabulary is made smaller by aggregating words of similar meaning. Each neuron in a 2-D SOM starts with a random vector, and the input vectors are mapped to neurons in an iterative process. When selecting the best match for a given input, the similarity between the vector representing the input and the vector rep-resented by the neuron is calculated by counting the matches between corresponding positions in the two vectors or in mathematical terms by calculating the inner product of the two vectors. Dierent weights can be given to dierent words to reect their relative importance to the text. Such a weighting scheme is achieved, for example, by the “inverse docu-ment frequency” measure that gives higher weights to words appearing a lot in a specic document but that are otherwise rare. e actual imple-mentation of WEBSOM includes several shortcuts enabling the system to handle eciently the large amount of data.
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    199e system maps similar documents to neurons in the same region of the map. To make the map a useful text-mining tool, the system selects and automatically labels map regions. A search can start by nding docu-ments mapped to regions whose labels match best with the search expres-sion. en, further relevant search results can be found by moving to documents mapped to neighboring regions even if they did not match exactly the search criteria. Figure4.28 shows an example of such search in a WEBSOM built for 68,000 articles from the Encyclopedia Britannica.Descriptive words:bird, yellow, species, black, king bird,Hawaiian, bill, inch, family, have Articles:caciqueguiraHawaiian honeycreepersiskinkingbirdchickadee Descriptive words:insect, adult, lay, other, waterArticles:homopteran : Formation of gallsstrepsipteranmantispidneuropteran : Natural historylacewingdamselﬂycaddisﬂy : Natural historybagworm mothglowwormDescriptive words:shark, ﬁsh, species, ray, many, water, feed, have,attack, use Articles:fox sharkchondrichthian : General featuresleopard sharksoupﬁn sharksharkchondrichthian : Economic valueof raysbull sharkCambyses I chondrichthian : Natural historyblacktip sharkshark : Description and habitsshark : Hazards to humansFIGURE4.28  A close-up of the map of Encyclopedia Britannica articles. e user has clicked a map region with the label “shark,” obtaining a view of a section of the map with articles on, for example, sharks, various species of sh, and eel (middle and le); insects and larvae (lower right corner); and various species of birds (upper right corner). Searches performed on the map conrm that whales and dolphins can be found nearby (not shown). A topic of interest is thus displayed in a context of related topics. e three inserts depict the contents of three map regions, that is, the titles of articles found in the region. By clicking a title, the user can access the article. e “descriptive words” contain a concise description of the contents of each map region. (Adapted from Lagus, Krista, Samuel Kaski, and Teuvo Kohonen, Information Sciences 163, no. 1–3, 135–156, 2004. With permission.)
200    ◾    Biological Computation4.8 SUMMARYIn this chapter we have concentrated on the pioneering examples of neural networks developed more than two decades ago. Since then, neural networks have become practical tools in several areas including image processing and medical decisions. Probably the most popular area of application is nance, where neural networks are used to evaluate loan applications, to forecast foreign currency exchange rates, and to predict stock market behavior. One remarkable recent application of neural network is 20Q, a computer-ized version of the popular children game of guessing what the opponent is thinking about in 20 yes/no questions. e system uses a neural network structured as a matrix of weights that represents the strength of the associa-tion between objects and questions. is weight matrix is used to dynami-cally choose the next question based on previous answers, and the weights are updated when the system guesses the correct answers, reinforcing the weights involved in the successful computation. e game is available in an online version (http://www.20q.net/) with about 10,000,000 synaptic con-nections that keep learning from the answers of the participants and also as a small handheld device using far fewer weights and without the ability to learn. Try it and you will be amazed by the performance of the system.We have focused on the classical models of neural networks: the per-ceptron, the multilayered feedforward–backpropagation network, and the Hopeld network. Many variants of these models as well as several new models have been suggested. Among them are recurrent networks, where the network includes not only forward edges but also backward connec-tions; stochastic neural networks, where the output of the neurons is not deterministic and includes random noise; dynamic neural networks, where the network exhibits time-dependent behavior such as transient phenomena and delay eects; and spiking neural networks, where the output of the neurons is a sequence of pulses (spikes) rather than an out-put of a constant level. Spiking neural networks are inspired by biological neurons that can represent information not only by the level of the output but also by the rate in which the pulses are emitted. It is too early to tell if any of these models or other emerging models will achieve the promi-nence of the models we discussed in this chapter.In this chapter we discussed learning and memory. We demonstrated how similar principles to those used by the central nervous system can be implemented by simple computational systems. Clearly, the biological systems are dierent and much more complex than the articial systems 
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    201we dealt with, but we hope we have succeeded in highlighting the similar principles, rst and foremost of which is the importance of high connec-tivity between the basic building blocks of the systems. is connectivity is at the core of the capabilities of the human brain and is the common basis of all the articial neural networks we have described.Will future articial networks be as capable as the human brain? e jury is still out on this issue. Many researchers believe that there is a vast dierence between the two kinds of systems. ey believe that we are inca-pable of building and controlling systems with a similar number of com-ponents and level of connectivity as exists in the human brain. According to this view not only is the limitation technological; we also simply do not understand well enough the actual data processing mechanisms that occur in the brain and the principles governing these mechanisms to enable us to simulate them in an articial system. On the other hand, some researchers believe that most of the dierence between the biological and articial processing capabilities is merely quantitative, and when we consider the rate of growth of computational systems (as measured by, e.g., the number of components, their speed and complexity, memory size) we see that the rate of technological advancement is so fast that it will soon catch up with biological systems. In the bibliography you will nd a refer-ence to one of the leaders of this school of thought, Ray Kurzweil (2005).4.9 FURTHER READINGChittka, Lars and Jeremy Niven. 2009. Are bigger brains better? Current Biology 19, no. 21, R995–R1008.Haykin, Simon. 1998. Neural Networks: A Comprehensive Foundation, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.Hopeld, John J. 1982. Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collec-tive computational abilities. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 79, no. 8, 2554.Hopeld, John J. and David W. Tank. 1986. Computing with neural circuits: A model. Science 233, no. 4764, 625–633.Kohonen, Teuvo. 2001. Self-Organizing Maps, 3rd extended ed. New York: Springer.Kohonen, Teuvo, Samuel Kaski, Krista Lagus, Jarkko Salojarvi, Vesa Paatero, and Antti Saarela. 2000. Self organization of a massive document collec-tion. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 11, no. 3, 574–585. Available at: http://websom.hut./.Kurzweil, Ray. 2005. e Singularity Is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology. New York: Viking.
202    ◾    Biological ComputationLagus, Krista, Samuel Kaski, and Teuvo Kohonen. 2004. Mining massive docu-ment collections by the WEBSOM method. Information Sciences 163, no. 1–3, 135–156.LeCun, Yann, L.D. Jackel, B. Boser, J.S. Denker, H.P. Graf, I. Guyon, et al. 1989. Handwritten digit recognition: Applications of neural network chips and automatic learning. IEEE Communications Magazine 27, no. 11, 41–46.Marr, David. 1982. Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human Represent-ation and Processing of Visual Information. New York: W. H. Freeman and Co.Minsky, Marvin and Seymour Papert. 1969. Perceptrons. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Rumelhart, DavidE., Georey E. Hinton, and Ronald J. Williams. 1986. Learning internal representations by error propagation. In D. E. Rumelhart, J. L. McClelland, and the PDP Research Group (Eds.), Parallel Distributed Processing. Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition. Volume 1: Foundations, 318–362. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Segev, I. 1998. Sound grounds for computing dendrites. Nature 393, no. 6682, 207–208.Sejnowski, Terrence J. and Charles R. Rosenberg. 1987. Parallel networks that learn to pronounce English text. Complex Systems 1, 145–168.Tesauro, Gerald and Terrence J. Sejnowski. 1989. A parallel network that learns to play backgammon. Articial Intelligence 39, no. 3, 357–390.4.10  EXERCISES4.10.1 Single-Layer Perceptrons 1. Study the OR function learned by a simple perceptron with three inputs x0,x1,x2 and threshold of 0. Fill out the values of the weights in Table4.4 using the learning rule. Let the value x0 always be –1. e patterns are presented to the perceptron in the order in which they appear in the table. e learning rate is α = 0.5. Repeat as needed until the weights converge.TABLE4.4X0X1X2W0W1W2OutputDesired Output–10 0 1.3 0.4 –0.2–10 1–11 0–11 1–10 0–10 1–11 0–11 1–10 0


===== [49/72] chapter-49.html =====

Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    203 2. Design a perceptron for the following problem: the inputs to the net-work are strings of six bits (i.e., there are six input neurons), and the perceptron has six output neurons that count the number of bits, which are 1 in the input strings as follows: e output is 000000 if the input contains no 1’s. e output is 100000 if the input contains a single 1 (its position is unimportant). e output is 110000 if the input contains two 1’s. … … e output is 111111 if the input is all 1’s. 3. Can you design a perceptron for Exercise 2 if the output is represented by the position of a single 1 in the output neurons? For instance: 100000 represents an input string containing a single 1. 010000 represents an input string containing two 1’s. 000010 represents an input string containing ve 1’s. Justify your answer.4.10.2 Multilayer Networks 4. Design a network that deals with images of the format shown in Figure4.29. Every image contains N cells that are either white or black. e network has to determine whether the image contains more than N0 contiguous black regions. e images are circular (the rst and last cells are considered to be adjacent). For instance, in Figure4.29, the top image contains two black regions, and the other images contain one black region each. Suggest a topology for the network, and determine its weights. Your solution can disregard the special case where all cells are black.
204    ◾    Biological ComputationFIGURE 4.29 5. Design a multilayered network that implements the XNOR function. (XNOR is Not XOR; that is, it returns 0 when XOR returns 1 and 1 when XOR returns 0). 6. Given the network in Figure4.30, determine the weights W1,…,W9 so that the network computes correctly the XOR function on binary inputs A and B. (Note that each hidden neuron has a control input with the xed value –1.) To simplify matters, you may assume that all the neurons compute using a threshold function (as in percep-trons) rather than a sigmoid function.−1−1−1ABABW1W2W3W4W8W9W7W5W6FIGURE 4.30 7. e network in Figure4.31 is to be used to compute the XOR func-tion. e learning rate is α = 0.5, and the activation function is a sigmoid. Perform a full epoch of weight updates for the inputs (0,1) and (1,1) where the initial weights are w1 = –0.1, w2 = 0, w3 = 0.1, w4 = 0.2, w5 = 0.1, w6 = –0.2, w7 = 0.1, w8 = –0.3, and w9 = 0.
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    205x1x2–1W1W7W8W9W2W3W4W5W6FIGURE 4.31 8. In the NetTalk network: a. What are the advantages and disadvantages of a larger window? b. How can the optimal window size be determined? 9. In the handwriting recognition example: a. Why was such a large training set needed? b. Calculate the number of connections between the neurons in the rst hidden layer and the neurons in the input layer (consider the threshold level as input) and the number of weights needed to specify these connections. 10. Consider a multilayered network with seven input neurons, seven output neurons, and n neurons in a single hidden layer. For simplic-ity, assume that the neurons in the hidden layer function accord-ing to step function and not the sigmoid function. e network is designed to map unary representations of the digits 0 to 7 to identi-cal outputs (the bottleneck method). In this representation the input patterns 0 is represented as 0000000, the input 1 as 10000000, 2 as 01000000, and 7 as 00000010. a. What is the minimal number of neurons in the hidden layer? b. Design a network to solve this problem.4.10.3  Hopﬁeld Networks 11. Consider the Hopeld network shown in Figure4.32 where the thresh-old values of the neurons are 0.
206    ◾    Biological Computation23–23–23–23–23+23+321FIGURE 4.32 a. Display the weights as a matrix T where the cell in position (i,j) holds Ti,j. b. Show that the weights in T adhere to the requirements on weights in a Hopeld network. c. e network contains three neurons, allowing for eight possible patterns. e stored states are (1,–1,1) and (–1,1,–1). Compute the behavior of the network on these patterns, and show that they are stable. d. For each vector obtained by changing the value of a single neuron in the stored patterns (e.g., changing (1,–1,1) to (–1,–1,1), (1,1,1) or (1,–1,–1), determine the vector to which the network will con-verge. Does the network deal well with errors? 12. A Hopeld network containing ve neurons has to store the fol-lowing patterns: UUU123=( )=( )=1, 1, 1, 1, 11, –1, –1, 1, –1–11, 1, –1, 1, 1( ) a. Determine the 5 × 5 weight matrix for the network. b. Show that the stored patterns are stable states of the network.
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    207 c. Check the network’s behavior when presented with a noisy ver-sion of U1 where the second element is –1. d. Show that the following patterns are also stored in the network. What is the relationship between these patterns and the original patterns? UU12=( )=( )–1, –1, –1, –1, –1–1, 1, 1, –1, 1UU3=( )1, –1, 1, –1, –1 13. Design and implement a Hopeld network that memorizes dig-its and retrieves them. Every digit will be represented as a 10 × 10 matrix containing 0’s and 1’s. e network will memorize the digits and will retrieve a digit when presented with its image with a few ipped bits. For instance, in Figure4.33 the network will retrieve the digit 3 on the le when presented with the image on the right, which has several altered bits. Explore a few aspects of this network:(a) (b)FIGURE 4.33 a. Determine how many dierent digits the network can memorize. A digit is considered memorized if the network can retrieve it correctly in 90% of the cases in which 10% of the bits are ipped. b. Explore the trade-o between the number of memorized digits and the number of altered bits. Plot a three-dimensional graph where X is the digit axis, Y is the percentage of errors axis, and the Z axis is the success percentage.


===== [50/72] chapter-50.html =====

208    ◾    Biological Computation c. Repeat the tests where every digit is memorized using several similar but not identical input patterns (create the patterns rst). Does this improve the learning? d. Repeat the experiments by representing the digits using 1 and –1 (rather than 1 and 0). Does this improve the success rate or the convergence rate? Why? e. e network can fail in one of two ways: it can converge to a digit that was learned but that is not the correct digit, or it can con-verge to a state that was not part of the input samples (a spurious attractor). Count the number of errors from each type, and print out a few samples of states that are not part of the input samples. Try to classify those patterns.4.10.4 Self-Organizing Maps 14. Download a red/green/blue (RGB) color table. In it each color is coded using three numbers that represent the strengths of its red, green, and blue components. For instance, navy blue is represented as (65,105,225) and pink as (255,192,203). Such tables can be found on many Web sites. Make sure your table contains about 100 colors (choose a sampling of the table if it is too large). Build a self-organiz-ing map that will classify the colors on a map of size 9 × 9 and display the results graphically.4.10.5  Summary 15. In supervised learning the size of the dataset is oen limited. us, dividing the data into a training set and a test set might render the training set too small. Suggest a way to handle such situations. 16. Due to the complexity of designing multilayer neural networks (e.g., the need to determine the number of layers, the number of neurons at each level, weight sharing), it has been suggested that genetic algo-rithms can be used to nd good network architectures. Discuss how to implement this idea (consider the components required to char-acterize the genetic algorithm, such as data kept in chromosomes, as well as the components required to characterize the network, such as the learning process).
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    209We presented several potential applications of neural networks (of all types). For Exercises 17–22 discuss how to represent the input for each problem in an appropriate way and which network should be used to solve the problem. Note that these problems can be approached in dierent ways and that no single correct solution or method can be found that guaran-tees nding a successful network without using trial and error. 17. Optimization problems: a. e map coloring problem: given N countries and K colors, color the countries such that no two adjacent countries (countries sharing a border) have the same color. Countries may remain uncolored, and the goal is to minimize the number of uncolored countries. b. e N queens problem: place N queens (or less) on an N×N chess-board such that no queen can attack another queen. e goal is to minimize the number of unplaced queens. 18. Design a network that suggests reasonable past forms for English verbs when given the present tense of the verbs. Keep in mind that many English verbs have irregular past tenses (e.g., run–ran, speak–spoke, draw–drew, die–died). Consider data representation, network design, and expected deciencies in the network’s learning and gen-eralization capabilities. 19. Image processing: a. Face recognition: the goal is for the network to identify a person from a photograph. Assume the photograph is a headshot. b. Image reconstruction: the network is presented with images that have some missing regions (e.g., parts were torn o) and some regions that are out of focus. e network is to reconstruct the originals from these partial images. 20. Suggest a design for a network to forecast failures in a large engine in a power plant. e network uses sensors that report the temperature, number of rotations per minute, fuel ow, and vibrations as well as a microphone that captures the engine’s sound. Under normal circum-stances the engine operates continuously (and the network design has 
210    ◾    Biological Computationto take this into account). For training purposes, however, the engine may be stopped, and started; failures can be induced, etc. 21. A bank uses an expert system to determine which clients are credit-worthy. e system is based on parameters such as the clients’ age and gender, their balance sheets, number of operations per month, and the type of requested credit (i.e., whether it is for small, medium, or large loans). e system has been in use for a few years, and the bank has data on its performance (i.e., the cases where loans were approved and turned out to be bad loans.) Will a neural network be able to improve the loan approval process? Suggest an appropriate architecture. 22. Identifying unusual credit card usage. Design a network for a single customer (one credit card). Note that under normal circumstances there are no unusual usage patterns of the sort the network needs to identify that can be used for training the network.4.11 ANSWERS TO SELECTED EXERCISES 2. A perceptron where each one of the six inputs is connected to all of the six output neurons and the threshold of the rst output neuron is 1, the threshold of the second output neuron is 2, and so forth accomplishes the given task. 3. is is impossible to do with a simple perceptron. Look at a smaller example of two inputs and two outputs. e behavior we require for the rst output bit is to be 1 if and only if one of the two input bits is 1; this is the XOR function that cannot be calculated with a simple perceptron. 4. e black cells will be represented by the value 1 and the white cells by 0. e network has a single hidden layer as shown in Figure4.34. For the hidden layer a simple step function with a threshold of 0 is used. us, a node in the hidden layer will re only when it recog-nizes a switch from a white cell to a black cell. Note that because of the circular nature of the problem we have a node that connects the rst cell and the last cell. e output neuron will have a threshold of N0, so it will output 1 only if there are at least N0 contiguous black regions.
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    211–1–1–1–1–1–1–1–11111FIGURE 4.34 8. a. e network has more data the larger the window and there-fore can pronounce the letter better. If, for example, there was no window around the letter, the network would be unable to distinguish between the k’s in “kill” and “know.” On the other hand, a larger window means that the network is more complex and has to learn a larger number of weights. at will cause the training phase to be longer, require a larger training set, and may result in an impractical convergence rate. b. e decision has to be based on the network’s performance: can it achieve a low enough percentage of errors to be useful? 9. a. e variety of dierent shapes is very large, and the number of neurons and weighs grows proportionally. Moreover, the large variability in the ways the same digit can be written necessitates the use of a large training set to decrease the danger of overt-ting, where the network would be well trained on the training set but incapable of generalizing. b. e hidden layer contains 768 neurons (8 × 8 × 12), which have 19,968 connections. e number of weights is only 1068 (768 threshold values + 12 × 25 weights). is means that the net-work has to learn ~5% of the weights it would have had to learn if weight sharing was not employed. e second hidden layer is similar to the rst. It contains 12 groups of 4 × 4 neurons that are “in charge” of a region of size 5 × 5 in the rst hidden layer. e neurons get input from corresponding regions in 8 of the 12 
212    ◾    Biological Computationgroups in the rst hidden layer (every 4 × 4 group is “in charge” of a dierent combination of eight groups). 10 a. Since the network actually needs to count the numbers 0 to 7, three neurons are enough to capture the data using a binary representation. b. A possible design for the network is shown in Figure4.35. e input nodes are connected to the hidden layer nodes in a way that represents the binary coding; for example, every second input bit is connected to the upper hidden node that repre-sents the parity (rightmost) bit in the binary representation. e weight of all edges from the input to the hidden layer is 1 (to prevent overloading the gure not all of these weights are shown). e threshold values of all the hidden layer neurons are 1. e hidden layer neurons are fully connected to the out-put neurons (again, to prevent overloading the gure, not all of these edges are shown). e reconstruction is achieved by setting the appropriate values for the weights on the edges and by the threshold of the output units. e weights are set accord-ing to the binary representation of the number; for example, the three edges going into the fourth neuron, which represents the number 4 with the binary representation 100 should have weights of (1,–1,–1). e threshold value for each neuron is the number of 1’s in the corresponding binary representation, which is 1 in the case of 100.111–1–1–1–111111113221221FIGURE 4.35


===== [51/72] chapter-51.html =====

Artiﬁcial Neural Networks    ◾    213 11. a. T =− +− −+ −130 2 22 0 22 2 0 b. We have to test for two conditions: (1) that the weights Tii are equal to 0; and (2) that the weights satisfy Hebb’s rule (i.e., for-mula (4.10)). Verify that T satises both of these conditions. c. We will demonstrate this using matrix multiplication notation. Tvv =− +− −+ −+−+130 2 22 0 22 2 0111=+−+13444 Applying the sign() function yields: sign( )Tvv vv=+−+=111 which means that v is stable. e calculation for the other vector is similar. 15. A possible solution is to use all the available data for training, leav-ing out only a single example to be used for testing. To evaluate the performance of the network in this way, one needs to repeat the procedure many times, each time leaving out a dierent example for testing, and then evaluate the performance over all trials. is is known as the “jackknife” method. Note, however, that the data points have to be independent and dierent from each other in order for this technique to work. If many data points are duplicated, then when one copy is presented as the test case, the other copy is included in the training test and would taint the result of the test


===== [52/72] chapter-52.html =====

215C h a p t e r 5Molecular ComputationT    solving computational problems using chemical and biological processes. Problems to be solved using molec-ular computation are usually presented as a collection of molecules that are mixed together and undergo a series of biological processes. ese pro-cesses produce a new collection of molecules that represent the solutions to the computational problem. is approach to solving computational prob-lems is interesting in several ways:• Practical motivation: Molecular computation may allow us to build computational devices from biological molecules and possibly to build general-purpose “biological computers.” As we will discuss in this chapter, such devices may have several advantages over classical computers for certain applications. An interesting example might be in medicine where such devices may be able to make autonomous real-time decisions inside the patient’s body.• eoretical motivation: e observation that biological molecules can carry out computations should help us realize that many bio-logical processes involved in information processing and biological control should be viewed as computational processes. e computa-tional perspective can help us gain better insight into these biological processes. Furthermore, this viewpoint opens the way to employ the tools and methodologies of computer science to analyze biological processes.
216    ◾    Biological Computation• Parallelism: Molecular computations are inherently parallel pro-cesses, as they involve a large number of molecules that collide and interact with each other. us, molecular computational models are potentially very powerful and may be able to solve hard computational problems.• Analog computation: Molecular computation is analog computa-tion rather than digital computation. Historically, the rst com-puting machines were mechanical and were used for astronomical computations. ey made use of gears, cams, levers, drums, and other mechanical components to perform complex computations such as computing integrals. e heyday of the mechanical com-puting machines was during World War II when electromechanical machines called BOMBE were used to crack the Enigma code used by the Germans. is era came to an end when electronic computers using binary logic took over and replaced the mechanical machines. e term analog computation, however, encompasses a wider range of computational processes based on making use of other physical phenomena like hydraulics, optics, and biological phenomena to solve computational problems. In other words, analog computers use the physical behavior of a system to solve computational prob-lems. Consider, for example, the following. When two boards con-nected by rods are dipped in soap water, bubbles with a minimal surface area will be created between the rods, because closed physi-cal systems will reach an equilibrium state of minimal energy, and thus, in this example, the system will minimize the surface of the bubbles. We could harness this phenomenon to solve the following computational problem. Given a set of vertices, interconnect them by edges such that the total length of the edges (the sum of the lengths of all the edges) is minimized. You may add vertices and edges to the graph to reduce the total length. (e added vertices are called Steiner vertices, and the problem is known as the Steiner tree prob-lem and is an NP-complete problem.) e soap bubbles self-organize by adhering to the laws of physics to nd the Steiner tree dened by the location of the rods between the boards (Figure5.1). To date, analog computations are hardly considered by computer scientists, but they do raise very interesting algorithmic, complexity, and computability questions such as how to measure the complex-ity of an analog system, what can and cannot be computed using an 
Molecular Computation    ◾    217analog computer, and to what extent the analog and digital computa-tional models are equivalent. We believe that the new computational models described in this chapter, along with quantum computing (out of the scope of this book; a computational model based on qubits, which can be in a state of one, zero, or quantum superposi-tion of zero and one) will raise interest in analog computation.5.1   BIOLOGICAL BACKGROUNDIn this section we describe a number of laboratory techniques used in the molecular computations discussed later in this chapter.5.1.1  PCR: Polymerase Chain ReactionPolymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a major player in biological lab work and has a central role in the molecular algorithms described in this chap-ter. PCR is used to amplify a DNA segment of interest multiple times. Kary Mullis developed this technique in the 1980s and was awarded the 1993 Nobel prize in chemistry for this accomplishment.PCR makes use of the enzyme DNA polymerase (Figure5.2), which completes a single strand of DNA, which is used as a template for a FIGURE 5.1  Soap bubbles self-organize to create the optimal Steiner tree on a four-vertex graph. (Picture courtesy of Scott Grandison.)
218    ◾    Biological Computationdouble-stranded DNA molecule. To perform its function, the enzyme has to encounter single-stranded DNA that terminates with a double-stranded segment at one end. e DNA polymerase elongates the double strand to the entire molecule. When DNA is heated to a high temperature (around 95°C), the strands separate from each other, whereas they attach to each other at lower temperatures in a process called hybridization or annealing.e combination of strand complementation, separation, and anneal-ing allows the PCR process to turn into a chain reaction. A DNA sequence to be amplied is selected, and short sequences of DNA called primers are prepared. e primers complement the beginnings of each selected DNA strand and must be roughly 20 bases long for the PCR to succeed. e PCR process starts when DNA, the primers, the bases used to create new strands, and the DNA polymerase are mixed together in a test tube. e complete process is described in Table5.1.A thermal cycler, or a PCR machine, is used to automatically heat and cool the solution in the test tubes. Note that the solution should contain enough “raw material” so that the process can go through all its DNApolymeraseA TT AG G GA A T T A T G G GA A T TT A C C CT T A AFIGURE 5.2  e DNA polymerase reaction.TABLE 5.1  e PCR Process1. e DNA strands are separated by heating them to around 95°C.2. e mixture is cooled to around 55°C and the primers attach themselves to the beginnings of the corresponding strands (base pairing).3. e mixture is warmed to 72°C which is optimal for the functioning of the Polymerase. e enzyme complements the bases on each strand, thereby doubling the number of DNA molecules.4. e whole process is repeated from Step 1 as often as needed. e number of available DNA molecules is doubled at each iteration.
Molecular Computation    ◾    219phases. PCR allows researchers to start from a very small amount of DNA (obtained, e.g., from fossils or found at a crime scene) and to amplify it quickly. For example, if we want to know whether a sample of DNA con-tains a particular DNA sequence, we can prepare unique primers that surround the sequence and start a PCR reaction. If the sequence is pres-ent in the sample it will be amplied; otherwise, the two primers will not attach, and the reaction will not take place.5.1.2  Gel ElectrophoresisGel electrophoresis is a technique for separating molecules such as DNA and proteins using an electric eld applied to a gel. Dierent molecules move dierently in the gel according to their size and electrical charge, so smaller and higher-charged molecules will be more aected by the electric eld and therefore will move faster. Since DNA molecules have a similar charge to mass ratio, the main dierence between molecules is their size, which determines their ability to migrate through the pores of the gel. us, running DNA molecules on a gel sorts the molecules according to their size and allows researchers to determine the size of new DNA molecules by comparing them with DNA molecules of known sizes (which form a DNA ladder when run on the gel).5.1.3  Restriction EnzymesRestriction enzymes cut double-stranded DNA molecules. ey oper-ate by binding to the DNA at a specic restriction site (a short sequence usually four to eight bases long) and incising the DNA at the site or close to it. Some enzymes perform a blunt incision, and others leave behind sticky ends that allow the ends to join other DNA molecules (Figure 5.3). e rst restriction enzyme was discovered by Werner Arber, Dan Nathans, and Hamilton Smith, who were awarded the Nobel prize in medicine in 1978. It is believed that these enzymes evolved in bacteria to protect them against viruses with double-stranded DNA. Restriction enzymes have turned into essential molecular biology tools, A A GC T TT T CG A AA A GC T TT T CG A A(a) (b)FIGURE 5.3  Restriction enzymes. (a) Blunt edge. (b) Sticky end.


===== [53/72] chapter-53.html =====

220    ◾    Biological Computationsince they allow cutting DNA for many purposes such as introducing new sequences into existing DNA molecules. Hundreds of restriction enzymes are currently available commercially.5.1.4  LigationLigase enzymes can repair breaks in one of the strands of a DNA mol-ecule (provided that the molecule is held together by its double-strand structure). is is done by bonding (ligating) adjacent nucleotides, thereby recovering the original structure of the molecule (Figure 5.4). Ligase enzymes are used by cells both in DNA repair and in DNA replication. In molecular biology, ligase and restriction enzymes are oen used in con-cert to introduce new sequences into DNA molecules.5.2  COMPUTATION USING DNA5.2.1  Hamiltonian PathsMolecular computation seemed almost like science ction until Leonard Adleman published his paper “Molecular Computation of Solutions to Combinatorial Problems” in 1994. In the paper, Adleman presented an implementation of a molecular process to solve the classical computer sci-ence problem of nding Hamiltonian paths in a directed graph:Let G = (V,E) be a directed graph and vin and vout be two of its ver-tices. A Hamiltonian path is a path starting at vin and terminating at vout that goes through every vertex exactly once. Given G, vin, and vout, determine whether there exists a Hamiltonian path in G.e Hamiltonian path problem is known to be NP-complete; therefore, solving it using DNA was an exciting development.We rst present an abstract nondeterministic algorithm to solve the problem, which we will then use as an outline for the molecular algorithm. LigaseT TG G GC CC A A AA AC C CG GG T T TT TG G GC CC A A AA AC C CG GG T T T(a) (b)FIGURE 5.4  e ligation process. (a) Before. (b) Aer ligation the double-strand structure is complete.
Molecular Computation    ◾    221e algorithm generates random paths, which are tested to determine if they are Hamiltonian. e algorithm follows these steps: 1. Generate a large set of random paths in the graph, where a path is a set of one or more edges where the starting vertex of an edge has to match the ending vertex of the previous edge in the path. 2. Discard all paths that do not start at vin and do not terminate at vout as they cannot be a solution to the given Hamiltonian path problem. 3. Discard all paths whose length (the number of vertices they traverse) is not equal to the number of vertices in the graph, as they cannot be a solution to the given Hamiltonian path problem. Note that this stage may retain paths that do not solve the problem as they may visit some vertices more than once and never visit other vertices. 4. Discard all paths that do not visit every vertex as these paths can-not be solutions to the Hamiltonian path problem. Note that we do not need to check separately if the remaining paths visit some nodes more than once, as this follows from Steps 3 and 4. 5. If the resulting set is nonempty, return “yes.” Otherwise, return “no.”is algorithm has two main stages: (1) generate a set of candidates; and (2) sieve out all the candidates that do not solve the problem. is is called a generate and test algorithm, and the molecular algorithm operates in a similar way.e main trick in implementing the algorithm using molecules is the way vertices and edges are represented. We represent the graph as a collec-tion of single-stranded DNA molecules, where the vertices and edges are represented as follows (Figure5.5):TATAGGGGTAGCGCTTTTGCTATCGGATCGGTATATCCGAGCTATTCGAGCTTAAAGCTAATATCCCCATCGCGAAAACGO0O2O3O0GTATATCCGAGCTATTCGAGO2 3TATAGGGGTAGCGCTTTTGCGCTATTCGAGO0 3FIGURE 5.5  Molecular representation of vertices and edges in a graph.
222    ◾    Biological Computation• Vertices: Every vertex is represented by an arbitrary sequence of 20 bases (we could have chosen another arbitrary number of bases). e sequence associated with each vertex is arbitrarily chosen, but we will see that these sequences may not be identical, similar, or complemen-tary to sequences associated with other vertices. ere are 420 possible such representations, which is assumed to be much larger than the number of vertices in the graph. e molecular representation of vertex i will be denoted as Oi. e complementary sequence, where A comple-ments T and C complements G, will be denoted as Oi.• Edges: Each edge is also represented by a sequence of 20 bases. e edge between vertices i,j is composed of the last 10 bases of i’s rep-resentation followed by the rst 10 bases of j’s representation. We will see how this allows us to connect the edges to create paths. e molecular representation of the edge i → j will be denoted as Oi → j. e edges starting at vin or ending at vout have a slightly dierent representation. ey use the complete representation of these special vertices, so these edges will be represented by sequences of length 30. An edge from vertex vin to vertex j will be represented by the entire representation of vin followed by the rst 10 bases of j. Similarly, edge from vertex i to vertex vout will start with the last 10 bases of the rep-resentation of i followed by the entire representation of vout.e signicant property of this representation is that it enables the con-nection of adjacent edges into a sequence that represents a path. is is achieved by putting together, in a solution, molecules representing edges and molecules representing the complements of the vertices. So if, for example, we introduce the representation of the edges O2 → 3 and O3 → 4 and the complement of O3 denoted asO3, O3will combine with the second half of the edge O2 → 3 and with the rst half of the edge O3 → 4 to create a double-stranded sequence, as can be seen in Figure5.6.When such double-stranded sequences are created in the presence of the enzyme ligase, the two separate molecules O2 → 3 and O3 → 4 will be ligated to form a single molecule representing the path 2 → 3 → 4. In this manner all possible paths in the graph are generated from the molecules representing the edges of the graph; then, they can be sieved such that only the Hamiltonian paths (if they exist) remain. Another example, representing the path 0 → 3 → 4, appears in Figure5.7. Note that this process can create sequences representing paths that are not legal Hamiltonian paths. e molecular 
Molecular Computation    ◾    223GTATATCCGA GCTATTCGAGCTTAAAGCTA CGCTAGGTACCGATAAGCTC GAATTTCGATO3 4O3O2 3O2 3O3 4GTATATCCGA GCTATTCGAGCTTAAAGCTA CGCTAGGTACCGATAAGCTC GAATTTCGATO3Ligase(a)(b)FIGURE 5.6  Building the path 2 → 3 → 4. (a): e participating molecules: two edges, and the complement of a vertex. (b): e segment of the path that can be created by these molecules.CGATAAGCTC GAATTTCGATCTTAAAGCTA CGCTAGGTACTATAGGGGTA GCGCTTTTGC GCTATTCGAGATATCCCCAT CGCGAAAACGO3 4O0 3O0O3GAATTTCGATCTTAAAGCTACGCTAGGTACTATAGGGGTAGCGCTTTTGCGCTATTCGAGATATCCCCATCGCGAAAACGCGATAAGCTCO0O3O3 4O0 3Ligase(a)(b)FIGURE 5.7  Building the path 0 → 3 → 4. (a): e participating molecules: two edges, and two complements of vertices. (b): e segment of the path that can be created by these molecules. Note that, because of the longer structure of the edge O0→3, the beginning of the path has a blunt shape that cannot be extended.
224    ◾    Biological Computationalgorithm was implemented in Adleman’s paper on the seven-vertex graph in Figure5.8, where vertex 0 is the starting vertex vin, and vertex 6 is vout. Figure5.9 depicts a legal Hamiltonian path in the graph, whereas Figure5.10 shows a path through the graph that is not a legal Hamiltonian path.Let us now go over all the steps required for executing the molecular algorithm for the seven-vertex graph, using the same steps we used to describe the nondeterministic algorithm: 1. Insert multiple copies of the representations of all the edges and the complements of all the vertices into a solution that also contains the enzyme ligase. e molecular processes should then generate the molecular representations of all the paths in the graph. 2. At this point, a process that creates many copies of the paths start-ing and ending at the appropriate vertices is applied to the solution. is is achieved by doing a PCR with primers that are the molecular representations of vin (O0) and the complement of vout (O6).O5O6O2O5O0O2O0O2O5O6––––FIGURE 5.10  An illegal Hamiltonian path in Adleman’s graph.1023456FIGURE 5.8  e graph used by Adleman to compute a Hamiltonian path. A pos-sible Hamiltonian path in this graph is depicted by the darker arrows.O5O6O4O5O3O4O2O3O1O2O0O1O0O1O2O3O4O5O6–––––––FIGURE 5.9  A legal Hamiltonian path in Adleman’s graph.


===== [54/72] chapter-54.html =====

Molecular Computation    ◾    225 3. e DNA molecules are separated based on their length, and only the molecules of length 140 (20n, where n is the number of vertices in the graph) are kept. As each edge is represented by a molecule of length 20 and a Hamiltonian path has to traverse each vertex exactly once, a Hamiltonian path will contain n – 1 edges. But as the edge starting at vin and the edge ending at vout are of length 30, the total length of the representation of the Hamiltonian path is 20n. e molecules that were kept are amplied again so that enough copies exist to continue with the algorithm. 4. e paths that visit every vertex in the graph are selected. is is achieved by rst selecting from the solution all the molecules that contain the sequence O1. e selection of such molecules is achieved by rst heating the solution to separate the DNA strands and then applying magnetic beads attached to sequences that are complemen-tary to those being searched for and thus anneal with them. Next, the selected molecules are further processed to select only the ones containing O2 and so on, up to O5. e molecules we are le with at the end of this process represent paths that visit each vertex. 5. PCR is applied again to the solution (using the same primers) to make sure that even a small number of appropriate DNA molecules will be detectable. 6. Gel electrophoresis is performed to test whether any DNA molecules of the appropriate length are found. If such molecules exist in the solution, this proves that a Hamiltonian path exists in the graph, and the algorithm outputs yes; otherwise the output is no.Figure5.11, taken from Adleman (1994), shows the gel used to read out the composition of the DNA molecules found. e gel shows the nal step of the algorithm (Step 6). To produce the image in Figure5.11, a number of PCR processes were applied to the molecules, each of which contained O0 as one of its primers; the complements of O1 through O6 were used consecutively as the other primer. e resulting DNA was then run on a gel. Each lane in the gure shows the result of the amplication of a specic subsequence of the Hamiltonian path. is process allows us to see the formation of the mol-ecules for all partial paths and to prove that the resulting Hamiltonian path is 0 → 1 → 2 → 3 → 4 → 5 → 6. Alternatively, it is possible to sequence the resulting molecule and actually read out the sequence of the vertices.
226    ◾    Biological ComputationIn Adleman’s experiment the implementation of the molecular algo-rithm for a seven-vertex graph took about a week of lab work. Some of the steps can be automated, and the time to implement such an algorithm may be shortened to a matter of hours; indeed, in subsequent works Adleman presented apparatuses that can do this. Nonetheless, some of the processes are time-consuming; for example, the PCR steps cannot be signicantly shortened. Clearly, for a seven-vertex graph the computation time is much shorter on a regular computer. However, computer scientists are interested in analyzing how the time to execute an algorithm changes as a function of the problem’s size. e molecular algorithm was run on a small graph, and we would like to know how its speed would vary as the size of the graph is increased. is allows us to neglect “xed costs” and focus on the execution speed as a function of the input size (the number of vertices in the graph). e complexity of the algorithm is analyzed by counting the change in the number of basic operations the algorithm goes through as a function of the input size (usually denoted by n). Note that counting basic operations is better than measuring actual running time, as it is not dependent on the speed of the machines used to execute the algorithm.e number of lab steps needed for implementing the molecular algo-rithm grows linearly with the size of the input. at means that if the number of vertices is doubled, the number of lab steps will also double (ignoring xed costs that do not change as a function of n). is can be seen by looking at all the steps taken by the molecular algorithm and ana-lyzing how they depend on the size of the graph. For most of the steps it seems that the amount of time is constant regardless of the size of the graph. For example, the hybridization performed in Step 1 would take roughly the same time whether 7 or 7000 molecules are involved. e only step that is directly dependent on the size of the graph is Step 4 where the 1 2 3 4 5 6 715010050FIGURE  5.11  e experiment proving the existence of a Hamiltonian path: Graduated PCR of the nal product of the experiment revealing the Hamiltonian path (lanes 1 through 6); the molecular weight marker is in lane 7. (From Adleman, Leonard M., Science 266, no. 5187, 1021–1024, 1994. With permission.)
Molecular Computation    ◾    227number of selection operations is the same as the number of vertices in the graph, so obviously the number of selection operations will double when the number of vertices is doubled. If at every step of the algorithm the increase in the number of operations is equal (or is a constant multiple) to the increase in the number of vertices, the total increase is linear, and the algorithm is called a linear algorithm.All the conventional Hamiltonian path algorithms require a number of operations that grows very fast—in fact, exponentially—as a function of the size of the graph. is is very dierent from the behavior of the molecu-lar algorithm, which is more and more cost-eective as graphs gets larger.Counting the number of steps needed to execute the algorithm in the lab allows us to estimate the eciency of the algorithm but hides the num-ber of concurrent operations caused by the collisions of the molecules in the test tube. As already stated, parallelism is the secret behind the power of the molecular algorithm, and to appreciate its strength it is important to try to determine how many molecular operations are performed at each stage. is will allow us to estimate the number of basic operations and to facilitate the comparison between the performance of the molecular computation and regular digital computations.Let us estimate the number of ligation operations performed in Step 1 of the molecular algorithm to evaluate the number of operations performed per time unit, which is the common metric of the speed of a computa-tional device. is approach provides a way of quantifying the advantage a molecular algorithm has relative to a sequential computation using a digital computer. Adleman (1994) estimated that the number of ligation operations performed in Step 1 was on the order of 1014 and that it would be relatively easy to increase this number to at least 1020. Dividing this into the length of time it takes to perform Step 1 (about an hour) shows that the molecular computation operations are about as fast as basic operations performed on a supercomputer.It is common in computer science to evaluate algorithms by looking at the time and memory needed to execute them (as a function of input size). One could also look at other resources. For molecular algorithms we might want to look at the cost of resources, such as the number of mole-cules needed to perform the algorithm or the amount of energy consumed by the process, again as a function of the graph size.e number of distinct molecule types needed for implementing the algorithm (i.e., representing the vertices and edges), grows only linearly with the graph size. However, this is not the case for the total number of 
228    ◾    Biological Computationmolecules. It is important to realize that the algorithm has to generate all possible paths in the graph to make sure that each one is tested for being Hamiltonian. Since the number of possible paths of length N in the graph is roughly dN (where d is the average degree of nodes in the graph), the amount of DNA (i.e., the total number of molecules) needed will grow exponentially with the number of vertices. Assume a graph with 80 ver-tices and an average degree of 10. We will then need more than 1080 DNA molecules. is number is larger than the estimated total number of atoms in the universe, which obviously indicates that this and similar algorithms are not practical for large problems. us, these types of molecular algo-rithms do not really oer us a magic bullet to shatter the limits of solving large exponential problem. Nevertheless, these algorithms may be useful in addressing medium-size problems that are not amenable to conven-tional computation.Another disadvantage of the molecular algorithm, compared with digi-tal computation, is that it is susceptible to errors. As we will see, errors can arise in various stages of the algorithm and can adversely aect the success of the algorithm. is is particularly dangerous in Step 4 of the molecu-lar algorithm. If a single valid path fails to be selected and is removed due to an error, the algorithm may return a false negative, even though a Hamiltonian path does exist. at is the reason for repeating the PCR at each step—amplifying the number copies representing each solution reduces the probability that all the copies will be lost due to an error. e danger of a false positive is not as problematic, as the molecules that gave rise to the positive answer are validated at the nal step to verify that they indeed represent a Hamiltonian path in the graph. If it turns out that the molecule does not represent a Hamiltonian path, other molecules from the nal batch can be tested.A major source of errors during the molecular computation is due to the potential creation of wrong double-stranded molecules. For instance, a sequence s might hybridize with a sequence that is similar but not iden-tical to its complement s because of a partial match. Another possibility is that single strands that are complementary on a subsequence will create a double-stranded molecule even though they are not complementary on the full length of the sequence: a sequence xy can create a partially dou-ble-stranded molecule with the strandyzby pairing the sub-sequences y and y . Another case is when two regions in the single strand happen to complement each other, thereby losing the linear structure and creating loops in the molecule.
Molecular Computation    ◾    229e more similar is the representation of a vertex to the complement of another vertex, the larger is the probability of creating erroneous double-stranded sequences. To lessen this danger, it is better to choose molecular representations that minimize the probability of creating such errors, that is, choosing representations that are dierent enough from each other. is can be achieved by using longer molecular representations and select-ing the sequences so that the number of complementing bases between any two representations will be minimal.Note that the hardware of digital computers is also prone to various errors, which might occur because of electromagnetic induction between components of the electronic circuits or because of electrical noise in the vicinity of the circuit. e errors may aect the computation of the logical circuits, but the main danger lies in the fact that they may change the con-tent of stored data bits. Various techniques are applied to minimize these risks, and digital computers are usually considered so trustworthy that programmers and users tend not to consider the possibility of hardware errors. Nonetheless, when building computers that have to be extremely reliable (e.g., aircra control systems), system architects do address the possibility of hardware errors—both at the physical design and at the logi-cal design (e.g., algorithmic) levels.To conclude, let us compare the molecular algorithm with a digital computer: 1. Speed: Personal computers currently operate at speeds of Gops (109 oating-point operations per second). e fastest supercomputers are close to achieving speeds of Petaops (1015 oating-point operations per second). Adleman (1994) estimated that one can achieve a simi-lar number of 1015 ligation operations per second. In other words, the number of basic operations per second (which are not particularly expensive or complex) of the molecular algorithm is similar to that of a digital supercomputer. 2. Memory (space eciency): A single bit of information is stored in a molecular representation with a volume of about 1 cubic nanometer. Modern disks can store 1011 bits in a cubic centimeter that translate to one bit in 1010 cubic nanometers; that is, the molecular representa-tion oers a dramatic improvement. 3. Energy: One joule of energy is enough for 2 × 1019 ligation opera-tions, which is 1010 more ecient energy-wise than a supercomputer.


===== [55/72] chapter-55.html =====

230    ◾    Biological Computation(A joule is a physical unit of energy equaling roughly the amount of energy required to li a 1 kilogram object 10 centimeters o the Earth’s surface.) 4. Flexibility: e biggest problem is that the use of molecular algo-rithms requires a radically dierent design of the algorithm for each problem (in terms of, e.g., representation, logical operations, and labo-ratory procedures) and that in each case the algorithm needs to be cre-ated from very basic molecular operations. Contrast this with solving problems using digital computers where modern high-level program-ming languages and soware design tools enable solving computa-tional tasks in fairly straightforward ways (at least most of the time).5.2.2  Solving SATWe now present a molecular algorithm for solving another computation-ally hard problem called the satisability problem, or SAT for short. is is also an NP-complete problem, like the Hamiltonian path problem. e solution described here was presented by Richard Lipton in 1995 and uses Adleman’s (1994) technique for constructing all possible paths in graph as part of its construction (Lipton, 1995).e particular case of SAT known as 3SAT has an illustrious com-puter science history, as it was the original problem proven directly to be NP-complete. All the subsequent NP-completeness proofs are based on reducing 3SAT to the problem or reducing another problem that was reduced directly or indirectly from 3SAT. e molecular solution we pres-ent here is not as “elegant” as Adleman’s Hamiltonian path solution (even though it is based on it) and exposes a brute-force characteristic that is much more subtle in Adleman’s work.Deﬁnition of the SAT ProblemLet U = {u1,u2,…un} be a set of logical variables. A logical variable’s value can be either “true” or “false.” An assignment is a function t that deter-mines for every element in U a value, either “true” or “false,” denoted from now on by 1 and 0, respectively. If u is a variable from the set U, then u and u’ (meaning “not u,” also denoted by ¬u) are called literals. e literal u has the value “true” under the assignment if and only if the variable u was assigned the value “true.” Similarly, the literal u’ has the value “true” if and only if the variable u was assigned the value “false.”e SAT problem is dened as follows:
Molecular Computation    ◾    231Given a logical formula of the form C = C1 ∧ C2 ∧…∧ Cm, where every clause Ci is of the form v1 ∨ v2 ∨…∨ vh , and each vi is a literal, determine whether there exists an assignment for the variables in C for which the logical formula C is true (i.e., its value is 1). We say that such an assignment satises the formula C. Examples• Let C = (p). is formula contains one clause and one variable, and the assignment {p = 1} satises it.• Let C = (p ∨ q). is formula contains one clause and two variables, and any assignment where either p or q assumes the value 1, such as {p = 1, q = 0}, satises it.• Let C = (p)∧ (q). is formula contains two clauses and two variables. In this case the assignment has to be {p = 1, q = 1} for both clauses to be satised.• Let C = (p ∨ q) ∧ (p’ ∨ q’). Here we have two clauses: (p ∨ q) and (p’ ∨ q’). To satisfy the formula, both clauses have to be satised simul-taneously. e two assignments {p = 1, q = 0} and {p = 0, q = 1} both satisfy the formula.• Let C = (p) ∧ (p’). It is easy to see that an assignment cannot exist that satises C because it is impossible for both p and p’ to be true at the same time.• Let C = (x ∨ y ∨ z) ∧ (x ∨ y ∨ z’) ∧ (x’ ∨ y’ ∨ w) ∧ (x ∨ z’ ∨ w’). For C to be true, we have to assign values to the variables x, y, w, and z such that for each clause there exists at least one literal with the value 1. Here {x = 1, y = 1, w = 1, z = 0) is one such an assignment. is for-mula is an instance of a 3SAT problem, where each clause contains exactly three literals.To solve SAT we have to represent all possible assignments for the variables in the formula. To do so, DNA sequences representing all the binary strings of a given length are prepared. For instance, if the formula contains three logical variables x, y, and z, all the eight possible Boolean assignments have to be evaluated.In general, 2n representations of sequences have to be gener-ated for n variables. To do this eciently we make use of the power of 
232    ◾    Biological Computationmolecular computation using similar techniques to those used for solving the Hamiltonian path problem. We will build a graph in which each path from the initial node a1 to the last node an represents a binary string. e graph for n = 3 is shown in Figure5.12.An example of a path in the graph is a1xa2y’a3za4. is represents the string 101: at each node ai one can choose between the upper and lower edges. e upper edge corresponds to choosing 1 as the assignment of one variable, whereas the lower nodes represent the bit 0. Each path rep-resents an assignment of the set of variables. So the path a1xa2y’a3za4 represents the assignments {x = 1, y = 0, z = 1}. As in Adleman’s (1994) algorithm, we choose random DNA sequences for the vertices a1, a2, a3, and a4 and for the vertices representing the variables x, y, and z and their negations x’, y’, and z’. Note that the representations of x, y, and z and their negations x’, y’, and z’ are not complementary DNA sequences (e.g., the representation of x does not complement the representation of x’). Using these representations for the vertices, the edges are then built as described in Adleman’s algorithm. All the possible paths in the graph will be generated in a test tube containing all of these molecules together with the enzyme ligase, similar to the way the paths were generated in the Hamiltonian path problem. Each path represents one distinct truth assignment for the n variables in the formula.Note that in such a graph Adleman’s technique will create all the paths representing exactly all the 2n combinations of the variables’ values. Aer they are generated it is possible to select all sequences with the value 1 in the i-th bit or all sequences without 1 in that bit, that is, sequences with the value 0 in the i-th bit. is can be achieved by using magnetic beads attached to the complements of the sequences of interest. e general strat-egy is to prepare all possible assignments as previously described and then to select the sequences that satisfy the formula (clause by clause) and to dis-card sequences that do not satisfy the clauses. If (and only if) any sequences remain, we know that a satisfying assignment exists for the formula.x y zx´y´z´a1a2a3a4FIGURE 5.12  e graph generating all binary sequences of length three.
Molecular Computation    ◾    233We start with a test tube marked T0 containing all possible assignments to the variables. e computation proceeds to create a set of T1,T2,…,Tm of test tubes (where m is the number of clauses in the formula) such that Ti contains only the sequences that satisfy the clauses C1,C2,…,Ci.Algorithm Structure• Prepare a test tube T0 containing all possible variable assignments.• For all 1 ≤ i ≤ m perform the following:• Generate the test tube Ti from the molecules in the test tube Ti-1 by selecting the sequences representing assignments that satisfy the clause Ci (the exact way of doing it is le as an exercise; see Exercise 5.10). Recall that the sequences in tube Ti-1 contain only sequences sat-isfying all the clauses C1,…,Ci-1; thus, this process will iteratively eliminate sequences that do not match the clauses of the logical formula.• Test the tube Tm to see if it contains any DNA (there are many simple ways for doing this). If so, the algorithm returns “yes.” If not, the for-mula is not satisable, and the algorithm returns “no.”Performance AnalysisIf the formula contains m clauses and is made up of a total of l literals, then the number of operations the molecular SAT algorithm performs is linear in l. If the number of literals per clause is xed (as in the 3SAT case), then the performance of the algorithm is linear in m. We leave the proof of these assertions as exercises for the reader (see Exercises 5.11 and 5.12).5.2.3  DNA TilingIn the 1960s Hao Wang suggested using tiling as a computational mecha-nism. is model seems simple but turns out to be very challenging. In the tiling model there is a nite number of types of tiles and an innite number of tiles of each type. Each tile has four labeled sides (e.g., the sides may be colored), and tiles may be laid next to each other only if any two touching sides are labeled the same. e tiles may not be rotated. Given such a set of tiles, the computational task is to determine if it can be used to tile the entire plane (Figure5.13). In some cases the answer is trivial. For instance, if all tiles are of the same kind and the opposite sides share 
234    ◾    Biological Computationa color (Figure5.13(a)), then it is possible to use them to tile the plane. In other cases (Figure5.13(b)) it is obvious that they cannot be used to tile the plane. But in many cases (Figure5.13(c)) the answer is far from obvi-ous. In fact this problem is equivalent to the halting problem we discussed in Chapter 2. In other words, in general it is impossible to nd an algo-rithm that will decide if the tiling problem has a solution in nite time. Moreover, it is possible to build the equivalent of a Turing machine using such tiles; therefore, the tiling model can be used to solve any problem solvable using a Turing machine; that is, it is computationally universal.Erik Winfree (Winfree et al., 1998) suggested that DNA molecules can be used to represent “tiles.” Winfree demonstrated the power of the til-ing model by using it to build a binary counter (Barish, Rothemund, and Winfree, 2005) as demonstrated in Figure5.14.Winfree used seven types of tiles, depicted at the top of Figure5.14. e tile labeled S is the starting tile. e two shaded tiles are used to build the frame in which the computation occurs, and the remaining four tiles are used for the computation. (is time, in contrast to Figure 5.13, we match Bit = 0Bit = 1No rolloverRollover10101111100000001111111110000000000000000000000000000000000000SSFIGURE  5.14  A binary counter using tiles. (Adapted from Barish, Robert D., Paul W. K. Rothemund, and Erik Winfree, Nano Lett 5, no. 12, 2586–2592, 2005. With permission.)(a) (b) (c)FIGURE 5.13  Tile samples. (a): Single tile that can be used for tiling the plane. (b): A pair of tiles that cannot tile the plane. (c): ree tiles for which the problem is dicult.


===== [56/72] chapter-56.html =====

Molecular Computation    ◾    235shapes instead of colors.) e computing tiles represent binary values—two represent the value 0, and the other two represent the value 1.e computation starts by laying down the starting tile S (this is the only time it is used). Subsequently, the framing tiles necessarily have to be laid out as depicted in Figure5.14. Using this frame, the local rules speci-fying how tiles match will lead the computing tiles to self-organize in a way that creates a binary counter where the rst row represents the value 1, the second row the value 10, followed by 11, and so forth. e computa-tion can be understood by studying Table 5.2: a tile has the same value as that of the tile directly underneath it if there is no carry (denoted by a smooth face) and has the opposite value if there is a carry (the face has a protrusion). So whenever a carry causes the value to change from a 1 to a 0, the corresponding tile will have a protrusion, thereby passing the carry bit to the tile on its le.As mentioned already, it is theoretically possible to use tiling to perform any computation; thus, if we can implement tiles by using DNA molecules, we will be able to use DNA to perform any computation. However, achiev-ing this in practice presents many technical challenges. DNA molecules are usually viewed as having binary recognition capabilities; that is, the two strands can recognize each other. If we can construct DNA molecules such that four strands can mutually recognize each other, then we can directly implement the tile model. By coding the molecules correctly we can expect TABLE 5.2  e Matching Rules of TilesRightBottom110000111100001100
236    ◾    Biological Computationthat they will self-organize in a way that will solve the tiling problem. For instance, in the previous example we would like the DNA molecules to recognize each other if and only if two recognition surfaces (on the bottom and on the right) match.Winfree et al. (1998) created complex DNA structures that implement four-way recognition (Figure5.15). Each structure contains four DNA mol-ecules that are partly single stranded and partly double stranded. Using these molecules, Winfree designed a relatively simple tiling representing a two-dimensional periodic template and implemented it in the lab. Later he also implemented the binary counter as well as other complex computa-tions. Nonetheless, the necessary self-assembly processes have a low yield (i.e., not all molecules self-organize when they should) and a high error rate (i.e., molecules are matched even if they should not match).5.2.4  DNA Computing—SummaryWe have discussed Adleman’s (1994) technique for solving computa-tional problems using DNA. is technique is useful when attempting to solve NP-complete combinatorial optimization problems such as the Hamiltonian path problem. We also saw how to use this technique to solve another NP-complete problem, SAT.In both cases the generate-and-test algorithms have two main phases: 1. “Possible solutions” are created randomly. 2. e solution set is rened so that only true solutions to the problems are kept.e rst phase uses the fact that single-stranded DNA molecules create double-stranded sequences according to the base-pairing rules. So, for instance, in Adleman’s Hamiltonian path algorithm the edges combine TT T T T TA A AA A AG GG G G GGCC C C CCA A A AT T T TGG GC CT T TC C CC C CG GG GG GG G GG G GG GG TCGTC CC C C CA AAA A A A AT T T T TTG G GG G GC C CCCCC C AAA GGG TTTT TCT T T T TA A AGGCC C C CC C CCAGA A AT T TT TCA A A AAAFIGURE 5.15  A schematic DNA structure for creating “tiles” that can join other tiles. (Adapted from Barish, Robert D., Paul W. K. Rothemund, and Erik Winfree, Nano Lett 5, no. 12, 2586–2592, 2005. With permission.)
Molecular Computation    ◾    237to create paths. ese molecules, which represent possible solutions to the problem, are generated randomly and in parallel as a result of collisions between molecules in the test tube.e second phase is based on a sequence of molecular operations. Each operation is performed simultaneously and in parallel on all possible solu-tions in the test tube. is is reminiscent of parallel computing technique called single instruction, multiple data (SIMD).It is useful to catalog the set of basic molecular operations used to build this kind of algorithm (Boneh et al., 1996) and to understand their logical purpose (see Table 5.3). So far this toolbox of molecular operations has not allowed us to create a practical high-level language to facilitate easy con-struction of molecular algorithms for solving many diverse computational problems.Winfree presented another way of computing using DNA; he created tiles that can be matched in ways that implement complex computations. As tiling is a universal computational model, this approach should allow us to solve any solvable computational problem using molecular compu-tation. In practice, the translation of computational problems into til-ing problems is nontrivial, and this approach is fraught with technical diculties.5.3  ENZYMATIC COMPUTATIONIn Adleman (1994) we saw how to represent a computational problem as a collection of DNA molecules and to compute using a sequence of lab operations. In Winfree et al. (1998) we saw how to use DNA to implement a molecular computation that proceeds in the test tube without the need for external manipulation. e approach we describe next, developed by Ehud Shapiro’s group (Benenson et al., 2001) is similar in this respect. TABLE 5.3  e Basic Molecular OperationsOperation Logical MeaningExtraction Extract all molecules containing a given sequence.Length Separate the molecules according to their length (using gel electrophoresis).Pour Combine the content of two test tubes without changing the molecules.Amplify Create many copies of molecules or segments using PCR.Anneal (base pairing) Create double-stranded molecules from single-stranded molecules using base pairing.
238    ◾    Biological Computatione fact that a molecular computation is autonomous is of major impor-tance as it may allow us to build “molecular computers” that will operate independently as components in biological and chemical processes not requiring external manipulations. An example of such a process may be a biological device for drug release inside the body. Moreover, this approach allows us to regard autonomic biological processes as computational pro-cesses, a point of view that has theoretical importance when considering life as a computation.5.3.1  Finite Automatais section presents a molecular computing device that implements a nite automaton. A nite automaton is a model of a system that reacts to a sequence of inputs. At any given time period the machine is in one of a nite set of states, and the transitions from state to state depend on the next input being read.e automaton’s set of states is denoted as Q, and the states are qi, where i is between 0 and n. e input tape contains an input word that is a sequence of symbols from a nite alphabet denoted by ∑. e automaton’s “read head” reads this sequence of symbols, and the automaton changes its state accordingly. At any given point during the computation the reading head is located on a particular input symbol (current input). Aer the sym-bol is read, a basic computation step composed of two actions is performed: 1. e automaton proceeds to the next state (which may be the same as the current state). 2. e input tape advances so that the read head is placed on the next input symbol.e automaton repeats this basic computation step until the tape has been read entirely. e nal state, which the automaton reaches aer read-ing the complete tape, is dened as the result of the automaton to the input word. e states of the automaton are of two kinds: (1) accepting; and (2) nonaccepting. If the last state the automaton reaches aer reading the com-plete word is an accepting state, we say that the automaton has accepted the input word. Otherwise, the automaton rejects the input. We denote the set of accepting states by F. e set of all words accepted by the automaton is called the formal language accepted by the automaton.
Molecular Computation    ◾    239To ensure a unique computation outcome, one of the states is dened to be the initial state and is denoted as q0.e formal denition of a deterministic nite automaton is as follows:Let ∑ = {a1,a2,…,an} be a nite alphabet. A deterministic nite automaton A = (Q,q0,δ,F) over ∑ is characterized by the following four parameters: 1. Q is a nite set of states. 2. q0 ∈ Q is the initial state of the automaton. 3. δ: Q × ∑ → Q is a deterministic function that denes the transition between the automaton’s states. 4. F ⊆ Q is a nite nonempty set of terminal (or accepting) automaton states.e automaton is an abstract state machine that changes its state as dictated by the function δ when reading an input string with symbols in ∑ .If the automaton is in state qj ∈ Q and it reads the symbol ai ∈ ∑, it will transition to the state δ(qj,ai ). If a a ai i ik1 2...is a sequence of length k of sym-bols over ∑ then δ δ δ( , ... ) ( ( , ), ... )q a a a q a a aj i i i j i i ik k1 2 1 2= .A language L is dened by an automaton A over an alphabet ∑ as the set of all strings over ∑ for which the automaton transitions from the initial state q0 to some terminal state q ∈ F, that is, L(A) = {x|δ(q0,x) ∈ F}.It is customary to distinguish between two kinds of nite autom-ata. In a deterministic nite automaton there is a single transition for any combination of the current state and the current input symbol. In contrast, for a nondeterministic nite automaton there is a set of possible next states for any combination of the current state and the current input symbol. e set may be empty, in which case the autom-aton cannot continue reading the input. A nondeterministic automa-ton accepts all words for which there exists any path from the initial state to an accepting state. It is also common to allow transitions that do not advance the reading head on the input tape—these are called ε-transitions. Surprisingly, it turns out that the set of languages dened by deterministic nite automata is identical to the set of languages dened by nondeterministic nite automata.e following examples show that nite automata can be represented in several ways:


===== [57/72] chapter-57.html =====

240    ◾    Biological Computation• In the automaton described in Figure5.16, q0 is both the initial and the only accepting state. e arrows indicate that upon reading either a or b the automaton transits from q0 to q1 and back upon reading the next symbol. e automaton accepts all even-length words and no odd-length words.• A nite automaton that accepts strings with an even number of the symbol b (Figure5.17).• A formal description of a nite automaton: Σ ====={ , }{ , , }{ }( , )( , )a bQ q q qF qq a qq b0 1 210 00δδ qqq a q b q a q b q11 1 2 2 2δ δ δ δ( , ) ( , ) ( , ) ( , )= = = = e language dened by this description is L A a b kk( ) { | }= ≥ 0 So the automaton accepts all words of the form b, ab, aab, aaab, and so forth.bbaaq0q1FIGURE  5.17  An automaton that accepts all strings over ∑ = {a,b}, where the symbol b appears an even number of times.a/ba/bq0q1FIGURE 5.16  An automaton that accepts all strings over ∑ = {a,b} of an even length.
Molecular Computation    ◾    241• e automaton in Figure5.18 is nondeterministic as there are two possible transitions for q0 upon reading the symbol b, and there is no possible transition from state q1, regardless of the next symbol. If this state is visited before reaching the end of the input word, the automa-ton gets stuck and the word is rejected. When the automaton is in state q0 and reads the symbol b, it has to “guess” whether to make the transition to q0 or to q1. If the automaton guesses that this is the last input symbol it makes the transition to the accepting state q1; oth-erwise, it stays in state q0. For every word in the language (i.e., every word ending with b), there is a computation that accepts it (i.e., where the guess is correct), although alternative computations may exist that do not terminate in an accepting state. Conversely, for words that are not in the language, there is no possible computation that will end in an accepting state. Note that if the automaton reaches state q1 before reading the complete word, it halts in this state (as there are no transi-tions out of it), and the word is not accepted (to accept a word it has to be read in its entirety).• One can also view the computation performed by a nite automaton as an execution of a set of derivation or rewrite rules on strings as follows. Assume that we are given the string q0bab, which contains the initial state, and we are given the following rules: q0a → q0 q0b → q1 q1a → q1 q1b → q0a/bbq1q0FIGURE  5.18  A nondeterministic automaton that accepts all strings over ∑ = {a,b} that end with the symbol b.
242    ◾    Biological Computation where each rule encodes a given state and the le-most symbol of the string and species what to do in that combination. For example, the rst rule states that if the string starts with q0a it should be replaced with the symbol q0. For the string q0bab we start by applying the second rule to obtain the string q1ab. Now we can apply the third rule to derive the string q1b and nally the string q0 by using the fourth rule. At this point there are no rules we can apply, so q0 is the nal product of the chain of derivations. Note that this is exactly the same automaton we saw in Figure5.17. If we dene q0 to be a termi-nal state, the automaton will accept all strings containing an even number of occurrences of the symbol b. e string in the example contains an even numbers of b’s, and indeed the computation ended in the state q0. We will soon see how molecular computations can implement nite automata described by derivation rules.5.3.2  Enzymatic Implementation of Finite Automatae analogy between automata with a read head that traverse an input tape and the biological process of a DNA sequence being “read” during operations such as transcription is the reason many researchers attempt to connect the two models. Here we describe one of these attempts done by Shapiro’s group—implementing nite automata using molecular tech-niques. e automata described here are simple two-state automata oper-ating on an alphabet containing two symbols.Shapiro’s computation is performed on DNA molecules sequentially cleaved by enzymes until the nal result of the computation is obtained. e restriction enzyme allowing for this automatic cutting without the need for external manipulation is called FokI.e FokI enzyme is a restriction enzyme (see Section 5.1.3); that is, its function is to cleave a DNA molecule. It operates by recognizing a particular sequence of nucleotides (called a restriction site) and by cutting the DNA at a location a few bases from the recognition site. Let us look at the DNA molecule in Figure5.19. e enzyme recognizes the sequence GGATG and cleaves that strand 9 bases away and the other strand 13 bases away. As a result of this particular type of cut, the resulting double-stranded DNA molecule has a single-strand end that is four bases long (i.e., a sticky end). e result is depicted in Figure5.20.e nite automaton is implemented by representing each transition rule as a DNA molecule. ese molecules are called transition mol-ecules and are similar to the derivation rules previously described. e 
Molecular Computation    ◾    243input string is represented as a DNA molecule chosen such that the FokI enzyme will cleave it and expose the appropriate sticky ends. A transition molecule attaches to the sticky end in accordance with both the current symbol in the input string and the current state of the automaton, and is ligated to the molecule. is representation is the basis of the automaton’s molecular implementation.e computational process follows these steps: 1. Representing the input string as a double-stranded DNA molecule containing the FokI recognition site. 2. e FokI enzyme cleaves the molecule and exposes the sticky end. 3. A transition molecule representing one of the transition rules attaches to the sticky end and determines the next state of the automaton. It is important to make sure that only one molecule can attach, thereby implementing the required transition rule. As we discuss later, if more than one molecule is allowed to attach to the sticky end, a nondeterministic automaton is in eect implemented. 4. Repeat from Step 2.GGATGNNNNNNNNNCCTACNNNNNNNNNNNNN(5’) (3’)(3’) (5’)FIGURE 5.19  FokI recognition site and cutting pattern (N can be any nucleotide).(a)(b)(5’)(3’)9 bases13 basesSticky endGGATGATATATTCTGGCTCGCAGC...CCTACTATATAAGACCGAGCGTCG...GGCTCGCAGC...GCGTCG...(3’)(5’)FIGURE 5.20  e result of a FokI restriction. (a) Binding of FokI. (b) e result-ing molecule.
244    ◾    Biological ComputationSteps 2 through 4 continue to take place as long as the FokI enzyme can nd a restriction site and as long as the appropriate transition mole-cules exist. If the transition molecules are depleted, the automaton halts and does not reach an accepting state. e molecular representation of the automaton described in Figure5.17 is depicted in Figure5.21. Following the molecular computation in this example is le as an exer-cise (Exercise 5.17).e key idea of the molecular implementation of the nite automaton is nding a molecular representation that combines the automaton state and the next input symbol. is representation allows one DNA molecule both to represent the automaton’s input and to implement its memory during the computation. First, we choose representations for each symbol in the alphabet, namely, for a and b, as well as for a special terminator symbol that will signal the end of the input string. Each representation is six bases long. A possible representation is shown in Table 5.4.e current state of the automaton is stored in the DNA molecule by having each of the automaton states represented by exposing a dierent StartInputOutputSoftwareFok ILigaseaGGATGT CTGGCT CTGGCT CGCAGC CTGGCT CGCAGC TGTCGCCCTACA GACCGA GACCGA GCGACG GACCGA GCGTCG ACAGCGGGATGTACGGATGACGCCTACTGCGACCGGATGGCCTACCGCGTCCTACATGCCGAGGATGACGACCCTACTGCTGGTCGa b a bq0q0q0q1baq1q1aq1q0bFIGURE 5.21  Molecular computation. e gure shows the molecular represen-tation of the input string, the transition molecules, and the two enzymes needed to implement an automaton that accepts binary strings with an even number of b’s. (Courtesy of Ehud Shapiro.)


===== [58/72] chapter-58.html =====

Molecular Computation    ◾    245sticky end of the representation of the next input symbol. e sticky ends depend on the representation of the symbol and the current state of the automaton. For state q1 we use the rst four bases of the symbol’s rep-resentation, and for q0 we use the last four bases of the representation. e displacement from the beginning of the symbol’s representation is denoted by ∆ and is in one-to-one correspondence with the state of the automaton. In Table5.5 the sticky end is underlined for every symbol–state combination.Recall that the state transition function determines the next state as a function of the current symbol and state: δ : Q × ∑ → Q. us, when FokI cleaves the last added transition molecule, it will expose a sticky end representing the new state of the automaton. e next transition molecule will attach itself to this sticky end as dictated by the new state and the next input symbol and so on until the input has been read in its entirety.Each transition molecule has three components (see, e.g., the four tran-sition molecules in Figure5.21): 1. e FokI recognition site. 2. e region identifying the current state and symbol. 3. e spacer region determining the next state. is component is the key for the proper implementation of the automaton, as its length determines the automaton’s next state (Table 5.6).TABLE 5.4  Representation of the Automaton’s AlphabetA B Terminator (t)CTGGCT CGCAGC TGTCGCTABLE 5.5  Representation of Symbol–State CombinationsState SymbolACTGGCTBCGCAGCTTGTCGCq0 = 2<q0,a>CTGGCT<q0,b>CGCAGC<q0,t>TGTCGCq1 = 0<q1,a>CTGGCT<q1,b>CGCAGC<q1,t>TGTCGC
246    ◾    Biological ComputationHow does the length of the spacer achieve the desired result? Recall that FokI removes nine bases aer the recognition site and that each symbol is represented by six bases. ese, together with the current displacement ∆, determine what will be the displacement from the beginning of the next symbol arising aer the FokI cleavage. is displacement uniquely deter-mines the identity of the next state of the automaton. ∆new = 9 – (6 – ∆current) – spacer = 3 + (∆current – spacer)Plugging the result of this formula into each of the transition states produces the displacements shown in Table 5.7. e table conrms that, given the displacement of the current state, the displacement produced aer the cleavage matches the new state as required. So by choosing the spacer length it is possible for the transition molecules to encode the state transitions. is construction allows us to create molecules describing all eight possible transition rules for a two-state automaton over a two-sym-bol alphabet (Figure5.22). When interested in recognizing a particular language (e.g., all strings containing an even number of occurrences of the symbol b), one can select the appropriate subset of rules (as illustrated in Figure5.21).e input molecule also includes a “terminator” sequence that is attached to the right of the input sequence. e input is scanned as long as recogni-tion sites for FokI to cleave still exist and as long as appropriate transition TABLE 5.6  Spacer Length Representation of the Automaton’s State TransitionsSpacer Length State Transition1q1 → q03 State unchanged5q0 → q1TABLE 5.7  Analysis of the Eect of Dierent Spacer LengthsState Transition Spacer Length ∆current∆newq1 → q01 0 2Do not change states 3 0 02 2q0 → q15 2 0
Molecular Computation    ◾    247molecules exist. When the required transition molecules are missing (i.e., no transition molecule exists that matches the current sticky end), the automaton halts and does not reach a nal state. If the automaton scans the input string to its end, the nal sticky end will be that of the terminator, which reects the nal state reached by the automaton.To determine whether the automaton accepts the string (i.e., to deter-mine whether the string belongs to the language recognized by the autom-aton), one has to determine if the nal state is an accepting state. e last time FokI cleaves the sequence, it cleaves the terminator sequence, and the resulting sticky end depends on whether the nal state is q0 or q1.Output detectors, which are double-stranded DNA sequences with a sticky end that complements the terminator sequences representing either q0 or q1, can be used to identify the nal state. In Shapiro’s method this was done by using output detectors of dierent sizes for each of the two autom-aton states. In this way gel electrophoresis, which allows us to ascertain the length of the DNA molecules in the solution, can be used to discover the nal state of the automaton.It is interesting to note that the molecular implementation allows the implementation of both deterministic and nondeterministic nite autom-ata. is nondeterminism is manifested by allowing more that one type of transition molecule to attach to a given sticky end and thus the computation to proceed in alternative routes. Using nondeterminism permits a reduc-tion in the number of states necessary for identifying a particular language GG ATGTACGG ATGTACCC G AT1:q0q0aGG ATGACG ACC C TA CT G C T GC C G AT2:q0q1aGG ATGACGC C TA CT G CG T C GT3:q0q0bGG ATGACG ACC C TA CT G C T GG T C GT4:q0q1bGG ATGAC C TA CAG A C CT5:q1q0aGG ATGACGC C TA CT G CG A C CT6:q1q1aGG ATGGC C T A CCG C G TT7:q1q0bGG ATGACGC C TA CT G CG C G TT8:q1q1bFIGURE 5.22  e eight molecular rules for implementing all two-state automata over a two-symbol alphabet. (Courtesy of Ehud Shapiro.)
248    ◾    Biological Computationrelative to a deterministic automaton that recognizes the same language. So it would seem that using the molecular mechanism to implement nondeter-ministic automata may oer an advantage. However, in practice Shapiro’s group noted that increasing the number of nondeterministic decisions decreases the yield (i.e., the number of molecules that complete the com-putation) exponentially; therefore, this approach was not deemed practical.5.4  SUMMARYis chapter demonstrated two main approaches to using biological mol-ecules for computational processes: (1) computations implemented by applying lab techniques to DNA molecules; and (2) independent computa-tion performed by proteins (i.e., the enzymatic computation discussed in Section 5.3). Both approaches depend on choosing an appropriate repre-sentation of the data as DNA molecules so that the computation can make use of the complementarity of DNA strands.DNA computing allows us to harness the inherent power of parallel-ism, as molecular operations occur simultaneously in a huge number of molecules in the test tube. is property is promising for solving com-putationally hard problems, such as NP-complete problems. Independent computations performed by enzymatic reactions lead to the possibility of using computational processes for medical purposes. For example, systems have been proposed that can identify DNA sequences typical of cancerous processes (i.e., cancer markers). Such systems can identify the combination of such sequences that the patient has (e.g., identify the exis-tence of marker A and marker B and the lack of marker C) and can decide on treatment, such as releasing a DNA molecule appropriate for treating a specic condition (Benenson et al., 2004). e treatment might involve turning o genes that promote the cancerous process using various molec-ular techniques. is approach has been demonstrated in the lab in an in vitro setting but is not yet ready for medical use. It is conceivable that such techniques may be used in the future for medical applications.Note that computations using DNA are “articial” in the sense that they are not based on natural processes and make use of DNA for applica-tions that are not natural to DNA molecules. Enzymatic computation is based on reactions occurring in nature, but even so the procedure pre-sented by Shapiro in which a sequence of DNA is iteratively digested can-not be regarded as a natural biological process. is raises the question as to whether one can use biological processes and molecules for computing in a manner more similar to their natural activities. is would allow us 
Molecular Computation    ◾    249to make better use of the potential of these molecules, which have been optimized to perform their function over millions of years of evolution.In Dennis Bray’s (1995) insightful paper, he claims that a central func-tion of proteins is to transfer information and to perform computations and that proteins are therefore the most useful platform for molecular compu-tations. Particularly useful is the capability of proteins to recognize each other and to attach to each other very specically. In fact, we can think of the signal transduction mechanism in the cell as a computational process and can harness it for general-purpose computations. Signal transduction is the process whereby a combination of signals received by the cell mem-brane causes a specic chain of reactions to occur (making use of proteins that recognize each other), which results in the expression of genes in the nucleus of the cell. Several such computational models have already been proposed. For example, Unger and Moult (2004) suggested a way (so far only as a theoretical model) to implement logical NAND (not and) gates by molecules built from proteins tagged by DNA sequences. ese molecules are diused in solution and can phosphorylate each other. Phosphorylation is a process by which a phosphate is added to a protein molecule. is phos-phate causes the protein molecule to undergo structural modication, in essence creating two versions of the protein—phosphorylated and nonpos-phorylated. Phosphorylation is a common modication used in biological signaling. Unger and Moult suggested that phosphorylation reactions can implement the logic of NAND gates so that when two molecules collide they create a complex that phosphorylates the target molecule unless they both are already phosphorylated. e model includes additional ingredi-ents required for the model to directly implement any logical circuit, sug-gesting a way for universal computation by proteins.In conclusion we can say that the potential of molecular computation of various types is large, yet it is important not to forget that molecular computation has two main obstacles preventing it from currently being a realistic alternative to digital computing: 1. e diculties in designing molecular algorithms relative to the ease and exibility of programming digital computers. 2. Physical and experimental limitations making dealing with large, multiphased molecular systems dicult and error prone. Taking a molecular algorithm and turning it into a practical system is far from straightforward.


===== [59/72] chapter-59.html =====

250    ◾    Biological Computation5.5  FURTHER READINGAdleman, Leonard M. 1994. Molecular computation of solutions to combinatorial problems. Science 266, no. 5187, 1021–1024.Barish, Robert D., Paul W. K. Rothemund, and Erik Winfree. 2005. Two computa-tional primitives for algorithmic self-assembly: Copying and counting. Nano Lett 5, no. 12, 2586–2592.Benenson, Yaakov, Binyamin Gill, Uri Ben-Dor, Rivka Adar, and Ehud Shapiro. 2004. An autonomous molecular computer for logical control of gene expres-sion. Nature 429, no. 6990, 423–429.Benenson, Yaakov, Tamar Paz-Elizur, Rivka Adar, Ehud Keinan, Zvi Livneh, and Ehud Shapiro. 2001. Programmable and autonomous computing machine made of biomolecules. Nature 414, no. 6862, 430–434.Boneh, Dan, Christofer Dunworth, Richard. J. Lipton, and Jiri Sgall. 1996. On the computational power of DNA. Discrete Applied Mathematics 71, no. 1, 79–94.Bray, Dennis. 1995. Protein molecules as computational elements in living cells. Nature 376, no. 6538, 307–312.Lipton, Richard J. 1995. DNA solution of hard computational problems. Science 268, no. 5210, 542–545.Unger, Ron and John Moult. 2006. Towards computing with proteins. Proteins. 63, 53–64.Winfree, Erik, Furong Liu, Lisa A. Wenzler, and Nadrian C. Seeman. 1998. Design and self-assembly of two-dimensional DNA crystals. Nature 394, no. 6693, 539–544.5.6  EXERCISES5.6.1  Biological Background 1. e DNA polymerase enzyme continues complementing the tem-plate strand to its end. Assume we started with long double-stranded DNA molecule and primers that complement regions not at the ends of the molecule. Which molecules will result aer the PCR? Hint: draw the molecules, and follow the PCR steps. 2. What will happen if the rst phase of PCR is applied to single-stranded DNA molecules? What molecules will result at the end of the process?5.6.2  Computing with DNA 3. Explain why a graph of N vertices has at most N! paths of length N. 4. Determine whether the graph shown in Figure 5.23 contains a Hamiltonian path (for any vin and vout).
Molecular Computation    ◾    251FIGURE 5.23 5. Follow all the steps in Adleman’s algorithm, and show that it runs in time that is linear in the number of vertices in the graph. 6. Analyze the probability for errors in Step 4 of Adleman’s algorithm where the goal is to select molecules containing a specic subse-quence. Let P(X,s) be the “positive” test tube resulting from selecting from a test tube X all sequences containing the subsequence s, and let N(X,s) be the “negative” test tube (i.e., the remaining molecules aer taking out all the sequences containing s). Let εp be the probability a molecule that should be in P(X,s) ends up instead in N(X,s), and let εn be the probability a molecule that should be in N(X,s) ends up in P(X,s) instead. To decrease εp, s can be selected by the following repeating selection cycles from the initial population T:Step 1: P1 = P(T,s),   N1 = N(T,s)Step 2: P2 = P(N1,s),   N2 = N(N1,s)Step 3: …Step 4: …Step n: Pn = P(Nn – 1,s),   Nn = N(Nn – 1,s)Final step: P = P1 ∪ P2 ∪ … ∪ Pn,   N = Nn a. Explain the logic of this procedure. Why is there a high probabil-ity that the molecules in nal test tubes P and N are indeed the correct molecules? b. What is the probability that aer n steps a molecule that should be P is indeed in that test tube? c. What is the probability that aer n steps a molecule that should be in N is in P?
252    ◾    Biological Computation d. Given an initial estimate of εp = 1/10 and εn = 1/106, what value of n guarantees nal probabilities of εp ≈ εn ≈ 1/106? 7. Solve the following problem using DNA-based computing: given a map of cities and roads between them where every road has a given length (the map is connected, but not all cities are necessarily directly connected), compute the circular route of shortest total length that visits each city. You can asume that it is possible to distinguish experi-mentally between circular and non-circular DNA molecules, and sort circular DNA by size. 8. Suggest a way to solve the vertex cover problem using DNA-based computation. The vertex cover problem is defined as follows: given a graph, find a minimal subset of the vertices that “covers” all the edges in the graph; that is, every edge has to touch at least one of the vertices in the subset. Refer to Figure5.24 for an exam-ple where the dotted circles indicate the vertices in the minimal cover set.FIGURE 5.24 9. Solve the maximal clique problem using DNA: given a graph, nd the largest subset of vertices in which every two vertices are con-nected to each other by an edge. 10. Show how to use molecular operations to extract only the sequences representing assignments for which Ci is true from the Ti-1 test tube in the SAT algorithm. Hint: consider as an example the clause Ci = p ∨ q’. e sequences making this clause true are those where p = 1 and those where q = 0. 11. Show that the number of operations for the molecular algorithm for SAT is linear in l (the number of literals in the formula).
Molecular Computation    ◾    253 12. Show that if the number of literals in each clause is constant then the number of operations for the molecular algorithm for SAT is linear in m (the number of clauses in the formula). 13. Explain the role of the right frame column in Winfree’s binary coun-ter (Figure5.14). 14. Explain how each of the generic operations in Table 5.3 is carried out molecularly and where each operation is used in the Hamiltonian path and SAT algorithms.5.6.3  Enzymatic Computation 15. Find the language accepted by the automaton in Figure5.25.q2q1b/caa/b/cq0b/caFIGURE 5.25 16. Construct a nondeterministic automaton over the alphabet {a,b} that accepts all the words containing aa or bb. Hint: construct automata for each of the sequences, and combine them using an initial state that guesses which of the two sequences has to appear in the input. 17. Step through the computations performed by the molecules in Figure5.21, writing down all the partial results. 18. Given the automaton in Figure5.26, determine the molecules required to represent it, and follow the algorithm’s operations on the input bbaab.a/babq0q1FIGURE 5.26
254    ◾    Biological Computation5.7  ANSWERS TO SELECTED EXERCISES 1. Molecules comprising only the sequence between the two primers will be amplied. 2. ere will be no dierence from PCR that starts with double-stranded DNA (assuming that both correct primers were used). Aer the primer attaches to the single-stranded DNA, the DNA polymerase will complete the complementary strand. en the situation is back to that described in the presentation of the PCR method. 4. e graph in the question does not contain a Hamiltonian path, but note that by adding a single edge we do get a graph (Figure5.27) containing a Hamiltonian path.FIGURE 5.27 6. Analysis of the probability using repeated extractions: a. Since εp is much larger than εn the goal is to reduce the prob-ability that a molecule that should be selected is not selected. us, at every step we extract the molecules containing s from the remainder of the previous extraction; that is, in every step we select the positive molecules from the negative test tube of the previous step. b. e probability is the sum of the probabilities that the molecule is in the positive test tube for each of the n steps; that is, 1 1 11111−( )+ + + = −( )−−= −−ε ε ε εεεεp p pnppnppnn (this is a sum of a geometric series).


===== [60/72] chapter-60.html =====

Molecular Computation    ◾    255 c. 1 – (1 – εn)n. d. For n = 6, εp = 1/106, εn ≈ 6/106, which is close enough to be con-sidered equal for practical purposes. 7. e solution is similar to the Hamiltonian path solution, with the following changes: a. As the path is circular, there is no need to distinguish between edges starting at the rst vertex or ending at the last vertex. b. We will add an arbitrary sequence of the length of the edge into the representation of each edge. For example, an edge of length 5 between the vertices i and j is built as shown in Figure5.28.Representing the length of the edge i jRepresenting the sufﬁx of node i Representing the preﬁx of node jTA A A A A A A A A AT T TC G G G G GT T T TFIGURE 5.28 c. Mix as before all the edges and the complements to the vertices to create all the circular paths. Note that, since the rst and last edges are no longer distinct, all possible circular paths will be generated. Note that circular DNA runs in a particular way on a gel (circular DNA migrate more slowly on electrophoresis gels and their migration rate is determined by their radius of gyra-tion), a fact that can be used to extract only circular molecules. d. As in Adleman’s algorithm, we will use n test tubes to extract the sequences containing the complementary sequences to the sequences representing all the cities. e. The remaining molecules (i.e., those containing all the ver-tices) will undergo gel electrophoresis, and the shortest mol-ecule will be selected as it represents the circular path of minimal length.
256    ◾    Biological Computation 8. Represent the given graph’s vertices and edges as in Adleman’s algo-rithm. en create sequences representing all subsets of the set of vertices. is can be achieved using a graph similar to the one we used when solving SAT where each vertex is represented in the upper edges and one dummy vertex in all the lower edges (Figure5.29). e total length of all dummy nodes should be less than the length of the representation of a real vertex. is will produce sequences containing all the subsets of the vertices, where all missing vertices from the set are represented by the dummy vertex. We are interested in only the subsets whose vertices cover the whole graph, that is, in which every edge touches at least one vertex in the subset. Recall that the representation of each edge contains half of the representa-tion of the two nodes it connects. us, for a sequence representing a subset of nodes to be a solution to the vertex cover problem it must contain bases that are complementary to at least half of each edge. To achieve this we will compare the subsets with all edges in the graph, an operation that may require n2 test tubes for a graph with n vertices. In each test tube we will test whether the edge hybridizes to the sequence (we can create the representations so that the hybrid-ization occurs if half of the edge’s length matches the sequence). At the end of the process the remaining sequences represent covering subsets. By performing gel electrophoresis we will identify the short-est sequences corresponding to minimal cover set.a1a2a3a4Representationof node S1Representationof node S2Representationof node S3Representationof a dummy nodeRepresentationof a dummy nodeRepresentationof a dummy nodeFIGURE 5.29 10. Let Ci = p ∨ q’. Represent Ci as v1 ∨ v2, where v1 is the variable p, and v2 is the negation of the variable q.
Molecular Computation    ◾    257 a. Since v1 represents a variable, let t1 be a test tube containing all the sequences extracted from Ti-1 where v1 is assigned the value 1. Extraction can be done using magnetic beads that are comple-mentary to sequence of v1 . Lett1be the remainder of sequences le in Ti-1.. b. t2 is created from sequences in the reminder test-tube,t1. Since v2 represents a negation of a variable, select from t1all the sequences where v2 is assigned the value 0, that is, that include the q’ sequence. Now mix together the contents of the test tubes t1 and t2. is creates the Ti test tube because in the rst step we extract all sequences sat-isfying v1. From the remainder we extract all sequences satisfying v2, so the result is all the sequences satisfying v2 but not satisfying v1 (it is trivial to generalize this example to clauses containing any number of literals). e mixing step gives us the union of the sets, so we end up with all the sequences satisfying v1 or v2. (If the clause contains three literals like in 3SAT problem we need to create in a similar way a third test tube t3 and mix the three test tubes to create Ti.) 11. e rst step of the algorithm requires the preparation of raw material (representations) that depends linearly on n (calculate the exact num-ber of required molecule types), followed by mixing the molecules and waiting for the ligation to nish. e next steps require a number of extraction operations that is linear in the number of literals (Step 2) and one identication step to test whether any DNA remains in the test tube (Step 3). 13. e role of the right frame column is to add 1 to the value computed in the previous row; therefore, it is implemented using a tile with a pro-trusion causing the computation in the next row to start with a carry. 16. See Figure5.30.
258    ◾    Biological Computationq4q3ba,bq0a,bq2q1abaa,bFIGURE 5.30 18. e four rules needed to implement the automaton are as follows: q0,a → q0 q0,b → q1 q1,a → q1 q1,b → q1 us, we need to use molecules T1, T4, T6, and T8 from Figure5.22.


===== [61/72] chapter-61.html =====

259C h a p t e r 6The Never-Ending StoryAdditional Topics at the Interface between Biology and ComputationI    have discussed a wide spectrum of ideas in computer science that were inspired by our understanding of biological processes. We focused on four main areas that introduced new computational mod-els based on ideas and insights arising from biological research. Chapter 2 dealt with cellular automata in which computation is performed on a grid of cells, and every cell aects only its neighbors. is model is somewhat reminiscent of a colony of single-cell organisms (e.g., bacteria), which presents a complex collective behavior, even though each cell’s behavior is based on a set of relatively simple local rules. We saw how to prove that a nonstandard computational model is universal (in the sense of being equivalent to Turing machines). We also saw how cellular automata allow us to formally study the conditions that are sucient for self-replication, a fundamental aspect of living systems.Chapter 3 dealt with evolutionary computation, which involves solving computational problems such as optimization and search problems by mim-icking the evolutionary process in nature. e focus of Chapter 3 was mainly on genetic algorithms; even this specialized model presents the system designer with a wide scope of choices, such as how to represent the genetic data or the precise properties of the genetic operators. Moreover, we saw that one can formally prove theorems about properties of the evolutionary com-putation (Holland’s Schema theorem) that are valid under a wide variety of assumptions. We also discussed genetic programming in which the indi-viduals undergoing evolution are representations of computer programs.
260    ◾    Biological ComputationChapter 4 presented several models of neural networks. ese models are based on an attempt to mimic the way a brain operates in order to facili-tate machine learning. e rst three models were based on supervised learning, where networks are presented with a set of examples for which the expected output is known, which are used to train the network. e rst model was that of a simple perceptron, and we saw how simple it is to prove the inherent limitations of such networks. en we discussed multilayered neural networks and developed a learning algorithm based on backpropa-gation, which adjusts the network weights automatically and sequentially. en, using the Hopeld model, we studied the issue of associative mem-ory and discussed the strength and the weaknesses of this model. Finally, we gave an example of self-organizing maps, which are neural networks capable of unsupervised learning.Chapter 5 dealt with molecular computation. Here we saw another kind of link between computer science and biology: the use of biological techniques and organic molecules to implement computational processes. In this chapter the biological material was used as “hardware.” e inher-ent parallelism of molecular processes was harnessed to improve the e-ciency of expensive computations such as nding Hamiltonian paths in graphs. We showed how DNA can be used as a computational medium as well as how to harness enzymatic reactions to implement autonomous computational processes.Each of these four areas is an extensive eld of study, and we pre-sented only basic concepts—enough to give a sense of each topic to help the reader identify which approaches may be useful for solving a given problem, and to provide the basic tools and concepts needed for the fur-ther study of each topic. e reader interested in more in-depth knowl-edge will nd references to further reading at the end of each chapter and in the list of recommended books that appears at the end of this chapter.e summary of the previous chapters shows how combining ideas from biology and computer science leads to a variety of results: from technological and engineering applications to theoretical conclusions and formal proofs of theorems. In this chapter we will discuss briey additional topics that are in the intersection of computer science and biology that further demonstrate the rewards that can come from “cross-fertilization” between the two elds. We will try to relate the new topics to ideas discussed in the previous chapters and to highlight the similari-ties and dierences.
The Never-Ending Story    ◾    261We will not discuss the important eld of bioinformatics, which focuses mainly on computational analysis of biological sequences such as RNA, DNA, and proteins. is analysis is achieved to a large extent by using methods developed in the computer science elds of pattern match-ing and machine learning. is is a central topic in computational biol-ogy requiring a separate discussion, and many recent textbooks have been dedicated to this subject (see Further Reading section).6.1  SWARM INTELLIGENCESwarm intelligence is a set of computational approaches inuenced by observing the living world from a computational perspective that views the behavior of organisms as problem-solving processes. Swarm intel-ligence approaches are derived from observations showing how cooper-ating organisms solve problems collectively. e classic example of such behavior is that of an ant colony. Anybody who has observed a row of ants marching toward a food source must have wondered how the ants know where to go and how to return to their nest. It turns out that an ant that has discovered a food source can signal the preferred direction to other ants, which repeat the process and mark the way for even more ants.Swarm intelligence is based on the observation that colonies of sim-ple organisms can present a behavior that seems planned and goal ori-ented even though each individual is simple and lacks the skills to solve the problem independently. We have discussed this observation in other contexts, particularly when discussing the emergent behavior of cellular automata in Chapter 2. In this respect, the discussion can be considered as an extension of the topics described there. e set of simple organisms that are capable of developing mutual interactions and interact with the environment is known as the swarm or the swarm system. e collective goal-directed behavior is an emergent property (a topic we return to in Section 6.3) of the swarm system and is referred to as swarm intelligence. We present three computational methods based on swarm intelligence.Ants leave chemical markers called pheromones on their trails, which allow them to pass information between individuals. Communication between individuals by locally changing the environment is called stig-mergy. e scent of the pheromones is picked up by the olfactory organs of other ants, allowing the pheromones to mark the way back to the nest and the way to food sources. When more ants use a particular path, the stronger its markings will become. Conversely, pheromones evaporate over time, so a trail that has been neglected will disappear aer a certain period 
262    ◾    Biological Computationof time. Note that ants do not always follow the trail and may turn in ran-dom directions from time to time. is guarantees that ants will discover new food sources and new trails.e combination of these two properties—individuals with simple com-putational abilities and communication using the environment—makes swarm computation appropriate for distributed computing and for solving coordination problems for robots that operate cooperatively.6.1.1  Ant Colony Optimization Algorithmse pheromones mechanism gave rise to the development of a class of optimization algorithms known as ant colony optimization (ACO) algo-rithms. Such an algorithm was rst presented by Marco Dorigo in the 1990s (Bonabeau et al., 1999, 2000). e goal of the algorithms is to nd an optimal solution to a computational problem by using the method that allows ants to nd food quickly and eciently by not wasting energy on long trails. e problems are usually presented as nding good paths in graphs, and the algorithm proceeds by creating a set of virtual ants that walks the graph with the goal of constructing appropriate paths. A typical application is the traveling salesperson problem (TSP). e solution to this problem is the shortest path traversing a given set of cities where each city is visited exactly once.To solve the TSP, several ants are placed in each city. At each time step, a random ant is selected and has to travel on the graph according to the trails marked by pheromones. us, the probability that an ant will go to an adjacent city (an adjacent node in the graph) is directly proportional to the amount of pheromones deposited on the edge between the current and adjacent cities.e following random proportional transition rule is the formula one of the algorithms uses to determine the probability that an ant at vertex i will go to the adjacent vertex j: i jijijikikkp,=( )( )( )( )∑αβαβτητηwhere τij is the amount of pheromones on the edge (i,j), and ηij is the heuris-tic value assigned as the value of the edge (i,j) a priori. is heuristic value serves to estimate the quality of the ants’ choices in advance of building 
The Never-Ending Story    ◾    263the path. Such heuristic functions exist also in algorithms for game play-ing where the dierent game states are evaluated as part of evaluating the game tree. In problems such as TSP the heuristic value is determined by the distance between the cities d and may be, for example, 1/d, to give a higher weight to closer cities. As expected, the heuristic value is computed using local information only. α is a positive constant that determines how the quantity of pheromones inuences the algorithm, and β is a positive constant determining the inuence of the heuristic value. e sum in the denominator is over all the neighboring vertices k among which the ant has to choose.Aer building a path between n nodes, the ant updates the amount of pheromones on the graph edges it traversed in accordance with the qual-ity of the complete path (the better the path, the more pheromones will be deposited). For simple graphs, this mechanism suces for nding the shortest paths. For complex graphs or when searching for paths with other properties, additional mechanisms are added to the algorithm, such as having only the ant that found the best path during an iteration of the process leave a pheromone trail behind it; having a certain percentage of pheromones evaporate at every time step; xing minimum and maximum values for the amount of pheromones deposited on each edge; or keep-ing a list of visited cities for each ant to avoid multiple visits to the same city. Researchers have successfully used ACO to solve the TSP and other similar combinatorial problems, which can be represented as problems of nding paths in graphs.Another interesting use of swarm intelligence is for planning routing tables in a communication network. e basic premise is simple: commu-nication packets update the routing tables based on the quality of the path they were routed to. For slow routes, the corresponding table entries will be updated by a small value, whereas a faster path will be updated with a higher value. In this fashion the packets act as ants leaving a trail of phero-mones behind them as well as carrying the information in the network. is application of swarm intelligence is called ant colony routing (ACR) and has two important engineering advantages: 1. Using the many packets sent in the network allows for an ecient mapping of the network which may be large and complex. 2. e mapping happens in real time and allows for route changes based on the changing characteristics of the network. Since the load


===== [62/72] chapter-62.html =====

264    ◾    Biological Computationin certain parts of the network may vary greatly over time, this prop-erty is highly important.6.1.2  Cemetery Organization, Larval Sorting, and ClusteringObserving ant behavior also leads to techniques for solving clustering problems. In these problems the goal is to nd a good partition of a (usually large) set of data into subsets or clusters. e goal is to have the elements of each cluster be closer or more similar to each other than to members of other clusters. e number of clusters may be an input to the algorithm or may be determined by it. A typical example is the problem of partitioning customers into sets of customers with similar charac-teristics, for example, “customers who buy expensive kitchenware” ver-sus “customers who buy expensive appliances and cheap kitchenware.” e types are not known a priori—they are found by the algorithm that attempts to identify clusters minimizing the distance between the data points inside each cluster.Observation of certain species of ants has demonstrated that they arrange “cemeteries” for dead ants in the nest. Initially, the dead ants are distributed randomly over a certain area, but aer some time the area is partitioned into subregions containing dead ants and others that are free of them; in other words, one can observe clusters of ant carcasses. Other ants have been shown to arrange their larvae by size, such that the smaller larvae are placed in the center of a cluster and the larger larvae at the clus-ter’s periphery. ese observations gave rise to the idea of using stigmergy to solve clustering problems similarly to the ants’ techniques for clustering carcasses. Here the data to be partitioned and sorted play the role of the “carcasses” to be clustered.The basic idea of the algorithm is to place the data on a two-dimen-sional grid, similar to the one found in cellular automata. For best results the data are initially placed on the grid randomly using a uni-form distribution. Ants are also placed on the grid and may move from one grid cell to another and carry with them the data when they move. At each time step an ant decides whether to move the datum in the cell according to the distribution of data in the local neighborhood, and it may do so only if it is not already carrying some other data. The sparser the data in the neighborhood, the higher the probability the ant will “pick up” the datum and start carrying it. Conversely, an ant may put a data item it carries down in a new cell at any time step, and 
The Never-Ending Story    ◾    265the probability of this event increases the more data items there already are in the local neighborhood. Iterating this process over a number of generations causes the data to cluster, as more distant data are brought into existing clusters.When calculating the probability of an ant picking up or putting down data, one has to take into account both the placement of the data on the grid and the distance between the datum in the current cell and the data in the local neighborhood. Going back to our example, the dis-tance between two customers might be dened as the number of items one customer has bought and the other has not (i.e., the size of the sym-metric dierence between the sets of items each customer has bought). Using this denition, customers who bought similar items will be con-sidered “close” for the purpose of clustering. Note that in most cases the data are characterized by a rather large set of properties, so they can be considered as points in an n-dimensional space Rn (where n is the num-ber of properties for each data point). e algorithm we described not only attempts to discover clusters but also does so while projecting the n-dimensional property space onto the two-dimensional grid (or more generally on a space with less than n dimensions). It is convenient to implement this approach using “ants” moving on a discrete grid, so in fact the n-dimensional space Rn is projected onto a discrete two-dimen-sional space (Z2) similarly to what is achieved by self-organizing maps (Chapter 4).e structure of the clustering algorithm is as follows:// Generic code for clustering using ants (Lumer-Faieta Algorithm) // Each ant remembers its current location on the grid, and the item// it is carrying. PLACE_ITEMS_ON_GRID()PLACE_ANTS_ON_GRID()WHILE no END_CONDITION t BEGINFOR i:=1 TO number of ants BEGIN IF not(CARRYING(ant )) and not(EMPTY(LOCATION(anti i)))THEN p := PICKUP_PROBABILITY(anti) // see below PICKUP(ant ) with probability pi ELSE IF CARRYING(ant ) and EMPTY(LOCATION(anti i)) THEN p := PUTDOWN_PROBABILITY(anti) // see below PUTDOWN(anti) with probability p END IF MOVE(anti) // randomly move ant END END 
266    ◾    Biological ComputationTo complete the presentation of the algorithm we have to specify how to compute the probability that an ant will li up a piece of data and the probability that an ant will deposit a data item at a particular grid point. ese probabilities have to be based on the number of similar points in the ant’s neighborhood.First, we dene the function f(i,r), which computes the local density of objects similar to object i located at position r: f(i,r)=sd(i, j)j112−∑αif positive0 otherwisewhere d(i,j) is the distance (or dissimilarity) between objects i and j, s is the neighborhood’s radius, and the sum is over all items in the neighborhood around r. f(i,r) measures the average similarity between item i and the items in its neighborhood. e parameter α determines the sensitivity of the comparison: if the value of α is high, then the comparison is less sensi-tive and items that dier by much may be clustered together. Conversely, when α is low, even similar items will be viewed as dierent and will not be clustered together.Using f(i,r) we can dene the probabilities for picking up and putting down data using the following formulas: Pickup_Probability(anti)=kk + f(Item(ant ),Location(ant ))i i112 Putdown_Probability(anti)= 2f(Item(ant ),Location(ant )) ifi if( )< k12Item,Locationiif f( ) kItem,Location2≥where k1 and k2 are constants. If f(i,r) << k1, the pickup probability will be close to 1. is describes a sparse neighborhood. If f(i,r,) >> k1 the neigh-borhood is rich in similar items, and the pickup probability will be close to 0. k2 plays a similar role in computing the putdown probability.
The Never-Ending Story    ◾    267To summarize, the probability of a pickup decreases with the density of similar items, whereas the probability of an item being put down increases with the density of similar items in the neighborhood. In this way the algorithm achieves the desired goal.We saw in previous chapters how the interaction with the environment can oen aect the behavior of the computational organism. It is interest-ing to note that this is also the case with swarm intelligence: the system is governed by the feedback the ants receive from the environment, which is used both for representing the input to the algorithm and for communica-tion between the organisms in the swarm.6.1.3  Particle Swarm OptimizationSwarm behavior—particularly the behavior of schools of sh and ocks of birds—has led to another computational technique, called particle swarm optimization (PSO). In this technique optimization problems are solved by a set of particles distributed on the search space (which is represented as an n-dimensional space Rn) where each point (an n-tuple of real numbers) rep-resents the n characteristics of a possible solution. e particles move around attempting to reach the extreme points (optimal solutions) identied at each time step. In the basic algorithm, every particle is aware of the following:• e quality of the solution represented by the point at which it is located.• e quality and location of the best solution it has ever visited (per-sonal best).• e quality and location of the best solution the population has ever encountered (global best).e particles are initially randomly distributed on the search space, and each has a velocity (which initially may be 0 or some random value). At each iteration the location and velocity of the particles are updated as follows: 1. e change in velocity (“acceleration”) is determined so that it cre-ates movement toward the personal best and global best. e acceler-ation is computed as a weighted average of the distance between the particle and the personal best and global best; the location and veloc-ity of particles are vectors in the n-dimensional space (i.e., vectors 
268    ◾    Biological Computationof n real numbers). e new velocity is calculated using the current velocity and acceleration. 2. e new position of particle i is determined by the current position and the new velocity (xi,t is the vector location of particle i at time t): xi,t = xi,t-1+vi,t. (Figure6.1).As usual, the algorithm executes until it converges or some other halting condition is satised.Most of the parameters allowing for ne-tuning the system involve the way the new velocities of the particles are calculated in Step 1. e new velocity of particle i is determined as follows: vv vv xxi,t i,t 1 1 i,t-1 2= +c rand() globalbest - +cω−( )rrand()personalbest-ii,t-1xx( )where:• xi,t is the location of the particle at time t.• globalbest is the location of the best solution the population has encoun-tered so far.• personalbest is the location of the best solution particle i has encoun-tered so far.• ω denotes the inertia of each particle. It is usually chosen to be close to 1.CurrentpositionPersonal bestGlobal bestxvFIGURE 6.1  New position calculation. e actual trajectory of a particle is deter-mined by its own position and velocity and also by biasing the trajectory toward the best position visited by the particle and the best position found by the entire population.


===== [63/72] chapter-63.html =====

The Never-Ending Story    ◾    269• e constants c1 and c2 determine the inuence of personalbest and globalbest, respectively. e larger c2, the larger the inuence of the particle’s “private” data, whereas the larger c1, the larger the inu-ence of the whole population on the behavior of each particle (the social inuence). Initially, one could use c1 = c2 = 2.• rand() is a random number between 0 and 1. Note that a dierent random value is used for each dimension (to simplify notation this is not reected in the formula above).e calculation of the velocity in each dimension is done separately and takes into account the corresponding dimensions of globalbest and personalbest.Note that, in contrast to the cellular automata described in Chapter 2 where each cell has only local knowledge, in PSO, the system keeps track of the global data—the location of all particles and the properties for the optimal solution globalbest. It is possible to reduce the role of global infor-mation by having each particle be aware only of a limited group of neigh-boring particles, where the neighbor relation is dened in advance and does not depend on the current locations of particles.e structure of the PSO algorithm is as follows: *HQHULFFRGHIRULPSOHPHQWLQJDVLPSOH362DOJRULWKP7KHDOJRULWKPWULHVWRPD[LPL]HWKHILWQHVVIXQFWLRQIINIT_POPULATION()&UHDWHLQLWLDOSRSXODWLRQWHILE QRW END_CONDITION BEGIN FORL:=TOQXPEHURISDUWLFOHV BEGIN 5HPHPEHUORFDWLRQRISHUVRQDOEHVW IF I[L!SHUVRQDOBEHVWL THEN SHUVRQDOBEHVWL:=[L END IF 5HPHPEHUJOREDOEHVW JOREDOBEHVW:=MAX_FITNESS_LOCATION(SHUVRQDOBEHVWSHUVRQDOBEHVW«SHUVRQDOBEHVWQ) FORG:=TOQXPEHURIGLPHQVLRQVBEGIN QRWLFHWKDWLQSUDFWLFHZHRQO\QHHGWRVWRUHDOOWKHFXUUHQWSRVLWLRQVDQGDOOWKHQHZSRVLWLRQVWZRVHWVRIORFDWLRQVQRWDOOWKHSUHYLRXVYDOXHVvLW:= tYLWc rand() JOREDOBEHVWxLWc rand() SHUVRQDOBEHVWLxLWxLW:= xLWvLW END // FOR d END // FOR i END 
270    ◾    Biological ComputationIn an impressive demonstration, particle swarm optimization was used to nd weights for a neural network whose goal was to report the charge of an electrical car’s batteries. e network consisted of ve input neu-rons, three hidden neurons and one output neuron, and it took around 3.5 hours to train using backpropagation. It took merely 2.2 minutes to nd weights achieving the same level of success (the same sum-squared error) using PSO (Kennedy and Eberhart, 2001, p. 318).6.2  ARTIFICIAL IMMUNE SYSTEMSImmunology is the research eld dealing with the immune system, which defends the organism against a wide variety of pathogens such as bacte-ria, fungi, and parasites. e immune system is a complex system whose description is beyond the scope of this book. We will present a few appli-cations that employ insights gained from knowledge of the biological immune system to solve problems arising in computer science and while doing so will introduce the relevant properties of the biological immune system.e immune system is fascinating from a computational perspective as it operates in a consistent fashion, “reaches” conclusions, exhibits “mem-ory,” and performs various activities while being totally distributed and without a central control mechanism or even “wiring.” us, it is radically dierent from the nervous system discussed in Chapter 4. Two central properties of the immune system are immune specicity and immune memory. Immune specicity refers to the capability of certain immune system cells to identify specic pathogens, to target them, and to destroy them. Immune memory is based on the fact that some of the cells gener-ated during the initial contact with a pathogen remain in the organism and allow for a faster reaction to subsequent attacks by the same pathogen (this property is the basis of vaccinations). Articial immune systems, which mimic biological immune systems, attempt to recreate these properties to achieve computational needs. We will describe one such task—securing a computer system against unauthorized users.To achieve its immunological task, the immune system has to distin-guish between elements belonging to the organism and external elements. is is called the distinction between self and nonself. To achieve this goal the system has to contain cells that recognize and react to new elements invading the system. is raises an interesting question: how can one cre-ate cells that can identify elements the organism has never encountered previously? We can conceive of various ways for creating detectors for 
The Never-Ending Story    ◾    271certain known properties, but how can one detect invaders with unknown properties? Another requirement from the immune system, which is of equal importance, is that the detectors do not react to the organism’s own cells (the self), because such a reaction will cause the organism to attack itself (autoimmune diseases, such as multiple sclerosis and lupus, occur due to an immune response to the organism’s own proteins). It turns out that even healthy people have autoimmune activity but to a lesser extent. is raises the question of whether the immune system is geared only toward identifying the nonself or whether it has other functions unrelated to dealing with external elements. For instance, it might have additional regulatory functions. is fundamental question gives a completely dif-ferent perspective to the immune system’s function, whereby the immune system actually denes and maintains the self rather than just identifying it. In our articial applications we will ignore this question and focus on the task of distinguishing the self from the nonself.One way the immune system attempts to distinguish between self and nonself is negative selection. A large set of detectors are created randomly, and the ones that react to the self are sieved out. To implement this, many detectors are generated and allowed to live for a certain period of time in an environment exposed to the organism’s own molecules. If the detec-tors re, there is a high probability they are reacting to the organism itself and have to be removed. Detectors that have not red during this training period have the potential to react only to external elements and therefore should be activated in the hope that they identify attackers. In this way the system can be said to “learn” to identify nonself elements. In the immune system this process happens mainly in the thymus gland where white blood cells known as T-cells are “trained” to distinguish between self and nonself targets. It is easy to see that this method is useful for identifying not only attackers but also any anomalies in a system.is process is called negative selection because the detectors react-ing against the organism’s own proteins are removed. is is not the only mechanism employed by the immune system, and other mechanisms have inspired various learning algorithms; however, in this section we will focus only on negative selection.6.2.1  Identifying Intrusions in a Computer NetworkIt seems very natural to use ideas derived from immunology to defend computer systems against unwelcome intruders, as the biological immune system attempts to solve a similar problem. e LISYS system we will 
272    ◾    Biological Computationdescribe (Hofmeyr and Forrest, 2000) is based on the negative selection mechanism. In addition, the system makes use of other ideas inspired by the immune system.e goal of the system is to defend a local area network (LAN). e system monitors the communication in the network constantly and learns to distinguish between normal communication (self) and unusual com-munication (nonself). e system makes use of the fact that in a LAN every computer sees the entire communication passing in the network. is allows for detectors to be distributed on many computers on the net-work and for all the communication passing through the network to be monitored from each one of them.e monitoring system observes the network connections between dif-ferent computers. Each connection is represented by a 3-tuple composed of the Internet Protocol (IP) address of the sending computer, the IP address of the receiving computer, and the requested service (the port). Each 3-tuple is represented by a string of 49 bits. e goal of the system is to distinguish between 3-tuples representing normal connections between computers and those that are atypical and may indicate unauthorized entry into the network. For this purpose the system has to compare strings representing detectors with strings representing active connections between two computers. e strings are compared using the r-contiguous bits criterion, which considers two strings as matching if there exists in both strings an identical contiguous substring of at least r bits.Negative selection plays a role in the creation of new detectors. A detec-tor, which like the network connections is represented as a string of 49 bits, is generated randomly. e detector is considered immature during a training period of length T called the tolerization phase. If during that time the detector res, the assumption is that it reacts to self strings and the detector is eliminated. A detector surviving this initial phase is con-sidered mature and is used to identify invaders. A mature detector identi-fying at least τ strings in a time interval is considered to have identied an invasion, and its state changes to active (and its match counter m is reset to 0). τ is called the activation threshold. e match counter decays with time, so if not enough strings are identied during a time interval the detector slowly reverts to a less active state.When a new 3-tuple is observed it can cause a few detectors to re. ose identifying an intrusion best (i.e., with the largest number of adjacent identical bits with the 3-tuple) are selected to be memory detectors. ese detectors clone themselves, and the clones are distributed to neighboring 
The Never-Ending Story    ◾    273computers in the network. In this way the identity of the atypical 3-tuple is distributed in the network and it will be quickly identied at its next occurrence as detectors identifying it will exist on many computers in the network. Moreover, the activation threshold of memory detectors is lower than that of regular detectors (e.g., τ = 1), which causes them to react faster. e memory detectors provide the intrusion detection system with an immune memory.Similar to a biological immune system, one of the greatest dangers is of the system being overly sensitive and reacting strongly to innocent occur-rences. A way of minimizing this is by co-stimulation, which involves gen-erating an immune reaction only when a number of dierent mechanisms detect a problem. e LISYS architects chose a simple method for co-stimu-lation: when a detector is activated by identifying a string s, the string is sent to a human operator, who has to conrm to the detector within a xed time Ts that this indeed is an abnormal occurrence. Only then does the detector become active and an immune response is initiated. If the operator does not respond within this time period, the assumption is that the detector identi-ed a valid string (self), and the detector is removed from the system and replaced with a new immature detector. e life cycle of a detector is shown in Figure6.2. e system developers tested the immune system on a set of data obtained from a live communication network by stimulating 20 days of real network use. Tables 6.1 and 6.2 list the immune system parameters they chose and the performance achieved by the system.6.3  ARTIFICIAL LIFEe borderline between using biological ideas to solve computational problems (bio-inspired computing) and attempting to build systems that behave like biological organisms (articial life) is ne and oen hard to dene. roughout the book we have mainly addressed bio-inspired com-puting, but we will now attempt to dierentiate between various approaches to articial life (ALife) and will discuss a few well-known systems.Discussing articial life immediately raises the question of dening what life is in an exact way (the denition of life problem). Life manifests itself in a vast number of dierent living organisms with their dierent properties. Our large but limited knowledge of biological systems and the philosophical depth of the question “what is life” combine to make the denition of life a question many scholars prefer to avoid. e scientists and philosophers who did discuss the problem have suggested an array of denitions focusing on the many properties found in living organisms.


===== [64/72] chapter-64.html =====

274    ◾    Biological ComputationRandomly createdImmatureMature & NaiveDeathActivatedMemoryNo match duringtolerization period Match anything duringtolerization period Don’t exceed activationthreshold during lifetimeExceed activation thresholdCostimulationNo costimulationMatch011010110101100...110101FIGURE 6.2  e life cycle of a detector. (Adapted from Hofmeyr, Steven A. and Stephanie A. Forrest, Evolutionary Computation 8, no. 4, 443–473, 2000. With permission.)TABLE 6.1  LISYS ParametersParameter ValueString length 49 bitsNumber of contiguous bits to match (r) 12 bitsActivation threshold (τ) 10 matchesDecay period of match counter (m) 1 dayDecay period of local sensitivity (see Exercise 6.13) 0.1 daysTelorization period of immature detector (T) 4 daysWaiting period for costimulation (Ts) 1 dayDetector life expectancy 14 daysNumber of detectors per node 100 detectorsTABLE 6.2  LISYS PerformancePercentage of immature detectors in detector population (average over 20 days)23%Average number of false positives per day 1.76Number of correctly identied intrusions into system 7 of 7
The Never-Ending Story    ◾    275Among these properties we may nd self-replication and heredity, adapt-ability to the environment and homeostatis, and metabolic behavior (i.e., the capability to use matter and energy in the environment for the organ-ism’s existence and functioning).e challenge of providing such denitions is twofold: (1) the denition has to match all the varied objects we consider as living organisms and not match objects such as chairs, rocks, and digital computers that we do not consider to be live organisms; and (2) we have to avoid using too narrow a denition that will match only the living organisms found on Earth. We should aim to reect on the fundamental properties of life, so that when-ever we encounter an object that falls within the denition, we will agree it is alive, whether it is on another planet or even on a computer system. Due to these and other diculties, there is no one denition everyone agrees on, and it is doubtful that such a denition is possible. Researchers who work in the eld of articial life do not necessarily dene the term explicitly, but we can nonetheless characterize the assumptions underly-ing many of their projects.e fundamental premise underlying articial life is that life is not lim-ited to phenomena we necessarily know already. Articial life researchers thus deal with questions of life-as-it-could-be as well as life-as-we-know-it. is means that man-made systems are not ruled out (at least in prin-ciple) as living systems. e reasoning behind this assumption is that life is a dynamic process with universal characteristics that are independent of the life’s medium. In other words, life is a characteristic of the way the medium is organized and not of the medium itself: for instance, life does not have to be based on organic molecules. is allows us to accept the possibility that a computerized simulation of living processes should be considered as being alive.Given the scientic and philosophical diculties of dening life, it is common among researchers to distinguish between two types of approaches to articial life: (1) the strong ALife approach, which postu-lates that virtual “creatures” on a computer screen can be considered to be alive if they fulll the denition of life used by the researchers; and (2) the weak ALife approach, whereby computerized creatures displaying characteristics of living systems are only models used in research and are not really alive.Most ALife systems have common characteristics, based on general ideas derived from biology and the study of complex systems. As expected, these 
276    ◾    Biological Computationcharacteristics are similar to the main characteristics of the biology-inspired models which we have discussed throughout this book: 1. e systems are composed of a large collection of simple programs or other simple entities (a “population”). 2. ere is no central control mechanism. 3. Every program or object reacts to local phenomena in its immediate environment. e environment may of course contain other objects with which the object has to interact. 4. Any property of the system that extends beyond the local behavior of the objects (i.e., an emergent property) is the result of the local simple behaviors.As expected from this list, many ALife systems use the computational models described in Chapters 2, 3, and 4.We will describe a few representative examples of ALife systems. While studying them, try to determine how well these examples adhere to any of the previously given characteristics and whether they deal with the chal-lenge of strong ALife or the simpler but still challenging weak ALife.6.3.1  AvidaAvida (Lenski et al., 2003) is a soware environment for studying and evaluating the evolution of self-replicating computer programs. (Following the lead of the system’s developers, we will call such pro-grams computational organisms.) Using Avida allows researchers to perform experiments on articial evolutionary processes relatively easily and to follow all the stages in the evolution of the computational organ-isms “living” in the computer’s memory. Computerized experiments are of course simpler than experiments in the laboratory, especially when the experiments involve following many generations of organisms. Many researchers use mathematical simulations to analyze evolution-ary processes, but this approach is inherently biased as the simulations are based on the researchers’ already held assumptions about the evolu-tionary process (the computer simulations simply use pseudo-random numbers to explore probabilistic models of evolutionary processes). e Avida developers chose a dierent route—the computer is used not to perform the computations dened by a mathematical model but as an 
The Never-Ending Story    ◾    277environment in which autonomous organisms operate. ese organisms are responsible for their own reproduction and interaction with the envi-ronment and create an evolutionary process that does not necessarily operate according to a predened mathematical model. e main task of an Avida organism (which is a computer program) is to generate as many copies of itself as possible (i.e., to self-replicate). Note the fundamental dierence between this approach and the way the genetic algorithms we studied in Chapter 3 work. In Avida the organism is responsible for its self-replication; replication is not provided by a separate mechanism. e success in self-replication is the fundamental metric for an indi-vidual’s tness in Avida, and the success of an organism is measured by the number of its copies in the nal population.e Avida soware system implements a virtual computer and oper-ating system, on which dierent programs comprising the population of organisms in the virtual environment are run. e computer runs as a par-allel system, using time slicing, so that every articial organism is allocated a time slice during which the computer program comprising the organism is executed. Avida was inspired by an earlier system for studying articial evolution of self-replicating entities called Tierra, which was developed by the ecologist omas S. Ray. One of the main dierences between Avida and Tierra is that in Avida organisms may be assigned computa-tional tasks, and if they fulll them successfully they are rewarded with extra running time as a bonus. For example, we may challenge the organ-ism with the task of accepting two numbers as input and of producing their sum as output upon completion of the program. Organisms that are successful at this task will get extra running time, which they can use to create copies of themselves. In this fashion one can study the evolution of dierent computational capabilities. For example, one of the experi-ments conducted using Avida was to compute logical operations, and the highest bonus was given to the organisms implementing the EQU opera-tion, the operation that tests whether the bits of both input strings are equal (see Lenski et al., 2003). e goal of this work was to study how the evolution of complex traits depends on the evolution of simpler building blocks. Another feature Avida added to Tierra is that it implements a two-dimesional universe on which the organisms live. It additionally supplies a large spectrum of conguration and monitoring mechanisms for evolu-tion of the computational organisms.Ray already observed interesting evolutionary phenomena using Tierra (Ray, 1992). In his rst experiment the only success criterion was 
278    ◾    Biological Computationthe rate of self-replication. Ray noticed that the organisms became suc-cessively shorter—since the shorter the program the less time it needs to replicate—therefore for a xed execution time, shorter programs will gen-erate more copies. Another interesting phenomenon Ray discovered was that some organisms succeeded so well in decreasing their size that they removed critical parts of themselves and used parts of other programs that resided in the computer’s shared memory. is is reminiscent of the biological phenomenon of parasitism, whereby a parasite benets at the expense of another organism. e creation of parasites led to an arms race: the abused organisms developed methods to confuse the parasites and gain immunity; the parasites developed methods to overcome the immunity; and the cycle would repeat. Eventually, organisms evolved that seemed to be potential victims but that actually had mechanisms allowing them to fool the parasites and cause them to clone the victim rather than themselves!We now describe the Avida system in more detail and discuss how it can be used as a system for investigating evolutionary processes. An Avida run starts by the execution on the virtual machine of an initial organism that is capable of self-replication. is organism is the initial input pro-vided by the user. For example, the initial organism described in Table6.3 is capable of self-replication. e program is written in the machine lan-guage implemented by the Avida system. ere is no need to try to under-stand the details of the machine language, as we just want to give a general notion of what the digital organisms look like. What follows is a high-level description of the organism’s operation.e program starts out by allocating memory for the future descen-dant. en the program seeks its end, which is marked by the two commands nop-A (“nop” stands for no operation) and nop-B (these commands do not do anything). e new copy will be written to this memory location, where the newly allocated memory resides. Note that the template nop-A, nop-B is represented for the h-search command by the template nop-C, nop-A, which appears in the next two lines of code (this is how the machine language of Avida uses nop operations to rep-resent labels). Aer this initial step the copy loop starts executing and will execute as long as the template nop-A, nop-B (represented again for the if-label as nop-C, nop-A), which marks the end of the program, has not been copied. For every loop cycle one command is copied (by h-copy) from the read head (which is at the beginning of the code at


===== [65/72] chapter-65.html =====

The Never-Ending Story    ◾    279the beginning of execution) to the write head (which the program posi-tioned at aer the template nop-A, nop-B). At the end of the loop (aer copying the whole program), the h-divide command is executed and causes the program in the new memory region to turn into an indepen-dent organism. e experimenter using Avida denes the probability that h-copy will misbehave, and, instead of copying the command it is supposed to copy, a random command will be copied into the descen-dant. is creates mutations.Note how Avida’s machine language uses the nop commands, whose exe-cution has no eect, to seek memory locations (h-search) and to check which commands have been copied (if-label). It is worth reecting on how this design inuences the ease of writing self-cloning programs compared with addressing memory in the standard ways used in other machine languages.TABLE6.3  A Description of an Organism in the Avida System# — Setup —h-alloc # Allocate extra space at the end of the genome to copy the ospring into.h-search # Locate an A:B template (at the end of the organism) and place the Flow-Head aer it.nop-C #nop-A #mov-head # Place the Write-Head at the Flow-Head (which is at beginning of ospring-to-be).nop-C # [ Extra nop-C commands can be placed here w/o harming the organism! ]# — Copy Loop —h-search # No template, so place the Flow-Head on the next line (to mark the beginning of the copy loop).h-copy # Copy a single instruction from the read head to the write head (and advance both heads!)if-label # Execute the line following this template only if we have just copied an A:B template.nop-C #nop-A #h-divide # ...Divide o ospring! (note if-statement above!)mov-head # Otherwise, move the instruction pointer (IP) back to the Flow-Head at the beginning of the copy loop.nop-A # End label.nop-B # End label.Source: Courtesy of Charles Ofria.
280    ◾    Biological Computatione Avida developers mention a few factors demonstrating the appeal of digital organisms for evolutionary research. Here are two of the most important ones:• Researching articial life allows us to generalize about systems with self-replication capabilities. is allows us to study other evolutionary systems in addition to the biological ones based on DNA and RNA.• Studying digital organisms allows us to discuss questions that can-not be researched using biological systems. For instance, a certain type of mutations can be canceled, or certain evolutionary stages can be pinpointed so that changes can be made to them.Among the topics studied using Avida are the importance of the tness of intermediate evolutionary steps in the evolution of complex properties, the factors causing the coexistence of multiple species rather than the cre-ation of a single dominant species, and the evolution of cooperation.Clune, Ofria, and Pennock (2007) studied the evolution of plasticity and made an interesting use of Avida (see Chapter 3 for a further dis-cussion of plasticity). ey tried to test whether frequent changes in the demands made by the environment will cause the digital organisms to evolve an ability to adapt to the changing environment, that is, to evolve behavioral plasticity. Recall that in Avida the organisms may be required to fulll some tasks, and success at the tasks gives them additional run-ning time (failure may result in a decrease in the allotted running time). e researchers added a mechanism allowing the organism to determine if the task was accomplished successfully (using the return value from the output command). e aim was to test if this input from the environment will be used by the organisms to adapt their behavior to the demands of the environment, which was changed cyclically between requirements for two dierent computations on the input values. e researchers hoped that the system will create organisms which check the return value of the output command and use it (using a conditional statement) to choose a compu-tational path providing for more running time. Dramatically, something else happened: the articial evolution managed to nd an organism with one computation path that did not use the return value in any conditional statement yet remained adapted to the changing environment. e organ-ism achieved this by using the return value as one of the numbers used in the computation of the next output value, in a way that assured the new 
The Never-Ending Story    ◾    281output generated matched the environmental requirements represented by either one of the two return values. In other words, evolution man-aged to create an organism that did not need plasticity at the level of the computation paths (while the output it produced obviously had to dem-onstrate the required plasticity). To force the system to develop organisms with developmental plasticity of the type they were hoping to nd, the researchers had to avoid the creation of such a static solutions by chang-ing the conditions of the problem in a subtle way aimed at undermining solutions with a single computation path. e variety of environmental demands in nature may not allow for the creation of “sneaky” solutions such as those initially created.From a scientic perspective it is important to note that similar results about the evolution of plasticity and its relation to environmental demands were also obtained in studies looking at the evolution of neural networks under changing environmental conditions. e fact that similar evolution-ary phenomena arose in models that are fundamentally dierent from each other allowed the researchers to draw from the results of the dierent exper-iments general conclusions about the behavior of evolutionary processes.6.3.2  Evolvable Virtual CreaturesKarl Sims (1994) presented a way to use ideas derived from articial life to create three-dimensional graphical creatures for animated movies. ese creatures had to be mobile in their environment and to react to external stimuli. eir shape and the “brain” controlling their musculature and reacting to the environment are generated in the Sims system by a genetic algorithm of the sort described in Chapter 3. e evolution of the creatures can be directed toward certain behaviors by choosing dierent tness functions. Sims presented a large collection of creatures that have evolved in the system and were able to walk, swim, jump, and follow light sources.e genotype of the creatures determined both their physical structure and their control mechanism. e control mechanism was not a standard neural net as described in Chapter 4 but rather contained more complex elements capable of performing operations such as addition, multiplica-tion, conditional statements, and mathematical functions such as sin, log, and abs. e genotype was a graph representing the rules for building the creature (as can be seen in Figure6.3). e graph contains both the rep-resentation of the creature’s physical structure and the description of the neural net and sensors allowing it to sense its environment. As seen in Figure 6.3, a creature is constructed from a collection of connected blocks. 
282    ◾    Biological ComputationIts brain reacts to environmental stimuli and determines how to move the dierent blocks, similar to the way a live organism moves its limbs. is movement of various body parts allows the creatures to move around its living space.Sims performed experiments on the evolution of creatures under dif-ferent conditions, such as walking on a at terrain, swimming in water, or following a moving light source (see Figure 6.4). Fitness was com-puted taking the simulation’s goal into account. For instance, for the evolution of walking, the tness function took into account the dis-tance of the creature from its starting point and its nal velocity. Like in other genetic algorithms, individuals were selected for reproduction (either sexually or asexually). During the ospring creation phase, cer-tain mutations could occur as well as chromosome crossover (in sexual reproduction).Genotype: Directed graph(segment)(bodysegment)(legsegment)(body)(limbsegment)(head)Phenotype: Hierarchy of 3D parts.FIGURE 6.3  Sims’s virtual creatures. (Adapted from Sims, Karl, in Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques, 15–22, ACM, 1994. With permission.)
The Never-Ending Story    ◾    283An important part of the system was the simulation of the properties of the environment: the evolution of walking and jumping was aected by gravity, whereas the evolution of swimming was aected not by gravity but by water viscosity and its inuence on mobility. Moreover, the velocity of each creature was computed by taking into account the movement of its muscles and physical laws. All of this had a signicant impact on the real-ity of the simulation. Indeed, when one watches a video of the creatures, their movement seems extremely realistic and reminiscent of the move-ment of animals.Not only did Sims’s simulations emulate the physical environment; the creatures existed in an environment that could contain more than one crea-ture, and the creatures could interact with each other. For example, one of the simulations demonstrated competition between two creatures, where a creature “won” (evolutionarily) if at the end of the competition it was closer to a cube located in the environment. e creatures could look for the cube, move it, disturb each other, and so forth. Dealing with the environment in all its richness is of course a central factor in biological evolution, but many FIGURE  6.4  Creatures adapted to walking. (Adapted from Sims, Karl, in Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques, 15–22, ACM, 1994. With permission.)


===== [66/72] chapter-66.html =====

284    ◾    Biological Computationof the evolutionary computation models we have discussed thus far do not address this at all or address it only in a very limited fashion.6.4  SYSTEMS BIOLOGYSystems biology is a new research area attempting to apply modern tech-niques to the study of whole living systems rather than individual elements such as genes, proteins, or single cells. It might seem strange given how much we do not know about the basic components of biological systems to attempt to study how they combine and interact. For example, given that we do not fully understand how single genes function, how can it make sense to try to look at the next level up and study how large group of genes func-tion together? is approach might be less ridiculous than it rst sounds. In many cases, studying the interaction between components sheds light not only on the system behavior but also on the behavior of the individual components.While not complete, the vast knowledge accumulated about the biologi-cal building blocks allows for the usage of mathematical tools and simula-tions to try to understand how these components interact to create complete biological systems. As we saw throughout the book, complex systems can present properties that are generated by the way the dierent components interact and inuence each other and that do not exist at the level of the separate components.Systems biology, then, is the attempt to construct models describing biological systems in order to investigate the interactions between the ele-ments of biological systems, to study the behavior of these models, and to use them to explain the systemic properties of the biological systems. Many types of modeling techniques are used, and models range from mathematical models consisting of equations describing the relation-ships between various quantities in the system to computational models attempting to describe the step-by-step operation of the biological system being modeled (see, e.g., the discussion of statecharts later in the chapter).An important example of a systemic property is tolerance to disturbances and “noise” (robustness). System robustness manifests itself in a variety of ways: adaptability to changing environmental conditions, insensitivity or low sensitivity of the system to certain changes, or gradual reaction to damage to the system rather than a catastrophic shutdown. Robustness is discussed in more detail later in this section.A “systemic” approach to system-level properties such as robustness requires an understanding of both the structure and organization of a 
The Never-Ending Story    ◾    285system (i.e., the components and their interconnectivity) and an under-standing of its dynamics (i.e., how the system behaves through time and how it reacts to dierent conditions and forces applied to it). A systemic understanding of the organization and behavior of systems in the human body may, for example, be helpful in the development of new drugs and medical treatments that can change the behavior of these systems. It is important to note a fundamental problem in studying the dynamics of a system: the data we collect are mostly static and describe (partially) the state of the system at a given moment. Even when discovering connec-tions between some components of the system, one still has to discover how these connections generate the observed dynamics. e mechanisms responsible for controlling a system’s dynamics are called control mecha-nisms. Reasoning about their behavior based on observations is not at all simple and makes use of, for example, statistical tools and simulations. is analysis can be likened to reverse engineering: the attempt to under-stand the operation of a technological system such as a computer program or complex machine by observing its behavior. e goal is to be able to describe the biological system’s behavior in a precise quantitative manner so that we can analyze it analytically or simulate it and thereby discover answers to questions about the system, some of which may be very expen-sive or even impossible to study directly on the system itself. For instance, using simulations of biological processes in drug design can reduce the need for animal experimentation and can shorten the development cycle, thereby reducing the development cost while also allowing the research-ers to test how the drug will behave in rare conditions. For the simulation to be useful, it has to be as precise as possible and take as many factors as possible into account. All of these diculties are examples of the chal-lenges facing systems biologists.As mentioned in Chapter 1, biological systems present a wide array of hierarchical organization levels—starting with organic molecules such as DNA and RNA, moving on to the organelles that build up the cells, then the cell, which is a basic unit capable of surviving and reproducing inde-pendently, and then on, in multicellular organisms, to tissues, organs, and the whole multicellular individual. Multiple individuals create populations and communities that are complex dynamical systems.Systems biology builds models for dierent levels of organization. Some models focus on whole subsystems (e.g., the processes responsible for managing blood sugar), whereas others focus on one process built up from a few interconnected stages. As of now, most models limit themselves to 
286    ◾    Biological Computationsubsystems. ere is an interesting and important project to simulate all the molecular life processes in a minimal cell (i.e., a nonspecialized cell). e goal of the project is to present in a quantitative and exact way the set of basic life processes necessary to maintain a cell (see http://www.e-cell.org for more information). Another kind of systems biology model being developed is the whole patient model, which attempts to simulate a patient for drug development purposes (e.g., Entelos® provides a technol-ogy called “Virtual Patients”). Such models have to address the dierent organizational levels of the patient (e.g., the links among genes, chemical processes, intercellular communication, and the organization of tissues, organs, and nally the whole patient). Each structural level may operate at dierent scales of size and time rates and present dierent types of behav-ior. To be true to life and useful, a model has to capture the interactions of the dierent organization levels.One of the research goals is to identify and characterize modules or bio-logical “circuits” with well-dened roles that are used as building blocks in the assembly of the more complex biological systems, similar to the way electronic circuits are used to build computer systems. Researchers have been successful in identifying the control mechanisms that deter-mine the properties of many such modules. e modules contain pro-teins that act together as an organized system with a well-dened goal or are made up of cooperating gene (or protein) networks. Examples of such modules and their control mechanisms include positive feedback loops, negative feedback loops with delay mechanisms, mechanisms that imple-ment temporary storage of data (memory), noise-reducing and noise uti-lization mechanisms, and various oscillators (Kitano, 2002). Identifying the biological and chemical ways these control mechanisms must be implemented to create the required behavior allows us to understand the biological systems at a high level of abstraction based on engineering descriptions of the characteristics common to dierent processes sharing the same control mechanisms. e engineering approach allows us to use the same mathematical tools used in system engineering (e.g., dieren-tial equations). Obviously, the same control mechanism may be imple-mented in several ways at the chemical level; nonetheless, understanding the control mechanisms and the ways the dierent modules interconnect to create a whole biological system gives us a new perspective on biologi-cal systems.It is interesting to note that, in contrast to engineered control mecha-nisms, which are designed to implement desired behavior, the biological 
The Never-Ending Story    ◾    287control mechanisms evolved as a result of various evolutionary needs over long periods of time. It is natural to wonder about the chances that evolu-tion will give rise to modules that exactly match the control mechanisms developed by engineering disciplines. To answer this question, dierent biological control mechanisms have to be identied and analyzed, and their evolution must be investigated. ere is no doubt that our ability to perform large-scale studies and to analyze data from many sources pres-ents large challenges to systems biology and high expectations for new biological insights. Time will tell whether computational systems biology is up to this challenge.We now discuss two examples of questions asked by systems biology: (1) the origin and nature of biological modularity; and (2) the robust architec-ture of gene networks. We conclude this section with a discussion of the application of formal languages to the description of biological systems.6.4.1  Evolution of Modularitye modular and hierarchical structure of organisms (which contain cells, tissues, and organs) raises the obvious question about the evolutionary ben-ets of such a structure, and this question is the focal point of many studies. Herbert Simon, one of the central gures of articial intelligence during its heyday, oered one famous explanation in his paper titled “e Architecture of Complexity” (1962). He dened the term nearly completely decompos-able system (ND) to describe systems made up of separate components in which there is much more interaction within each component than between dierent components. It is easy to see that many biological and physical systems fall into this category. ND is not the same as modularity, as can be seen from the variety of properties of the previously mentioned biologi-cal “circuits,” but it does dene a central property of modular systems. So the question is how evolution leads to ND systems. Simon answered this using a parable about two watchmakers, named Hora and Tempus. e watchmakers build almost identical watches, each of which contains 1000 components. e dierence is that Hora builds his watches out of 10 sta-ble modules, each containing 10 stable submodules with 10 elements each. Tempus, on the other hand, does not use such stable substructures, and the only stable structure he comes up with is the whole watch made up of 1000 pieces. Assume both watchmakers are distracted frequently by phone calls from their customers. Clearly, Hora, who has to assemble only 10 mod-ules between interruptions, will be much more productive than Tempus, who needs an uninterrupted period of time long enough to assemble 1000 
288    ◾    Biological Computationelements and has to restart from the beginning aer each phone call. Hora, Simon tells us, prospered, while Tempus grew poorer and poorer and nally lost his shop. While Simon’s parable is told about watchmakers, it is in fact concerned with the organization of the watches, as examples of two ways complex systems might be organized, rather than with the role of the watch-makers or the origin of the dierent organizations.Simon concluded from the parable that in an evolutionary scenario ND watches (e.g., Hora’s watches), or in general ND systems, would be tter than their non-ND counterparts and therefore will have the upper hand in the evolutionary race (the reader is encouraged to understand how the conclusion about tness arises from the parable).As already noted and acknowledged by Simon, this model is very gen-eral and allows for dierent conclusions about the evolutionary process (note, in particular, that the model does not address the evolution of modularity of watches per se, but only deals with its advantages if it exists). Simon also has a stronger claim about ND systems: such sys-tems will improve their tness faster than non-ND systems with similar complexity (the property of how well a system can undergo evolution-ary changes is called its evolvability). e reason is that an ND system allows for local changes and therefore raises the probability that a change in one of the components improving tness will not compromise other components (Simon, 2002).e watch discussion seems to have dealt with the phenotype of a system, but the evolvability claim actually suggests that the genome may be ND in some sense and is reminiscent of Holland’s building block hypothesis (see Chapter 3). Biological systems present both genotypic and phenotypic modularities. For instance, each of our two arms is a dened organ, and an arm injury does not directly aect other organs; therefore, in this sense each arm is a module. On the other hand, both arms reect the same genetic template and not two dierent genetic modules. However, we did see in the previous discussion of biological circuits that we can identify sets of genes operating as separate modules in an ND-like fashion. Simon uses the notion of ND to discuss both these aspects of modularities, which do not necessarily arise due to the same reasons and the same evolutionary pressures. ND is useful in dis-cussing modularity but does not explain the dierence between these two kinds of modularity.


===== [67/72] chapter-67.html =====

The Never-Ending Story    ◾    2896.4.2  Robustness of Biological SystemsAn important property of living organisms is their robustness to various internal or external mishaps occurring before and during their lifetime, including genetic mutations, developmental perturbations, and accidental events. We will not dene robustness here, and it is clear that too many accidents will cause an organism to fail and eventually to die; however, our daily experience convinces us that organisms are generally robust to many such events.Engineering has taught us a variety of methods for achieving robust-ness. e central ones are as follows (Kitano, 2002):• Control mechanisms: In particular, negative feedback.• Modularity: Allows for the containment of failures so that a failure aecting one module will not spread and cause a total system failure.• Redundancy: A few components with identical functions can serve as backup for each other.• Structural stability: A physical structure can provide stability.ese methods are also available to biological systems. A simple exam-ple is the redundancy achieved by having many dierent cells with identi-cal functionality (consider the huge number of blood cells, which is the reason a minor injury does not cause a signicant physiological problem). e engineering knowledge of these methods for achieving robustness can help with the understanding of biological processes or at least can aid in creating exact mathematical models that will be the basis for new research.Robustness of Gene NetworksOne can perform large-scale experiments on simple organisms such as bacteria, worms, and yeasts where a single gene is removed from the genome or deactivated and the eect on the phenotype is studied. For instance, it turns out that 82% of the 6000 genes of yeast are not strictly necessary, and removing each of them leaves viable strains (Giaever et al., 2002). Moreover, only 15% of these genes aected the organisms’ rate of growth. In other words, 70% of the yeast’s genes do not seem to adversely aect its functions when missing. Clearly, we cannot judge the quality of life of these organisms, and probably this research has to be repeated under various environmental conditions where the aects of the loss of 
290    ◾    Biological Computationthe genes may be more pronounced. In any case it is clear that a very large fraction of the yeast’s genes are not absolutely necessary. Similar results were obtained when removing a single gene from organisms of varied complexity, from bacteria to mice.It would seem that these results suggest a simple mechanism that can explain the robustness of organisms. Genes may have backups that become operational when their counterpart is missing; therefore, removing a single gene at a time is not likely to cause any harm. is is similar to the engi-neering practice of increasing robustness by redundancy, for instance, by having dual wheel retraction systems in passenger jets.However, this simplistic explanation raises two issues. e rst is that evolution can almost never preserve a gene whose sole purpose is to pro-tect against mutations. is is because mutations are rare events, so there is no obvious advantage in having a redundant gene; as a result the backup gene will accumulate mutations over time and eventually lose the ability to produce the backup protein. e second problem is due to results of recent large-scale studies where pairs of genes were deactivated. If deacti-vating each of the genes separately would not seem to aect the system but mutual gene-pair deactivation had catastrophic results, then this could indicate that the two genes act as backups for each other. e results of the experiments present a much more complex picture (Tong et al., 2004). Very few pairs that back each other up have been identied, and most genes are members of modules interacting to create complex webs of func-tional modules.As a result, the current view is of partial backup among genes (or mod-ules) that have some functional overlap. In this way, each gene has a specic role that aects the tness of the organism; thus, it would be valued and preserved by evolution. On the other hand, the gene can at least partially substitute another gene if that gene fails (Kafri et al., 2005). For example, there might be two enzymes that digest dierent types of sugars and can stand in for each other in a partial fashion (e.g., in lesser eciency) in case one enzyme fails.6.4.3  Formal Languages for Describing Biological SystemsResearch in systems biology uses advanced computational capabilities to build simulations and to test hypotheses using models. To be able to describe the models in a consistent and uniform way and to share data between dierent research groups, formal languages for describing the biological models were developed. Currently, biological information is 
The Never-Ending Story    ◾    291described (e.g., in textbooks and most scientic papers) in natural lan-guage accompanied by gures and pictures, but these descriptions can be ambiguous and unclear. Hence, the need for formal languages with precise semantics to describe biological models. Such languages are very important when we want to make sure that information collected by mul-tiple research groups is consistent. In addition, they can be used as input languages for programs that simulate a model and describe its behav-ior graphically and as output of programs for visual building of models. Another important usage of formal languages is the ability to publish in conjunction with a traditional scientic paper an exact description of the model in a standardized language allowing other researchers to evaluate the results more easily. To these ends a few languages based on Extensible Markup Language (XML) have been dened. e best-known among those languages is Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML). Using SBML one can describe biochemical networks, that is, systems composed of a collection of chemical objects (e.g., molecules) linked to each other by chemical reactions. Using standard languages such as SBML allows data repositories containing a large collection of models from the scientic lit-erature to be created making them available to the research community.One can also go a step further and use tools developed for modeling computer systems to build “active” biological models. An example of this is the use of statecharts to build formal models of biological systems. e statecharts language is a visual language developed in 1984 by David Harel to aid in developing complex reactive systems (this language was originally intended to be used in the development of aeronautical systems). e behavior of a system is described using states and events that cause transition between states. e states in statecharts may be composed from substates, allowing the specication of systems at dierent levels of orga-nization, and for easy transitions between levels of description. Moreover, using statecharts one can allocate states to components acting in paral-lel and thereby can describe systems containing parallel and interacting processes. In contrast to a verbal description, a system described by a stat-echart is dened exactly and therefore allows for automatic execution.Researchers have used statecharts to describe dierent biological mechanisms, including major processes of the immune system. ese models were used to integrate the data obtained from many decades of research and to test by simulation whether these data are consistent and whether the models agree with the observed behavior of the immune sys-tem. To understand a system described using statecharts, one can use the 
292    ◾    Biological Computationsimulation tools originally developed to interact with models of computer systems. ese tools allow viewing animations that visualize the behavior of the system in order to observe the state of each object during the execu-tion, and to change objects’ states. All of these are, of course, necessary to verify a model and to understand its behavior.Figure6.5 (from Setty et al., 2008) is a statechart of a eukaryotic cell in a multicellular organism, which is specied by using three distinct objects, namely, the nucleus, membrane, and cell. e cell includes the specica-tion of the dierent stages in the life cycle of the cell. e nucleus object species gene expression in a discrete fashion, whereas the membrane object species the response to external stimulations. e statechart of the cell object contains two concurrent components: the proliferation and dierentiation processes. e proliferation component denes a state for each stage of the cell cycle, whereas the dierentiation component species CellNucleusMembraneProliferationMG2G1SG0DiﬀerentiationEndodermPdx1-PancreasprogenitorExocrineEndocrineActRUnboundBoundFGFRUnboundBoundMotion UnitSenseXLeftRightYLeft RightZLeft RightShhUnexp.Exp.PtcUnexp.Exp.Pdx1Unexp.Exp.FIGURE  6.5  Statechart description of a eukaryotic cell. (Adapted from Setty, Yaki, Irun R. Cohen, Yuval Dor, and David Harel, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105, no. 51, 20374–20379, 2008. With permission.)
The Never-Ending Story    ◾    293a state for each developmental stage of the organism. e nucleus and the membrane objects are located inside the cell to indicate the (strong) com-position relation among the three objects, that is, that the nucleus and the membrane cannot exist without the cell containing them. e stat-echart for the nucleus species each gene as an independent component that can be either in an expressed or an unexpressed state (denoted by Exp. and Unexp., respectively). ree genes—Sonic hedgehog (Shh), Patched (Ptc), and Pdx1—involved in pancreatic organogenesis are shown in this example. Similarly, the statechart for the membrane species the cell’s reactions to possible external stimulations. Two subcomponents within the membrane statechart specify two receptors in the membrane—activin receptor (AcrR) and broblast growth factor receptor (FGFR)—that can be in a bound or an unbound state. e third component in the membrane statechart depicts the motion unit that continuously scans over six pos-sible directions to nd the optimal move. e states contain behavioral instructions for the cell. For example, in the membrane, the state bound of a receptor denes the specic genes it activates. Similarly, in the nucleus, the expressed state contains instructions for genes to activate the expres-sion of other genes.While we cannot go into a full description of the semantics of statecharts here, it is important to realize that this graphical representation carries a precise meaning. For example, a cell is presented from two orthogonal views (i.e., proliferation and dierentiation) marked by dotted lines. In the proliferation view, the statechart tells us that a cell can be either in a resting state G0 or in the active part of the cell cycle that must start in G1.e language we just described is based on states. One of the problems with this notation is that we oen do not have enough biological data (or the data are not precise enough) to describe all the states and transitions of a complicated biological systems. us, other projects used languages and formal notations that are scenario based—for example, a list of rules that described what a cell does in a certain situation given a certain stimulus. en, given a set of such rules, the system allows for execution of many scenarios from dierent initial conditions. Such languages can better cope with partial knowledge. For this reason they may be better suited at the present time for describing biological processes.In addition to statecharts a variety of formalisms developed by computer science have been adopted for the description and analysis of biological systems. Among these are Petri nets, process calculi (e.g., the pi-calculus), and Boolean networks (Fisher and Henzinger, 2007).


===== [68/72] chapter-68.html =====

294    ◾    Biological Computatione last few years have seen many initiatives for creating languages for describing biological systems. Paradoxically, this multitude of initiatives is problematic. It seems that it would be better to select one language (or a small number of languages) and to focus on the monumental task of translating the vast array of biological knowledge to this formal language. Only when there is a critical mass of biological knowledge described in a few common formal languages will we be able to gain the full scientic benet promised by standardized formal languages.Given the current diculties in adapting and using a common formal language to describe biological systems, there is an ongoing eort to extract biological knowledge from natural language texts, that is, from biomedical journal articles. While regular text searches use exact word matching and keyword annotations, more sophisticated methods aim to use natural lan-guage processing (NLP) techniques combined with machine-learning algo-rithms using biological ontologies and dictionaries to extract knowledge from biomedical articles. While far from perfect, such text-mining systems bring hope to the endeavor of retrieving at least some of the vast amount of knowledge that has been published and converting it to machine-readable form. Having the data specied in formal languages with precise semantics will ease the goal of building systems to store, manage, and mine biological knowledge.6.5  SUMMARYWe have outlined in this chapter a few of the varied directions taken by researchers who study computational approaches motivated by biology. Each of the topics we described is an active research area with new ideas and applications being developed constantly. e topics we presented in this chapter are newer than the “classic” areas we described in previous chapters, and it is safe to assume they will develop in varied and surpris-ing directions.We have attempted throughout the book to emphasize the computa-tional aspect of nature, particularly the study of biological processes as computational processes (i.e., as information processing and problem-solving processes). is outlook made us consider which computational problems can be solved using biological mechanisms, looking at the spec-trum of biological mechanisms from molecular processes to the behav-ior of animal populations. To this end we inspected the information the processes consume and how it is saved and manipulated; the control mechanisms responsible for various processes; the roles of parallelism and 
The Never-Ending Story    ◾    295distribution; and the methods for dealing with faults, noise, and missing information. is perspective obviously does not address all the dierent ways of researching and studying biological processes, but it does allow us to observe aspects of the biological systems that might be obscured oth-erwise and to use computer science and engineering tools to help under-stand biological phenomena.On the ip side, viewing biological phenomena with “computational eyeglasses” allowed computer scientists to develop new computational models inspired by biology and new methods for solving computational problems. ese included optimization and search problems, clustering and classication problems, pattern recognition, and machine learning. Most of these new models are not exact representations of biological pro-cesses (which are only partially understood for the most part) but rather are new models developed by computer scientists inspired by the knowl-edge gained from the study of biological systems. e computational per-spective that guided the discussion in this book provided insights about basic computer science ideas, including computational universality, the fundamental inability of distinguishing between programs and data, ways to build parallel and distributed systems, and dealing with and utilizing noisy data. An important property of many of the methods we discussed is that they are based on using local data and control (this is especially manifest in cellular automata, neural nets, computational immunology, and swarm intelligence). Obviously, locality is of major importance in building parallel and distributed systems.Another recurring theme was that a system containing a large number of simple components may be much more complex than each of its components. For example, in the “Game of Life” we derived a system that is equivalent to a digital computer using very simple birth and death laws. e existence of a population of dierent solutions and a simple selection process allows for optimizations that cannot be achieved by a single solution. e learning and computing capacity of a neural system is much greater than that of a single neuron. Molecular computation was another example; as we saw, a large set of simple molecules can eectively solve complicated computational problems.An important aspect of these new models is that they rely to a large extent on learning and self-organization rather than on conventional programming. Modern computer systems have to contend with more and more complex computational problems, failures of various kinds, and complex and changing environments; to adapt to input changes and sometimes even to required changes in output; and also to deal with 
296    ◾    Biological Computationhuge amounts of data in an eort to nd patterns and statistical links. ese requirements are only part of the challenges faced by developers of large computer systems, and these challenges make the programming of these systems harder and harder. It is dicult to believe we will be able to avoid in the near future the need for system analysis, soware design, and programming. Hopefully, we may be able to hand some of the tasks faced by the computational system to mechanisms that can deal inde-pendently with them by machine learning and self-organization.Not only do the topics we explored in this book have a major research interest; they are also used for a wide variety of practical technological applications. e models we presented (in particular genetic algorithms and neural nets) allow us to deal with complex optimization and plan-ning problems and with problems that involve very large amounts of data, therefore requiring huge computational resources. Using the tools we pre-sented oen helps in reducing the amount of resources needed to more manageable levels. Some of the problems do not have other feasible solu-tions, whereas using self-organization characteristic of biological models allows us to cope with them, either by using an evolutionary process simi-lar to genetic algorithms or by a learning process of the kind implemented by neural networks. Examples of such problems are handwriting recogni-tion, image recognition, and data mining.In recent years buzzwords such as complex systems, nonlinear sys-tems, self-organization, and emergence are oen used in technological discussions to describe the behavior of dynamical distributed systems that do not employ hierarchical control. It is also common to associate properties such as learning ability, adaptability, and robustness with such systems. Oen it is unclear what the exact meaning of these properties is and how to discuss them formally. We have presented in this book spe-cic examples of systems with these properties in an eort to make them clearer and more tangible. We attempted to show how such properties manifest themselves and how they can be analyzed and made useful. We avoided theoretical denitions of these terms, and we tried to steer clear of vague generalizations. Computer scientists have dealt with the dierent aspects of these topics in a formal mathematical manner, and we provide suggestions for relevant further reading at the end of this chapter. In this book we preferred to focus on the diversity of biological examples while emphasizing their common properties on one hand and the richness of each biological example on the other hand.
The Never-Ending Story    ◾    297Solving technological problems using the ideas we presented in this book oen requires a combination of dierent methods and the use of the new models in conjunction with standard methods. For example, we can use genetic algorithms to discover a neural net with a useful topology allowing it to learn a training set eciently and to achieve a required behavior and good generalization. Another example of a combination of several models is the simulation of a population of neural nets embedded on a grid that pass infor-mation to each other, similar to the implementation of a cellular automaton. e set of possible combinations is obviously innite. Just as solving a new problem using standard algorithms necessitates using existing algorithms and adapting them to the new problem, the same is true when using the new methods and models.When using the ideas presented in this book, do not hesitate to make changes to the solutions we presented. Oen trial and error is the way to nd successful new solutions. Sometimes a solution is possible only aer preprocessing the data so it is better adapted for a particular computational model (we saw examples when discussing neural networks). Technological applications oen require some changes to ne-tune the system. Do not neglect the exciting possibility of observing the world, be it the physical, chemical, biological, or human aspects of the world, borrowing ideas and turning them into computational models. ere is great opportunity to develop new ideas and new applications of existing ideas!6.6  RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ADDITIONAL READINGWe recommend the following books, which deal with the topics we dis-cussed in this book. ey may be used to deepen the understanding of topics we discussed, to nd more examples, and to become familiar with other computational models inspired by biology.6.6.1  Biological Introductione following are some textbook suggestions for readers who are unfamil-iar with basic biology or who want a deeper biological introduction than provided in Chapter 1. Many other ne textbooks are available.Solomon, E., L. Berg, and D. Martin. 2007. Biology, 8th ed. Florence, KY: omson Brooks/Cole.Campbell, N. and J. Reece. 2008. Biology, 8th ed. Pearson Education.Starr, C., R. Taggart, and C. Evers. 2008. Biology: e Unity and Diversity of Life, 12th ed. Florence, KY: omson Brooks/Cole.
298    ◾    Biological Computation6.6.2  Personal PerspectivesCrick, F. 1988. What Mad Pursuit: A Personal View of Scientific Discovery. Jackson, TN: Basic Books.Watson, J.D. 1968. e Double Helix: A Personal Account of the Discovery of the Structure of DNA. New York: Atheneum. e autobiographical accounts of the co-discoverers of the structure of the DNA molecule provide enjoyable background to some of the topics discussed in Chapter 1. Francis Crick was also involved in the eorts to decipher the genetic code, and his book provides a personal account of this research as well.Hofstadter,D.R.1979.Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid.Jackson,TN:BasicBooks. A personal book about the role of self-reference in explaining life and cog-nition. Paradoxes, music, logic, and computation are some of the themes woven together in this unique book. e book won a Pulitzer prize and enjoys what might be called a cult following.6.6.3  Modeling Biological Systemse following books present various approaches to mathematical model-ing of biological systems.ompson, D.W. 1992. On Growth and Form. Mineola, NY: Dover. A famous and inspiring exploration of the living world, focusing on the role played by physical forces in determining the shapes of animals, this book is a treasure trove of magnicent examples of biology viewed mathematically. Originally published in 1917.Mandelbrot, B.B. 1982. e Fractal Geometry of Nature. New York: W.H. Freeman. A detailed analysis of a large number of examples from the living and nonliv-ing world, by the man who invented fractal geometry.Murray, J.D. 2002. Mathematical Biology: I. An Introduction, 3rd ed. Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag. is book presents the classical approach of mathematical modeling of bio-logical phenomena using dierential equations. Nowak, M.A. 2006. Evolutionary Dynamics: Exploring the Equations of Life. Boston: Harvard University Press. A contemporary perspective on the application of mathematical techniques to a variety of biological questions.Prusinkiewicz, P. and A. Lindenmayer. 1990. e Algorithmic Beauty of Plants. New York: Springer-Verlag. Available at: http://algorithmicbotany.org/papers/#abop. e book shows how the L-systems formalism can be used to model the growth patterns of plants.


===== [69/72] chapter-69.html =====

The Never-Ending Story    ◾    2996.6.4  Biological ComputationWhile many books have been written on the various topics we discuss, not too many integrative books tackle the emerging eld of biological compu-tation. e following books, which vary a lot in their technical level and scope, survey the entire eld.Flake, G.W. 1998. e Computational Beauty of Nature: Computer Explorations of Fractals, Chaos, Complex Systems, and Adaptation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. (See also: http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/FLAOH/cbnhtml/.) A delightful book emphasizing the aesthetic aspects of natural phenomena of self-organizing systems.Sipper, M. 2002. Machine Nature: e Coming Age of Bio-Inspired Computing. Columbus, OH: McGraw-Hill. A well-written book describing in a nontechnical way many aspects of bio-logical computation.De Castro, L.N. 2006. Fundamentals of Natural Computing: Basic Concepts, Algorithms, and Applications. Boca Raton, FL: Chapman & Hall/CRC Press. A comprehensive book covering many aspects of biological computation as well as other natural computational models such as quantum computation. e book can be used as reference book for many of these topics.Floreano, D. and C. Mattiussi. 2008. Bio-Inspired Articial Intelligence. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. A recent book covering in depth a wide range of topics related to bioinspired computing. e book is written with an engineering orientation and covers many biological systems.6.6.5  Cellular AutomataSchi, J.L. 2008. Cellular Automata: A Discrete View of the World. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. A readable introduction to cellular automata and their applications.Wolfram, S. 2002. A New Kind of Science. Champaign, IL: Wolfram Media. A very ambitious book trying to demonstrate in detail (the book contains 1197 pages) that the entire universe around us (e.g., biological, physical, and computational phenomena) could be and should be considered as cellular automata. While the approach of the author is a matter of heated discussion, the book is thought-provoking and contains many interesting examples.Ilachinski, A. 2001. Cellular Automata: A Discrete Universe. Hackensack, NJ: World Scientic Publishing. A detailed (approximately 800-page) and technical exposition of cellular automata. Includes detailed discussions of various theoretical techniques for studying cellular automata behavior. e proof of the universality of Life is presented in detail. Among the topics covered are probabilistic CA, the rela-tionship between CA and physics models, and a comparison between CA and neural networks.
300    ◾    Biological Computation6.6.6  Evolutionary ComputationHolland, J.H. 1975. Adaptation in Natural and Articial Systems: An Introductory Analysis with Applications to Biology, Control, and Articial Intelligence. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992. Written by the father of genetic algorithms, this book is short but deep and complex and presents a wide and rich perspective on the subject.Goldberg, D.E. 1989. Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine Learning. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Professional. A detailed and clear introduction, including code samples.Koza, J.R. 1992. Genetic Programming: On the Programming of Computers by Means of Natural Selection. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. e classic book about genetic programming (not genetic algorithms). Describes how programs can be evolved to solve various problems.Mitchell, M. 1998. An Introduction to Genetic Algorithms. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. A short and readable exposition of the research on genetic algorithms.6.6.7  Neural Networksere are many dozens of books and Internet sites dealing with all types of neural nets. Two “classic” and recommended texts areHertz, J.A., A.S. Krogh, and R.G. Palmer. 1991. Introduction to the eory of Neural Computation. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. (See also http://www.phy.duke.edu/~palmer/HKP/.) Comprehensive and detailed book with a mathematical focus. e book emphasizes the connection between neural nets and mathematical models derived from physics.Haykin, S. 2008. Neural Networks and Learning Machines, 3rd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. Covers many topics, written from an engineering/applicative perspective.6.6.8  Molecular ComputationNot many books deal with this topic, and most of the information can be found in research papers, which are published at a fast rate. e following is one of the few introductory texts and presents varied models:Calude, C. and G. Paun. 2000. Computing with Cells and Atoms: An Introduction to Quantum, DNA and Membrane Computing. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.6.6.9  Swarm IntelligenceDorigo, M. and T. Stützle. 2004. Ant Colony Optimization. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
The Never-Ending Story    ◾    301 e book discusses ant colony optimization (ACO) algorithms and includes chapters dedicated to ACO algorithms for the traveling salesman problem, ACO for NP-hard problems, and ACO for data network routing. Each chap-ter ends with a short section enumerating the main points raised in the chap-ter. Pseudo-code and exercises are provided.Bonabeau, E., M. Dorigo, and G. eraulaz. 1999. Swarm Intelligence: From Natural to Articial System. New York: Oxford University Press. e book presents techniques for building articial systems derived from the analysis of social insect behavior. Each chapter focuses on a specic biologi-cal example, which is described, modeled, and from which an algorithm is then derived. Pseudo-code for each of the algorithms is provided.Kennedy, J., R.C. Eberhart with Y. Shi. 2001. Swarm Intelligence. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann. A readable and thorough discussion of swarm and collective intelligence, as well as related areas. Includes detailed discussions of applications and philo-sophical and theoretical implications.6.6.10  Systems BiologyAlon, U. 2006. An Introduction to Systems Biology: Design Principles of Biological Circuits. Boca Raton, FL: Chapman & Hall/CRC Press. A recent book by one of the pioneers of the eld. e book concentrates on several well-known biological examples and demonstrates how mathemati-cal treatment can be used to gain insight into the way biological systems work.6.6.11  BioinformaticsIn the last few years many books dealing with bioinformatics from every possible aspect were published.Mount, D.W. 2004. Bioinformatics: Sequence and Genome Analysis, 2d ed. Cold Spring Harbor, NJ: Cold Spring Harbor Press. is frequently used book goes beyond listing bioinformatic tools and data-bases and tries to explain, oen in detail, the computational and biological background for the main tools developed in the eld. e book is used as a textbook in many bioinformatics courses but is also suitable for self-study.Lesk, A. 2002. Introduction to Bioinformatics. New York: Oxford University Press. Another comprehensive book by one of the founders of the eld. e book gives special emphasis to the structural aspects of biological molecules.6.7  FURTHER READINGBonabeau, Eric, Marco Dorigo, and Guy eraulaz. 1999. Swarm Intelligence: From Natural to Articial System. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Bonabeau, Eric, Marco Dorigo, and Guy eraulaz. 2000. Inspiration for optimi-zation from social insect behaviour. Nature 406, no. 6791, 39–42.
302    ◾    Biological ComputationClune, Je, Charles Ofria, and Robert Pennock. 2007. Investigating the emergence of phenotypic plasticity in evolving digital organisms. In F. Almeida e Costa, L. Rocha, E. Costa, I. Harvey, and A. Coutinho (Eds.), Advances in Articial Life, 74–83. New York: Springer.Fisher, Jasmin and omas A. Henzinger. 2007. Executable cell biology. Nature Biotechnology 25, no. 11, 1239–1249.Giaever, Guri, Angela M. Chu, Li Ni, Carla Connelly, Linda Riles, Steeve Veronneau, et al. 2002. Functional proling of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae genome. Nature 418, no. 6896, 387–391.Hofmeyr, Steven A. and Stephanie A. Forrest. 2000. Architecture for an Articial Immune System. Evolutionary Computation 8, no. 4, 443–473.Kafri, Ran, Arren Bar-Even, and Yitzhak Pilpel. 2005. Transcription conrol repro-gramming in genetic backup circuits. Nat. Genet. 37, no. 3 (March), 295–299. Kennedy, James, Russell C. Eberhart, with Yuhui Shi. 2001. Swarm Intelligence. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann.Kitano, Hiroaki. 2002. Computational systems biology. Nature 420, no. 6912, 206–210.Lenski, Richard E., Charles Ofria, Robert T. Pennock, and Christoph Adami. 2003. e evolutionary origin of complex features. Nature 423, no. 6936, 139–144.Ray, omas S. 1992. Evolution, ecology and optimization of digital organisms. Santa Fe Institute working paper 92-08-042. Available at: http://life.ou.edu/pubs/tierra/.Setty, Yaki, Irun R. Cohen, Yuval Dor, and David Harel. 2008. Four-dimensional realistic modeling of pancreatic organogenesis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105, no. 51, 20374–20379.Simon, Herbert A. 1962. e Architecture of Complexity. In Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 106, 467–482.Simon, Herbert A. 2002. Near decomposability and the speed of evolution. Industrial and Corporate Change 11, 587–599.Sims, Karl. 1994. Evolving virtual creatures. In Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques, 15–22. ACM.Tong, A. H., Lesage, G., Bader, G. D., Ding, H., Xu, H., Xin, X., Young, J., Berriz, G. F., Brost, R. L., Chang, M. et al. 2004. Global mapping of the yeast genetic interaction network. Science 303, no. 5659, 808–813.6.8  EXERCISES6.8.1  Swarm Intelligence 1. Is the pheromones mechanism based on positive or negative feedback? 2. To determine how ants discover paths to a food source, a device similar to the one in Figure6.6 was created. e ants walk along the circular corridor. e bottom vertical line denes the ants’ starting point and the top vertical line the location of the food source. e ants start out as depicted on the le. Initially, they distribute them-selves uniformly between the short and long paths as can be seen in 
The Never-Ending Story    ◾    303the middle. Aer a while they concentrate on the short path as seen on the right. Try to explain the development of this organization.Food Food FoodFIGURE 6.6 3. How will increasing the number of ants in the ants colony optimiza-tion aect the results of the algorithm? 4. Raising the rate of evaporation of pheromones (i.e., the decrease in the amount of pheromones at every iteration) can help avoid a too rapid convergence into a suboptimal region of the search space and can also help avoid premature convergence. Why? 5. Developers who built a PSO-based system discovered that if ini-tially ω is large (close to 1) and then is decreased aer a few itera-tions to ω ≈ 0.5, the system performs better. Try to explain this observation. 6. Why is rand() used in the PSO rate update formula? 7. In a well-known variation of PSO, the particles are not aected by all the other particles in the population but only by a subset of “neigh-bors” (the set of neighbors for each particle is dened ahead of time). a. What changes to the PSO algorithm we presented have to be made to implement this mechanism? b. Discuss possible advantages of this mechanism compared with the standard PSO algorithm.6.8.2  Artiﬁcial Immune Systems 8. Immunological detectors that react to the organism are dangerous, but on the other hand detectors that do not react at all are useless. How would you balance between these two requirements when using a negative selection algorithm?


===== [70/72] chapter-70.html =====

304    ◾    Biological Computation 9. How will increasing the activation threshold τ and the training period impact the frequency of false alarms? 10. Why is it important for the match counter to decay over time? 11. Ideally, the immune system should not react at all in any situation that does not pose a real risk. If that is impossible, one would want the severity of the reaction to be proportional to the probability that the situation poses a real risk. Suggest ways to achieve this in an arti-cial immune system. 12. Discuss the possible disadvantages of the co-stimulation method used by LISYS. 13. LISYS also uses another mechanism (not described in the text) that allows each computer on the network to have a dierent sensitivity level ωi (i = 1,2,..,n) to immunological events. e local activation threshold for the detectors in computer i is dened to be τ – ωi (the higher the local sensitivity, the lower the required activation thresh-old). Whenever a detector’s counter changes from 0 to 1, the relevant ωi increases by 1. Just like the other counters, ωi decays with time. What role does the local sensitivity mechanism play? How does it contribute to the behavior of the system? 14. e self set may change over time (e.g., the normal communication patterns in the network may change over time). How can an immune system of the kind described deal with this? A good solution will minimize both the number of false positives and false negatives. 15. Another mechanism used by the immune system and not discussed so far is rapid “evolution” of detectors, based on their similarity to a suspicious element. e only detectors that partake in this process identify the suspicious element with high enough condence. ey are quickly cloned, allowing for a high mutation rate. e mutation rate for each detector depends on how well it detected the suspect element—the more closely it matches the intruder, the lower its mutation rate. How can we integrate this mechanism in the detec-tion system, and what are its possible contributions to the system? 16. e immune system naturally has to be robust. Identify the proper-ties of articial immune systems that contribute to their robustness.
The Never-Ending Story    ◾    305 17. We have mentioned that the biological immune system may have reg-ulatory functions. Try to suggest possible regulatory functions for the immune system, and assess their likelihood (keep in mind the obser-vation that the distinction between self and nonself may be the result rather than the reason for the existence of such functions). Suggest observations or experiments to test your hypotheses.6.8.3  Artiﬁcial Life 18. Try to nd a counterexample for each of the properties used to dene life that were mentioned in the text; that is, describe a system that has that property but that is not considered to be alive. 19. Check to see whether the dictionary denition of the word life can serve as the denition of life. 20. Which of the properties we enumerated to dene life presents the most diculties to the proponents of strong ALife? 21. Both Avida and genetic programming (see Chapter 3) deal with evolv-ing computer programs. What are the fundamental dierences between the two approaches? 22. Download Avida’s source code from the Internet, and study the Divide_DoMutations subroutine (which is part of the implementa-tion of Hardware_CPU). is subroutine is executed aer the organ-ism executes the h-divide function. For which types of mutations is this subroutine responsible? 23. In Avida the basic cloning mechanism (i.e., command copy) is imple-mented by the virtual computer, as opposed to biological systems in which the replication mechanisms are part of the organism. Can organisms that are able to correct copying errors exist in Avida? e basic copying mechanism in Avida cannot improve evolutionarily since it is not part of the organism. Suggest a way to overcome this limitation to make Avida more faithful to biological systems. Why do you think the Avida developers preferred not to implement such a mechanism? 24. Which of the two approaches to tness—Avida’s or Sims’s virtual crea-tures simulation—is closer to the meaning of tness in natural selection?
306    ◾    Biological Computation6.8.4  Systems Biology 25. Find more examples of robustness, and determine whether the robustness stems from positive feedback, negative feedback, or some other mechanism. 26. Explain the impact that understanding of control mechanisms may have on applications such as drug design and development. 27. Suggest situations in which the mechanisms giving the organisms their robustness helps disease processes in becoming robust and hard to treat. 28. A heating system controlled by a thermostat operates by compar-ing the room temperature to the target temperature and adjusting the heating level accordingly. e obvious goal is for temperature to reach a steady state. Describe in detail the system’s algorithm. Does the system implement positive or negative feedback?6.8.5  Programming Exercises 29. Implement a solution to the traveling salesman problem using ACO. Test on a variety of graphs. For which graphs does the system fail to nd a good solution? Try to add mechanisms that will improve the behavior of the system in these cases. Try to minimize the number of additional mechanisms, and avoid using global information. 30. An interesting usage of clustering using ants is for plotting graphs. Let G = (V,E) be an undirected graph. e goal is to embed the nodes in the Euclidean plane such that the connections are as clearly drawn as possible. In particular: a. Clustered nodes will be placed close together on the plane. b. e distances inside clusters will be minimal. c. Dierent clusters will be far enough away from each other. Use the clustering algorithm we presented, in which the distance between two nodes is dened to be dv vDv vv vi ji ji j( , )( ( ), ( ))( ) ( )=+ρ ρρ ρ
The Never-Ending Story    ◾    307 where ρ(vi) is the set of neighboring nodes of vi (including vi itself)D is the symmetrical dierence between the sets, and |...| denotes the number of elements in the set. Test this solution on a few graphs (observe how the nodes move as the algorithm progresses). Has the algorithm found presentations that seem visually successful for the graphs you tested? 31. How can one use PSO to discover weights for a multilayered neu-ral net with full connectivity, assuming a training set composed of (input, output) pairs is known? Try to use this method for one of the neural nets described in Chapter 5 (without learning), and analyze the quality of the PSO algorithm’s results for varying parameters. 32. Design an articial immune system that will alert about unusual data in a soware system’s output les. Assume that the soware system runs a complicated computation in batch mode every night (e.g., a payroll). e immune system will be used to inspect the out-put les and will alert if the output diers enough from the norm to indicate a possible error (or deliberate attack) in the system. Note: the goal is to be able to identify suspicious result, not merely corrupt output les. 33. Install Avida, and program a new self-replicating organism. (Use Avida’s documentation for details of the machine language.)6.9  ANSWERS TO SELECTED EXERCISES 2. Initially there are no pheromones, and the ants choose a random path. As the le path is shorter, the ants traversing it will reach the food quicker, and when they look for a path back to the nest they will go back on the same path, following the pheromone trail they laid down. (As the other ants have not reached the food source yet, there is no pheromone trail on it close to the food source.) is choice makes the le path even more attractive, and more ants will choose it in the future. 3. Adding ants allows for better scanning of the graph and therefore may improve the algorithm’s results. On the other hand, too many ants will cause the entire graph to be covered with pheromones, which will obfuscate the paths and will impact the algorithm’s results negatively.
308    ◾    Biological Computation 9. Increasing τ and T (up to reasonable values) lowers the rate of false positives. 17. Inammation is a complex biological process involving the immune system. It was suggested that immune systems have a regulatory role in the inammatory process. 21. e most signicant dierence is that in Avida the organism is responsible for self-replication and that no external selection mecha-nism controls the process. A related dierence is that in genetic pro-gramming one has to dene a tness function a priori to evaluate the dierent solutions, while in Avida the evaluation is based only on the individuals’ self-replication ability, though it is important to note that in Avida one can reward individuals for performing exter-nal tasks. Another dierence is in the representation of individuals: in genetic programming the individuals are usually represented as expression trees to allow an easy crossover between the genotypes of dierent individuals (sexual reproduction). In Avida the individuals are represented as computer programs written in the Avida machine language. 26. Drugs may work by direct interference with control mechanisms; thus, understanding these mechanisms might help in designing treatment strategies. For example, if part of a process is controlled by positive feedback, one may aect the whole process using minimal intervention, such as by using a small amount of medication whose aect will be amplied by the feedback mechanism. Conversely, a process regulated by negative feedback may require large, potentially harmful doses of medication to overcome the negative feedback. In this case, nding drugs that modify the behavior of the negative feedback loop and can be administrated together with the original drug might be a solution. 27. e normal robustness processes of the healthy individual are par-tially responsible to the resistance of cancer cells to interferences in their reproduction and survival processes. An organism employs many negative feedback loops to adapt to changes in its environment. Cancer cells take advantage of these and other cellular mechanisms to resist the attacks the body may launch against them. In addition, anti-cancer drugs may become less eective because of the ability of cancer cells to adjust and become less sensitive to them. A second example


===== [71/72] chapter-71.html =====

The Never-Ending Story    ◾    309involves the lowered ecacy over time of psychiatric drugs, many of which achieve their eects by mimicking the structure of naturally occurring neurotransmitters (e.g., by attaching to the receptors of neurotransmitters and eectively blocking them). e body reacts in a variety of ways, including changes in the number and density of neu-rotransmitters receptors expressed, which cause the brain to readjust to the changing levels of neurotransmitters and to return over time to its activity state prior to the administration of the drug. 30. A relevant discussion and references can be found in Bonabeau et al. (1999). e discussion in this book explains why drawing graphs is a hard problem and why using clustering is not successful for all graphs.


===== [72/72] chapter-72.html =====

“I read this book in one breath—it opens vistas on how the elds of computation and biology can inspire each other. I particularly enjoyed the analogies between immune systems and software that ghts computer viruses.”—Uri Alon, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel, and author of An Introduction to Systems Biology: Design Principles of Biological Circuits“The book by Lamm and Unger methodically covers exciting developments in biological computation, offering for the rst time a broad perspective of this important cutting-edge eld of research.”—Ehud Shapiro, The Harry Weinrebe Professorial Chair of Computer Science and Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel“This is a wonderful treatise on bio-inspired computation, written from a computer science perspective. The authors are extremely knowledgeable about their subject, and the material they cover is both broad and deep. The book should benet anyone interested in the connection between computer science and biology, a connection that is poised to become dramatically central to the science of the 21st century.”—David Harel, The William Sussman Professorial Chair, Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, IsraelA unied overview of computer science ideas inspired by biology, Biological Computation presents the most fundamental and signicant concepts in this area. In the book, readers discover that bacteria communicate, that DNA can be used for performing computations, how evolution solves optimization problems, that the way ants organize their nests can be applied to solve clustering problems, and what the human immune system can teach us about protecting computer networks. The text focuses on cellular automata, evolutionary computation, neural networks, and molecular computation. Each chapter explores the biological background, describes the computational techniques, gives examples of applications, discusses possible variants of the techniques, and includes exercises and solutions.C7959Biological ComputationLamm • UngerComputational Biology/BioinformaticsC7959_Cover.indd 1 12/14/10 2:09 PM