BOOK 9781439836613 | chapters=99 ok=99 empty=0 total_chars=712851



===== [1/99] chapter-01.html =====

Using the VitalSource® ebookAccess to the VitalBookTM ebook accompanying this book is via VitalSource® Bookshelf – an ebook reader which allows you to make and share notes and highlights on your ebooks and search across all of the ebooks that you hold on your VitalSource Bookshelf. You can access the ebook online or ofine on your smartphone, tablet or PC/Mac and your notes and highlights will automatically stay in sync no matter where you make them.1. Create a VitalSource Bookshelf account at https://online.vitalsource.com/user/new or log into your existing account if you already have one.2. Redeem the code provided in the panel below to get online access to the ebook. Log in to Bookshelf and click the Account menu at the top right of the screen. Select Redeem and enter the redemption code shown on the scratch-off panel below in the Code To Redeem box. Press Redeem. Once the code has been redeemed your ebook will download and appear in your library.DOWNLOAD AND READ OFFLINE To use your ebook ofine, download BookShelf to your PC, Mac, iOS device, Android device or Kindle Fire, and log in to your Bookshelf account to access your ebook:On your PC/MacGo to http://bookshelf.vitalsource.com/ and follow the instructions to download the free VitalSource Bookshelf app to your PC or Mac and log into your Bookshelf account.On your iPhone/iPod Touch/iPad Download the free VitalSource Bookshelf App available via the iTunes App Store and log into your Bookshelf account. You can nd more information at https://support.vitalsource.com/hc/en-us/categories/200134217-Bookshelf-for-iOSOn your Android™ smartphone or tabletDownload the free VitalSource Bookshelf App available via Google Play and log into your Bookshelf account. You can nd more information at https://support.vitalsource.com/hc/en-us/categories/200139976-Bookshelf-for-Android-and-Kindle-FireOn your Kindle FireDownload the free VitalSource Bookshelf App available from Amazon and log into your Bookshelf account. You can nd more information at https://support.vitalsource.com/hc/en-us/categories/200139976-Bookshelf-for-Android-and-Kindle-FireN.B. The code in the scratch-off panel can only be used once. When you have created a Bookshelf account and redeemed the code you will be able to access the ebook online or ofine on your smartphone, tablet or PC/Mac.SUPPORTIf you have any questions about downloading Bookshelf, creating your account, or accessing and using your ebook edition, please visit http://support.vitalsource.com/Accessing the E-book edition of COMPUTATIONAL AND VISUALIZATION TECHNIQUES FOR STRUCTURAL BIOINFORMATICS USING CHIMERA
Computational and Visualization Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics Using Chimera
CHAPMAN & HALL/CRC Mathematical and Computational Biology SeriesAims and scope: This series aims to capture new developments and summarize what is known over the entire spectrum of mathematical and computational biology and medicine. It seeks to encourage the integration of mathematical, statistical, and computational methods into biology by publishing a broad range of textbooks, reference works, and handbooks. The titles included in the series are meant to appeal to students, researchers, and professionals in the mathematical, statistical and computational sciences, fundamental biology and bioengineering, as well as interdisciplinary researchers involved in the eld. The inclusion of concrete examples and applications, and programming techniques and examples, is highly encouraged.Series EditorsN. F. BrittonDepartment of Mathematical SciencesUniversity of BathXihong LinDepartment of BiostatisticsHarvard UniversityHershel M. SaferSchool of Computer ScienceTel Aviv UniversityMaria Victoria SchneiderEuropean Bioinformatics InstituteMona SinghDepartment of Computer SciencePrinceton UniversityAnna TramontanoDepartment of PhysicsUniversity of Rome La SapienzaProposals for the series should be submitted to one of the series editors above or directly to:CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group3 Park Square, Milton ParkAbingdon, Oxfordshire OX14 4RNUK
Published TitlesAn Introduction to Systems Biology: Design Principles of Biological Circuits Uri AlonGlycome Informatics: Methods and Applications Kiyoko F. Aoki-KinoshitaComputational Systems Biology of Cancer Emmanuel Barillot, Laurence Calzone, Philippe Hupé, Jean-Philippe Vert, and Andrei Zinovyev Python for Bioinformatics Sebastian BassiQuantitative Biology: From Molecular to Cellular SystemsSebastian BassiMethods in Medical Informatics: Fundamentals of Healthcare Programming in Perl, Python, and Ruby Jules J. BermanComputational Biology: A Statistical Mechanics Perspective Ralf BlosseyGame-Theoretical Models in Biology Mark Broom and Jan Rychtáˇr Computational and Visualization Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics Using Chimera Forbes J. BurkowskiStructural Bioinformatics: An Algorithmic Approach Forbes J. BurkowskiSpatial Ecology Stephen Cantrell, Chris Cosner, and Shigui RuanCell Mechanics: From Single Scale-Based Models to Multiscale Modeling Arnaud Chauvière, Luigi Preziosi, and Claude VerdierBayesian Phylogenetics: Methods, Algorithms, and Applications Ming-Hui Chen, Lynn Kuo, and Paul O. LewisStatistical Methods for QTL Mapping Zehua ChenNormal Mode Analysis: Theory and Applications to Biological and Chemical Systems Qiang Cui and Ivet BaharKinetic Modelling in Systems Biology Oleg Demin and Igor GoryaninData Analysis Tools for DNA Microarrays Sorin DraghiciStatistics and Data Analysis for Microarrays Using R and Bioconductor, Second Edition Sorin Dr˘aghiciComputational Neuroscience: A Comprehensive Approach Jianfeng FengBiological Sequence Analysis Using the SeqAn C++ Library Andreas Gogol-Döring and Knut ReinertGene Expression Studies Using Affymetrix Microarrays Hinrich Göhlmann and Willem TalloenHandbook of Hidden Markov Models in Bioinformatics Martin GolleryMeta-analysis and Combining Information in Genetics and Genomics Rudy Guerra and Darlene R. GoldsteinDifferential Equations and Mathematical Biology, Second Edition D.S. Jones, M.J. Plank, and B.D. SleemanKnowledge Discovery in Proteomics Igor Jurisica and Dennis WigleIntroduction to Proteins: Structure, Function, and Motion Amit Kessel and Nir Ben-TalBiological Computation Ehud Lamm and Ron UngerOptimal Control Applied to Biological Models Suzanne Lenhart and John T. Workman Clustering in Bioinformatics and Drug Discovery John D. MacCuish and Norah E. MacCuish


===== [2/99] chapter-02.html =====

Spatiotemporal Patterns in Ecology and Epidemiology: Theory, Models, and Simulation Horst Malchow, Sergei V. Petrovskii, and Ezio VenturinoStochastic Dynamics for Systems Biology Christian Mazza and Michel BenaïmEngineering Genetic Circuits Chris J. MyersPattern Discovery in Bioinformatics: Theory & Algorithms Laxmi ParidaExactly Solvable Models of Biological Invasion Sergei V. Petrovskii and Bai-Lian LiComputational Hydrodynamics of Capsules and Biological Cells C. PozrikidisModeling and Simulation of Capsules and Biological Cells C. PozrikidisCancer Modelling and Simulation Luigi PreziosiIntroduction to Bio-Ontologies Peter N. Robinson and Sebastian BauerDynamics of Biological Systems Michael SmallGenome Annotation Jung Soh, Paul M.K. Gordon, and Christoph W. SensenNiche Modeling: Predictions from Statistical Distributions David StockwellAlgorithms in Bioinformatics: A Practical Introduction Wing-Kin SungIntroduction to Bioinformatics Anna TramontanoThe Ten Most Wanted Solutions in Protein Bioinformatics Anna TramontanoCombinatorial Pattern Matching Algorithms in Computational Biology Using Perl and R Gabriel Valiente Managing Your Biological Data with Python Allegra Via, Kristian Rother, and Anna TramontanoCancer Systems Biology Edwin WangStochastic Modelling for Systems Biology, Second Edition Darren J. WilkinsonBioinformatics: A Practical Approach Shui Qing YeIntroduction to Computational Proteomics Golan YonaPublished Titles (continued)
Computational and Visualization Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics Using ChimeraForbes J. BurkowskiUniversity of WaterlooOntario, Canada
CRC PressTaylor & Francis Group6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742© 2015 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLCCRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa businessNo claim to original U.S. Government worksVersion Date: 20140519International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4398-3662-0 (eBook - PDF)This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, includ-ing photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site athttp://www.taylorandfrancis.comand the CRC Press Web site athttp://www.crcpress.com


===== [3/99] chapter-03.html =====

To my wife Karen
This page intentionally left blankThis page intentionally left blank


===== [4/99] chapter-04.html =====

ixContentsPreface, xviiAcknowledgments, xxiiiAuthor, xxvChapter 1 ■ Introduction: Macromolecules and Chimera 11.1 MOTIVATION 11.2 WHY CHIMERA? 21.3 GETTING STARTED WITH CHIMERA 41.4 OVERVIEW OF PROTEIN STRUCTURE 41.4.1 Amino Acids and Primary Sequence 51.4.2 Secondary Structure 101.4.2.1 Alpha Helices 101.4.2.2 Beta Strands 121.4.2.3 Loops 161.4.3 Tertiary Structure 171.4.3.1 What Is Tertiary Structure? 171.4.3.2 Tertiary Structure of Myoglobin 181.4.3.3 Tertiary Structure beyond the Binding Pocket 211.4.4 Quaternary Structure 271.4.5 Protein Functionality 291.4.6 Protein Domains 311.5 EXERCISES 33REFERENCES 35
x ◾ ContentsChapter 2 ■ Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera 392.1 MOTIVATION 392.2 PYTHON SKILLS 402.3 PYTHON SCRIPTING 412.3.1 Script 2.1: Using Raw Input to Get a PDB ID 442.4 CHIMERA OBJECT HIERARCHY 442.5 ATTRIBUTES FOR MOLECULE OBJECTS 482.6 ATTRIBUTES FOR SEQUENCE OBJECTS 492.6.1 Referencing a Sequence Object 492.6.2 Identication of a Sequence 502.6.3 Sequence Entries 502.6.4 Getting Residue Objects from a Sequence 512.6.5 Residue Maps for Sequences 522.7 ATTRIBUTES FOR RESIDUE OBJECTS 532.7.1 Referencing a Residue Object 532.7.2 Identication and Characterization of Residues 542.7.3 Location of a Residue 552.7.4 Deriving Substructure 562.7.5 Other Useful Attributes 572.8 ATTRIBUTES FOR ATOM OBJECTS 582.8.1 Referencing Atom Objects 582.8.2 Identication of Atoms and Atom Properties 592.8.3 Working with Atom Coordinates 602.8.4 Atom Attributes Related to Chemical Structure 602.8.5 Atoms and Bonds 612.8.6 Atom Attributes Related to the Display 622.9 ATTRIBUTES FOR BOND OBJECTS 622.9.1 Referencing Bond Objects 622.9.2 Bond Attributes 63
Contents ◾ xi2.10 WORKING WITH A BATCH OF FILES 642.10.1 Dealing with Files 642.10.2 Script 2.2: Getting a Batch of Files from the Protein Data Bank 662.10.3 Script 2.3: Getting a Batch of PDB Files by UsingChimera 672.11 HILITER CLASS 672.12 HBONDDICTS CLASS 692.12.1 Using the HBondDicts Class 692.13 EXERCISES 71REFERENCES 86WEBSITES FOR PYTHON 86Chapter 3 ■ Algorithms Dealing with Distance 873.1 MOTIVATION 873.2 CALCULATING INTERATOMIC DISTANCES 873.3 APPLICATIONS 903.4 RAPID DETERMINATION OF ATOM MEMBERSHIPINSHELLS 903.4.1 Implementation Strategy 913.5 CONTACT MAPS FOR PROTEINS 953.5.1 Script for Generating Contact and Distance Maps 973.6 INERTIAL AXES 993.6.1 Motivation 993.6.2 Mathematical Analysis 1003.6.3 Script for Computing the Inertial Axis 1043.7 DEHYDRONS 1083.7.1 Motivation 1083.7.2 Script for Identifying Dehydrons 1103.8 EXERCISES 112REFERENCES 132
xii ◾ ContentsChapter 4 ■ Algorithms Dealing with Angles 1354.1 MOTIVATION 1354.2 BOND ANGLE 1354.2.1 Calculating Bond Angles in a Script 1364.3 DIHEDRAL ANGLES 1374.3.1 Dening Dihedral Angles 1374.3.2 Mathematics for the Computation of a DihedralAngle 1394.3.3 Computation of a Normal 1394.3.4 Calculating the Phi Dihedral Angle 1424.3.5 Sign of the Dihedral Angle 1424.3.6 Calculating the Psi Dihedral Angle 1444.3.7 Calculating Dihedral Angles in a Script 1444.4 RAMACHANDRAN PLOTS 1454.4.1 Scripts for Generating Ramachandran Plots 1494.4.2 Script 4.1: Generating a Ramachandran Plot for a Protein 1504.4.3 Background Densities for Ramachandran Plots 1514.4.4 3D Ramachandran Plots 1524.5 LEAST SQUARES PLANE 1544.5.1 Motivation 1544.5.2 Least Squares Plane: Mathematical Analysis 1544.5.3 A Script for Computing the Least Squares Plane 1594.6 EXERCISES 165REFERENCES 179Chapter 5 ■ Structure Overlap and Alignment 1815.1 MOTIVATION 1815.2 INTRODUCTION 1845.2.1 Specifying the Problem 1845.3 TECHNIQUES FOR STRUCTURAL COMPARISON 1855.4 SCORING SIMILARITIES AND OPTIMIZING SCORES 186
Contents ◾ xiii5.5 SUPERPOSITION ALGORITHMS 1865.5.1 Overview 1865.5.2 Characterizing the Superposition Algorithm 1885.5.3 Formal Problem Description 1895.5.4 Computations to Achieve Maximal Overlap 1905.5.5 Summary 1975.5.6 Measuring Overlap 1985.5.6.1 Calculation of the Root Mean Square Deviation 1985.6 A SIMPLE SCRIPT TO DO STRUCTURAL SUPERIMPOSITION 1995.7 PROTEIN SEQUENCE ALIGNMENT 2025.7.1 Partial matches 2035.7.2 Gaps 2055.7.3 Summary 2065.7.4 Computation 2065.7.4.1 Subproblem Specication 2075.7.4.2 Scoring Alignments 2075.7.4.3 Suitability of the Subproblem 2085.7.4.4 A Global Alignment Example 2115.8 VARIATIONS IN THE GLOBAL ALIGNMENT ALGORITHM 2125.9 PERCENT IDENTITY COMPARISON 2135.10 LOCAL ALIGNMENT 2145.11 A SCRIPT TO DO SEQUENCE ALIGNMENT AND THEN STRUCTURAL OVERLAP 2165.12 DEALING WITH WEAKER SEQUENCE SIMILARITY 2185.12.1 Structural Alignment by Overlapping Pairs of Secondary Structure Elements 2205.12.2 A Script for Structural Alignment by OverlappingSecondary Structure Elements 2245.13 EXERCISES 226REFERENCES 242


===== [5/99] chapter-05.html =====

xiv ◾ ContentsChapter 6 ■ Potential Energy Functions 2456.1 MOTIVATION 2456.1.1 Empirical Observations 2466.1.2 Mathematical Modeling 2466.1.2.1 Energy Terms for Bonded Atoms 2476.1.2.2 Energy Terms for Nonbonded Atoms 2496.1.2.3 Total Potential Energy 2506.1.3 Computational Issues 2516.2 SOME SIMPLE SCRIPTS TO DO ENERGY CALCULATIONS 2546.2.1 Linear Repulsive Energy Terms 2546.2.2 An Energy Function Based on the Lennard–Jones Formula 2556.2.3 Computing Energy Using Amber Parameters in Chimera 2566.3 EXERCISES 2586.3.1 Comparing Lennard–Jones and Piecewise Linear Energy Functions 258REFERENCES 260Chapter 7 ■ Rotamers and Side‑Chain Conformation 2637.1 MOTIVATION 2637.2 SIDE‑CHAIN PACKING: COMPUTATIONAL ISSUES 2647.3 ROTAMERICITY 2657.4 ACCESSING ROTAMERS USING A PYTHON SCRIPT 2677.5 ROTAMERS AND DIHEDRAL ANGLES 2717.6 A SINGLE SIDE CHAIN AND ENERGY CONSIDERATIONS 2717.7 SIDE‑CHAIN PACKING AND DEAD‑END ELIMINATION 2757.7.1 Goldstein’s DEE: Basic Strategy 2767.7.2 Goldstein’s DEE: A More Ecient Strategy 2787.7.3 Side-Chain Packing 278
Contents ◾ xv7.8 EXERCISES 2787.8.1 Dead-End Elimination 278REFERENCES 279Chapter 8 ■ Residue Networks 2818.1 MOTIVATION 2818.2 THREE‑DIMENSIONAL (3D) VISUALIZATION OF RESIDUE NETWORKS 2828.3 ALLOSTERY AND CONTACT REARRANGEMENT NETWORKS 2838.4 EXERCISES 2858.4.1 Spheres Representing Residues 2858.4.2 Spheres and Spindles for Residue Networks 2868.4.3 Spheres and Spindles for Residue Networks: Graphical User Interface (GUI) Implementation 2898.4.4 Graphs for Residue Networks: GUI Implementation 2908.4.5 Contact Rearrangement Networks: EvaluatingRF(i, j) 2908.4.6 Displaying the Residue Network for RearrangedContacts 292REFERENCES 295APPENDIX A: SIMPLE DIALOGS, 297APPENDIX B: SCENOGRAPHICS, 317APPENDIX C: THE GRAPH CLASS, 345APPENDIX D: 2D AND 3D PLOTS, 365APPENDIX E: DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING, 395INDEX, 409
This page intentionally left blankThis page intentionally left blank


===== [6/99] chapter-06.html =====

xviiPrefaceGOALS OF THIS BOOKWhile attending a workshop or conference on structural bioinformat-ics, you may overhear tidbits of conversations that are interspersed with phrases such as phosphofructokinase regulation, singular value decompo-sition, or class instantiation. e usage of such terminology, the afore-mentioned terms arising from biochemistry, mathematics, and computer science, respectively, would not be surprising in this setting because these three areas of investigation have become the core of expertise required for the study of structural bioinformatics:• Biochemistry provides realistic knowledge about protein structure and functionality.• Mathematics helps us to build models that represent protein struc-ture and functionality.• Computation allows us to apply the mathematical models to detect patterns and make predictions about biological systems. As well, computation is necessary for the creation of visual displays that may be used to demonstrate various aspects of protein structure and function.is book addresses all three areas with an emphasis on computational techniques:• Topics in the book deal primarily with protein structure, and there are many exercises that are grounded in biological problems at the molecular level.
xviii ◾ Preface• e book encourages mathematical analysis because it provides a rm foundation for subsequent computations.• Computational techniques are covered by providing and analyzing several Python scripts that execute within the Chimera environ-ment. is supplemental material (over 140 scripts) is available from the book’s website (http://structuralbioinformatics.com), and it pro-vides solutions for the various exercises at the end of the chapters. Due attention has been given to the modularity of the scripts with the goal of providing the reader with a toolkit of Python classes that can be directly used in the reader’s own applications or used as start-ing scripts that provide base functionality via class inheritance.What are the typical computations that would be done with a script? A script working with Chimera can easily use data downloaded from the Protein Data Bank (PDB). For example, if your algorithm requires protein atomic coordinates, a script can access a PDB le relying on Chimera to parse the content and make these coordinates available as input to the algorithm. If the algorithm is modifying or generating atom coordinates, then Chimera can be used to provide a visualization of the altered mol-ecule. Moreover, Python scripts can be designed to add various graphical constructs that help to describe various aspects of protein structure and function. Visual representation of an abstraction (e.g., a plane that has some relevance to a biological construct) helps us to discover congura-tions that are made clearer with the appropriate visualization. In addition to providing visual output, changing the display can be indispensable dur-ing debugging and for nal validation of the script that implements the algorithm.SCRIPTING WITH CHIMERAis book will help any reader who wishes to use the scripting capabilities of Chimera. ere are over 60 exercises that involve the development of Python scripts. Most of these scripts are available as supplemental mate-rial (downloadable from http://structuralbioinformatics.com). ere are several approaches to the use of these scripts:• To gain experience with Python scripting in the Chimera environ-ment, the reader may choose to work through an exercise and then compare this answer with the provided script. is learning by doing 
Preface ◾ xixhelps to build condence, leading to the solution of more challeng-ing problems. Some of the exercises duplicate the calculations done in research papers. Doing such an exercise is not meant to verify or double-check the result but rather to gain experience in the solving of such problems so that the reader can tackle similar problems in the future.• In many cases, the exercises demonstrate the various applications of linear algebra. For example, eigenvectors and eigenvalues are not just theoretical mathematical abstractions, but they can be used to build visual objects that are then displayed in the Chimera window. Last but not least, scripting is fun to do. ere is a compelling sense of accomplishment when the execution of a script runs a graphical user interface (GUI) or produces an immediate visual feedback in the Chimera window.• e reader may use the script as a starting point for the development of a similar application. ere are many situations, especially dur-ing GUI development, when a working script can show the reader how some code snippet handles a problem that is dicult because it involves some exasperating implementation issue that would other-wise be resolved only aer extensive searches on the Internet.• e reader may use classes from the StructBio toolkit in the devel-opment of an application. In addition, the ability to display some structural entity related to the algorithm can help in the debugging of a complex program that involves several dicult and complicated steps. I have spent several months in the design and development of these classes with the hope that they would be useful for the future scripting eorts of both myself and the readers of this book. ese classes provide several tools that may be used for computations such as structure overlap, data plotting, scenographics, and display of resi-due networks.INTENDED AUDIENCEis book is mainly intended for people who wish to build Python scripts to extend the capabilities of Chimera. It can also be used by students, typi-cally third- or fourth-year undergraduates, who have completed intro-ductory courses in bioinformatics and wish to go further in the study of structural biology. Prerequisites include introductory linear algebra, 
xx ◾ Prefaceelementary calculus, bioinformatics (“biology 101,” sequence analysis, etc.), computer programming, and an introduction to algorithms. We assume that the reader can do elementary Python programming. An introduction to Python is not included in this book because there are sev-eral excellent sources for such information (see the references at the end of Chapter 2).BOOK CONTENTChapter 1 presents some introductory material on protein structure, and subsequent chapters cover various selected algorithms and topics that are typically seen in structural bioinformatics. e algorithms are mainly used as a source of exercises that demonstrate scripting techniques in Chimera. As such, the chosen algorithms are not meant to provide a com-prehensive coverage of the algorithms used in structural bioinformatics.Chapter 1 introduces protein structure. is is essentially a review of the material that may have been covered in the earlier biochemistry courses of a bioinformatics program. e concepts of primary, second-ary, tertiary, and quaternary structures are introduced and explained. e material serves to underscore the most salient aspects of protein structure while providing several gures that illustrate the visualization capabilities of Chimera. Exercises cover the use of Chimera menu invocations to pro-duce various types of displays related to protein structure.Chapter 2 introduces Python scripting for the Chimera environment and rapidly progresses to a description of the Chimera object hierarchy. Various objects and their attributes are covered so that the program-mer can start writing scripts dealing with molecular structure including hydrogen bonds. Some elementary le I/O is discussed so that scripts can deal with multiple PDB les. A nal exercise shows how polygonal sur-faces can be added to a display (an introduction to scenographics).Chapter 3 covers scripts that rely on the calculation of distances (most oen, interatomic distances). Exercises deal with distance shells, contact maps, inertial axes, and dehydrons. e Solids and Ellipsoid classes are introduced to provide more scenographics. Generation of contact maps introduces the reader to scripts that can display plots.Chapter 4 deals with scripts that rely on the calculation of angles (usu-ally dihedral angles). e chapter provides more material for plotting, using Ramachandran plots as an example. Lagrange optimization (intro-duced in Chapter 3 for the generation of inertial axes) is applied again 
Preface ◾ xxifor the creation and display of a least-squares plane. More examples are presented for GUI implementations using Tkinter classes.Chapter 5 covers the supporting theory and implementation of scripts to do structure overlap. is will duplicate the current functionality of Chimera, but the idea is to learn the mathematics behind that functional-ity. is has intrinsic value and, more signicantly, it gives the reader the skills to generate an overlap class that can be used in larger applications. For example, if you need to do several hundred structure alignments, then menu invocations will not be eective; you need a script that can repeat-edly call a function to do overlap.Chapter 6 is a short discussion on energy functions. Its main impor-tance is to provide a simple energy calculation for a script in Chapter 7.Chapter 7 introduces rotamers and the Chimera functions that work with them. Goldstein’s dead-end elimination is covered as a prelude to side chain packing. Scripts provide examples of more extensive GUI develop-ment, including facilities to do strip charts. Scripts to do plotting of three-dimensional (3D) surfaces are introduced.Chapter 8 covers residue networks and provides examples for the use of the Graph classes in the StructBio package. e nal exercise describes a script that provides a visual display of a network for residue contact rearrangements.Appendix A discusses the implementation of GUIs that can be used for Python applications that require a more sophisticated interaction with the user. Because the Chimera window will still be the main window of concern, these GUIs are typically modeless dialogs that set up data input for the application. e appendix gives a quick introduction to Tkinter along with several sample scripts set up as a widget buet. ese can be extracted, modied, and placed into the reader’s applications.Appendix B introduces the scenographics toolkit. is includes several classes that can be used to place various lines, surfaces, and solids into the Chimera display. An extremely versatile set of classes under the heading “Parametric Surfaces” includes classes for Frenet frame surfaces, extrusion surfaces, surfaces of revolution, and ruled surfaces. e LabelGroups class can be used to place labels into the display at specied 3D positions.Appendix C introduces the GraphBase class, which can be used to implement abstract graphs via the Vertex and Arc classes. Methods are included for the computation of shortest paths and for the extraction of various subgraphs. A set of derived classes (Graph, Node, and Edge) are provided for the construction of 3D graphs that will be displayed in


===== [7/99] chapter-07.html =====

xxii ◾ Prefacethe Chimera window. Instantiation of these classes will also generate the underlying Vertex and Arc objects so that various graph algorithms can be applied to the constructed graph.Appendix D covers various scripts to do plotting including bar charts, density plots, scatter plots, plots of parametric curves, and 3D surface plots. Plots can be shown in their own windows or within a modeless dia-log designed by the programmer.Appendix E provides a review of dynamic programming to act as background material for the sequence alignment algorithms presented in Chapter 5.


===== [8/99] chapter-08.html =====

xxiiiAcknowledgments Almost all the molecular graphics were done using UCSF Chimera. e primary reference for this molecular modeling system is as follows:E. F. Pettersen, T. D. Goddard, C. C. Huang, G. S. Couch, D.M.Greenblatt, E. C. Meng, and T. E. Ferrin. UCSF Chimera—A visualization system for exploratory research and analysis. Journal of Computational Chemistry, 25(2004), 1605–1612.is book makes use of many PDB les. Please note the following reference that is to serve for all future use of PDB les:H. M. Berman, J. Westbrook, Z. Feng, G. Gilliland, T. N. Bhat, H.Weissig, I. N. Shindyalov, and P. E. Bourne. e Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Research, 28 (2000), 235–242.I thank Ariel Fernández and Ridgway Scott for their supportive comments on the dehydron material in Chapter 3.Special thanks to Eric Pettersen for his careful reading of the chapters and many helpful suggestions.Also, thank you to Sunil Nair, Sarah Gelson, Joette Lynch, and Joselyn Banks-Kyle at CRC Press for their patience and helpful assistance. A nal note of thanks goes to Dennis Troutman (project manager, diacriTech) for excellent copy editing and help during the nal production process.
This page intentionally left blankThis page intentionally left blank


===== [9/99] chapter-09.html =====

xxvAuthorForbes J. Burkowski earned his PhD in applied mathematics at the University of Waterloo, Ontario, in 1970. He taught computer science at the University of Manitoba (1970–1982), and during this time he also pursued studies in organic chemistry and biology. In 1982, Dr.Burkowski returned to the University of Waterloo as an associate professor in the computer science department. Over the past 7 years, he has served as the director of bioinformatics and has participated in the design of the undergraduate program in bioinformatics. He has taught the fourth-year structural bioinformatics course since 2003. Dr. Burkowski’s research interests include side chain packing, drug design, and mathematical modeling of flexibility in protein structure. 
This page intentionally left blankThis page intentionally left blank


===== [10/99] chapter-10.html =====

1Chapter 1IntroductionMacromolecules and Chimera1.1 MOTIVATIONWithin a cell, life processes involve an overwhelming set of complicated interactions, most of them involving macromolecular structures such as DNA, RNA, and protein.* is nal category of macromolecules is argu-ably the most important because it has the ability to contribute the most diverse functionality due to the structural complexity of its individual members. In fact, proteins act as enzymes that facilitate chemical reactions, regulators of cell processes, signal transducers enabling signals to be imported and exported into and out of a cell, transporters of small molecules, antibodies, structural elements that bind cells together, and motor elements to facilitate movement.As such, proteins are the versatile building blocks and active mol-ecules that form the components of all living systems. Proteins always act in concert with other molecules using a wide range of chemical reac-tions and mechanical recongurations. With over a billion years of evo-lution, these complex interactions have become sophisticated enough to accomplish all the coordinated events that constitute the life processes of a living cell. ese evolutionary processes have derived structures, such as proteins, that are much more than simply static macromolecular * In this book, we assume the reader is already familiar with the Molecular Biology 101 topics such as cell structure, the Central Dogma of Molecular Biology, the genetic code, and the roles played by macromolecules such as DNA and RNA.
2 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsassemblies: their composition must ensure proper folding to a stable functioning conformation with an eventual allowance for proteolysis. Proper functioning will mean that the protein interacts with other mol-ecules in a very selective manner demonstrating a high level of molecular recognition.We study protein structure and its dynamic changes so that we can bet-ter understand the complicated functionality of macromolecules. ese studies involve tools for the visualization of macromolecular structure and the subsequent mathematical modeling of structures using geometric analysis, linear algebra formulations, and statistics.In this book, our workbench used for the study of macromolecules (in particular, proteins) will be Chimera: a soware application that has been developed by the Resource for Biocomputing, Visualization, and Informatics (RBVI)* at the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF).††1.2 WHY CHIMERA?ere are several molecular modeling systems with very sophisticated visualization capabilities. e decision to go with UCSF Chimera was based on several issues many of which relate to ease of use and suitabil-ity for a student environment. e following points list some of the more important reasons for choosing Chimera: 1. Visualization capabilities As a standalone application for the visualization of macromol-ecules, Chimera has several advantages: a. Changing perspective: Easy mouse movements give rotation and zoom. b. Sophisticated graphics: Atoms can be rendered in wire-frame, stick, ball and stick, or sphere representations. Ribbons for sec-ondary structure can appear as at, edged, or rounded. Molecular surfaces can appear as solid, mesh, or dot.* http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/ e RBVI is supported by grant NIGMS 9P41GM103311.† http://www.ucsf.edu/.
Introduction ◾ 3 c. Versatile selection abilities: e Select menu oers a variety of selection mechanisms. Selection by chain, chemistry, residue, structure, sequence, and so forth. d. Visual eects: Users can give a scene a heightened spatial presence by means of perspective and fog. Surface eects include trans-parency, and coloring for electrostatic and hydrophobic values. e. Labeling atoms and residues: A molecular scene can be aug-mented with the provision of various atom and residue labels. f. Other sophisticated features: Chimera provides visualization of density maps, supramolecular assemblies, sequence alignments, docking results, trajectories, and conformational ensembles. 2. Multiplatform Chimera is available for Microso Windows, Linux, Linux 64-bit, Apple Mac OS X, SGI IRIX, and HP Tru64 Unix. 3. Maturity e rst public release of Chimera occurred in March 2000. Since then there have been several production releases that represent a sequence of steady improvements for the soware. 4. Scalability Chimera can be used for the visualization of large molecules.* 5. Pricing Chimera is free to academic and nonprot users. 6. Computational tools More important for our purposes, Chimera is an extensible appli-cation that can be given more capabilities if the user develops Python scripts. Scripting capability allows the user to design, develop, and execute a variety of algorithms that can accept macromolecular data (e.g., atom coordinates), perform any needed calculations, and sub-sequently print results to screen or le. A script can also change the molecular scene being displayed.* Not all visualizers survive the 1FFK test; try fetching the PDB le 1FFK and render it using various display techniques.
4 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics1.3 GETTING STARTED WITH CHIMERATo get a copy of Chimera, you can visit the UCSF Chimera homepage at http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/ and click on the Download link in the le column. On the download page choose the current production release that is appropriate for your platform and follow the installation instructions, which are also available via a link on the download page. Documentation includes the Chimera User’s Guide and the Chimera Programming Guide.ere are three ways that the user can interact with Chimera: 1. Menu invocations 2. Command line 3. Python scriptinge User’s Guide contains a tutorial with a comprehensive description of both the menu and command line interactions. If the reader does not have any experience in the use of Chimera menus, then it is advisable to do some elementary exercises to gain familiarity with the basics. is book will concentrate on Python scripting and, as noted earlier, the scripts can be used to modify or create molecular visualizations. In some cases it is simply easier to use menu invocations to modify the molecular scene produced by the script. Exercises at the end of this chapter can be used to get some prac-tice in the use of the menus. e command line interface is also covered in the tutorial of the User’s Guide. Our work with Python scripting will make occasional use of command line interactions, but for the moment, they can be ignored.e remaining sections of this chapter will provide a review of macro-molecular structure in preparation for the next chapter, which will intro-duce the Chimera object model and Python scripting. While reading these sections, bear in mind that all the molecular visualizations have been prepared using Chimera menu invocations. If you are new to Chimera, it would be a worthwhile exercise to try and replicate some of these gures using Chimera and a protein of your own choice.1.4 OVERVIEW OF PROTEIN STRUCTUREWe review the main aspects of protein structure by considering the various levels of description: amino acid primary sequence, secondary structure, tertiary structure, and quaternary structure. To make these topics a bit 
Introduction ◾ 5 more interesting for the many readers that already understand these con-cepts, we include a bit of history.*1.4.1 Amino Acids and Primary SequenceDuring the 1800s, chemists knew about amino acids and realized that each consisted of a side chain (also called an R group) that is attached to an alpha carbon that is also bonded to amine and carboxyl functional groups, as shown in Figure 1.1.e notion that proteins were linear chains of amino acids was pro-posed in 1902 by Emil Fischer and Franz Hofmeister. Both understood that amino acid residues were joined in a condensation reaction (Figure1.2).By 1906, approximately 15 amino acids were known to be constitu-ents of proteins, but there was considerable debate about the maximum length that a protein could achieve. It was considerably later that proteins were understood to be very long chains of amino acids. In fact, lengths vary from fewer than 20 amino acids to more than 5000 amino acids. It is interesting to note that, despite the earlier discovery of the peptide chain, many scientists, Fischer included, were initially quite skeptical that proteins could have a very lengthy macromolecular structure. Even as late as 1952, Fredrick Sanger regarded the peptide theory as very likely to be * For more historical information, see [D05] for structural molecular biology and [TR01] for proteins.AminogroupSide chainRHHHOHOCCαNCarboxylgroupFIGURE 1.1 A typical amino acid.R1HNNNNHHHHHHHHHOHOHOHOOOO+ H2OHR1R2R2+FIGURE 1.2 Condensation reaction.


===== [11/99] chapter-11.html =====

6 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticstrue but nonetheless only a hypothesis that had yet to be proven [F79]. e identities of all 20 amino acids were not completely known until 1940.We now understand that proteins are composed of chains of such amino acids and this chain can involve several hundred amino acids. e rst level of structural description of a protein is called the primary sequence and is simply a list of these amino acids mentioned in their order of appearance as one scans the protein starting with the amino end of the protein and proceeding to the carboxyl end.In terms of chemical functionality, each of the 20 amino acids has its own personality. In an eort to simplify descriptions of amino acid behav-ior, it is convenient to place amino acids into various categories. ere are several ways to do this. As an example, Figures 1.3 and 1.4 place resi-dues into four categories: nonpolar hydrophobic, polar uncharged, polar charged positive, and polar charged negative.All of the residues are shown in zwitterion form (an ionic molecule with separate positive and negative charges having a net charge of zero).e given categorization should be regarded as somewhat fuzzy. For example, histidine has a relatively neutral pKa and so fairly small changes in cellular pH will change its charge. So, it could be placed in the polar uncharged group, but in Figure 1.4 it is put into the polar charged group because it can achieve a positive charge under physiological conditions. Similarly, glycine oen appears in the hydrophobic category, but its side chain is essentially nonexistent, and so some biochemists will consider it to be in a category all by itself. It should be noted that hydrophobicity is of particular interest to researchers studying structural bioinformatics because it has been shown that the hydrophobic properties of amino acids contribute to the three-dimensional conformations of proteins.Some amino acids have special features that also contribute to struc-tural conformation. Proline has a peculiar structure due to the cyclic bind-ing of its three-carbon side chain to the nitrogen atom that is normally part of the amine group in the other amino acids. is binding places limits on the exibility of the backbone and so proline will oen cause a bend in structures such as helices and beta strands (to be considered in Section1.4.2). It is more likely to appear at the edges of such secondary structures or in loops that go between them. Another amino acid with important structural contributions is cysteine. It is possible for two cyste-ine residues to form a disulde bridge by means of an oxidative reaction:′→′−R-SH +SH-RR-S-S-R +2H+2e+
Introduction ◾ 7 Glycine (Gly, G)H3N+H3N+H3N+H3N+OHOHOHSHHNNHSO–OO–OO–OH3N+O–OH3N+H3N+H3N+H3N+H2NH3N+H3N+NH2H3CO–OO–OOO–OO–OO–OO–OOH3N+O–OO–OH3N+O–OO–OH3N+O–OCH3CH3CH3CH3H3CCH3CH3H3CAlanine (Ala, A) Valine (Val, V)Methionine (Met, M)Isoleucine (Ile, I)Leucine (Leu, L)Proline (Pro, P)Serine (Ser, S)reonine (r, T)Asparagine (Asn, N)Cysteine (Cys, C)Tyrosine (Tyr, Y)Glutamine (Gln, Q)Phenylalanine (Phe, F)Nonpolar (hydrophobic) residuesPolar uncharged residuesTryptophan (Trp, W)FIGURE 1.3 Amino acids: Hydrophobic and uncharged residues.
8 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsis allows two cysteine residues in dierent parts of the protein to form a bridge that helps to provide some extra stability for the molecule. Figure 1.5 shows a cysteine bridge that has been extracted from the bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor with Protein Data Bank (PDB) code 6PTI.In this gure, the cysteine residues including the two central sulfur atoms have been shown using a ball and stick visualization style while the four residues adjacent to the cysteine residues are simply shown in stick form.NHHLysine (Lys, K) Arginine (Arg, R) Histidine (His, H)Polar charged (+) residuesAspartic acid (Asp, D) Glutamic acid (Glu, E)Polar charged (–) residuesNNH3N+NH3+NH2+O–OH3N+O–O–OOH3N+O–O–OOH3N+H2NO–OH3N+O–OFIGURE 1.4 Amino acids: Charged residues.Sulfur atoms incysteine bridgeFIGURE 1.5 Cysteine bridge found in bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor.
Introduction ◾ 9 It has been noted that small proteins tend to have more cys–cys bridges than larger proteins. An interesting example: snake venoms oen have an unusually high preponderance of cys–cys bridges to enhance stability. Venom from the Malaysian krait contains the protein 1VYC that has three such bridges even though it is only 65 residues in length (Figure 1.6).In this gure, we see that the protein uses cysteine bridges to provide more positional stability to various loop substructures that would tend to be more oppy without the bridges.e alpha carbon of all amino acids, except for glycine, constitutes a chiral center. In most biological systems this chirality is described as being in the -conguration (Figure 1.7). Amino acids with a -conguration are not found in the metabolic pathways of eukaryotic cells but have been observed in the structure and metabolism of some bacteria.*In Figure 1.7, we see that bonds attached to the alpha carbon between the NH2 and COOH groups are coming up from the page, whereas the other two bonds are going down into the page as they go from the alpha carbon to the hydrogen and beta carbon of valine. e - conguration of this amino acid would be the mirror image of what is seen in Figure1.7.* A list of D-amino acid residues in the PDB can be found at: http://chemistry.st-andrews.ac.uk/sta/jbom/group/d-res.html.FIGURE 1.6 Cysteine bridges in bucain (a krait venom).FIGURE 1.7 -conguration for an amino acid (valine).
10 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsAs a nal note to end this section, we mention that almost all life forms are restricted to the 20 amino acids listed earlier. However, recently it has been discovered that two other amino acids can appear, although rarely. ey are selenocysteine and pyrrolysine. ese unusual amino acids should not be considered as normal cysteine and lysine residues that have been chemically modied due to some posttranslational mechanism. e microbes that use these amino acids actually have specic transfer RNAs for them and they are inserted into the growing peptide chain just like any other amino acids [MG00].1.4.2 Secondary Structuree next level of structural description is referred to as secondary struc-ture. e idea behind secondary structure is to simply characterize resi-dues ofthe primary sequence, putting them into categories that reect the most obvious description of the shape of the peptide chain. ere is no attempt to establish the physical positions of residues in three-dimensional space as is done in the specication of tertiary structure. Generally there are three categories of secondary structure: alpha helices, beta strands, and loops.e rst two types of structure are mainly facilitated by the formation of hydrogen bonding between atoms in the backbone. e nitrogen atom in the backbone acts as a hydrogen donor and the carbonyl oxygen acts as a hydrogen acceptor.1.4.2.1 Alpha HelicesAlpha helices are formed when the backbone of the amino acid chain winds into a helical conformation with hydrogen bonds used to stabilize the structure. Figure 1.8 shows the formation of one such hydrogen bond. In this gure, the alpha carbon atoms have been numbered so that one can see how the acceptor and donor are related to one another. Specically, the carbonyl oxygen of residue 1 acts as the hydrogen acceptor for the nitro-gen donor in residue 5. e alpha helix is distinguished by this pattern: residue n interacting with residue n + 4 through a hydrogen bond. is arrangement gives the alpha helix 3.6 residues per turn. So, if one views the helix from a perspective that is parallel to its axis, one sees an angular increment of approximately 100° between successive alpha carbon atoms.It is also possible to have helical conformations that are more elongated. e 310 helix has a hydrogen bond between the carbonyl oxygen of residue n and the nitrogen atom in residue n + 3. is gives three residues per turn and


===== [12/99] chapter-12.html =====

Introduction ◾ 11 is a type of secondary structure that occurs (rarely) in very short segments or at the ends of an alpha helix. e very rare pi helix has a hydrogen bond between residues n and n + 5 with 4.4 residues per turn. In this case, the helix is wide enough to have a hole along the axis of the structure and this is less energetically favorable when compared to the more compact alpha helix.Looking at Figure 1.8, we can pretend to grasp the helix with the right hand so that ngers are pointing in a direction that is the same as that specied by an increase in residue number. If the thumb is pointing toward the carboxyl end of the protein, then we have a right-handed helix, otherwise it is designated to be a le-handed helix. e latter is also a rare event because it forces L-amino acid side chains into an excessively close proximity with carbonyl groups.Figures 1.9 through 1.11 show an alpha helix that has been extracted from the protein 1QYS. e rst gure shows only the backbone atoms with longer roughly horizontal lines representing the hydrogen bonds. e side chains have been removed because they would certainly obscure a view of the helical nature of the structure. Even with this simplication, it is still dicult to assess the helix structure and so Figure 1.10 presents a ribbon model of the structure. Hydrogen bonding as dened by the Chimera visu-alization soware has been le intact. In many other gures to come, we will see ribbon diagrams that use a plain linguini type of ribbon to illus-trate a helix. Finally, to provide another visual representation, Figure 1.11 shows a ribbon structure with the side chains sprouting o the helix.It is interesting to note that Linus Pauling determined the structure of the protein helix in 1948. He is quoted as saying, “I took a sheet of paper and sketched the atoms with the bonds between them and then folded the paper to bend one bond at the right angle, what I thought it should be relative to the other, and kept doing this, making a helix, until I could form hydrogen bonds between one turn of the helix and the next turn of the helix, and it only took a few hours doing that to discover the alpha-helix.” Pauling realized that the Cα2Cα4Cα3Cα5Cα1FIGURE 1.8 Formation of a hydrogen bond in an alpha helix.
12 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsside chains would point outward from the protein helix.* In 1953, Pauling and Corey [PC53] published a paper that proposed a somewhat similar struc-ture for DNA based on a triple helix structure. e reader may consult a report written by Stephen Lawson (http://lpi.oregonstate.edu/ss03/triplehelix.html) to get a balanced perspective on this paper “which would turn out to be one of the most famous mistakes in 20th-century science.” In 1954, Pauling was given the Nobel Prize for Chemistry to recognize his work on molecu-lar structure. Pauling was also known for his signicant eorts on behalf of world peace and other issues related to humanitarian goals and social justice.1.4.2.2 Beta StrandsLike alpha helices, beta strands are secondary structures formed by hydrogen bonding. In this case, however, the consecutive amino acids interact with other consecutive amino acids that may be quite distant in the primary sequence. e hydrogen bonds provide a sequence of linkages * As noted by Anna Tramontano (Private communication): … the reason why Pauling could predict the alpha helix rst was because he was not trapped in thinking that the number of residues per turn had to be an integer number. is shows how common assumptions could mislead a lot of people! Also, he was the one who demonstrated the planarity of the peptide bond which is essen-tial to come up with the model.FIGURE 1.9 Hydrogen bonds in an alpha helix.FIGURE 1.10 Ribbon diagram of a helix with hydrogen bonds.FIGURE 1.11 Ribbon diagram with side chains.
Introduction ◾ 13 between two chain segments, which may have one of two orientations with respect to one another as follows:• Parallel beta strands: e consecutive hydrogen bonds are such that the indices of amino acids on either end of the bonds are increasing in the same direction.• Antiparallel beta strands: e consecutive hydrogen bonds are such that the indices of amino acids on either end of the bonds are increas-ing in opposite directions.Figures 1.12 through 1.18 provide more details about beta strands.In Figure 1.12, we see the backbone atoms of three beta strands. Side chains have been removed for clarity but the carbonyl oxygen atoms have been inserted to get the hydrogen bonds. e amino acids for each strand have their indices increasing as we go from le to right. is is indicated by the amide group on the far le and the carboxyl group on the extreme right. Notice how the hydrogen bonds are formed: the carbonyl oxygen atoms being hydrogen bond acceptors while the nitrogen atoms of the adjacent strand act as hydrogen donors.Figure 1.13 presents a more simplied diagram of the same three strands each with a rounded ribbon arrow indicating the direction of increasing indices in the primary sequence.FIGURE 1.12 Hydrogen bonds in parallel beta strands.FIGURE 1.13 Ribbon diagram for parallel beta strands of Figure 1.12.
14 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsFigure 1.14 shows the same backbone atoms as those seen in Figure 1.12 but with oxygen atoms and hydrogen bonds removed. e view has been rotated so that the strands are almost behind one another and collectively they dene a beta sheet. e alpha carbon atoms have been colored black so that they are more obvious in the gure. e importance of this view is that it shows how the strands tend to rise and fall in unison. In this way, the strands form a pleated sheet (sometimes described as a corru-gated sheet). A signicant consequence of pleating is that the side chains cannot originate from an alpha carbon that is in a valley of the pleat if they are to avoid steric clashes. In other words, they will seem to sprout from the alpha carbons in such a way as to avoid the atoms on either side of the alpha carbon. Consequently, the side chains originate from the peaks of the corrugations and so they appear to line up in rows when the sheet is observed on edge. is line up eect is shown in Figure 1.15.Figure 1.15 shows the same three ribbons but with side chains present and drawn as stick structures. e scene has been rotated so as to make it more apparent that the three strands form a sheet. As just described, the side chains appear to sprout in rows that are determined by the pleats of the sheet and because of the nature of the pleats, these rows of resi-dues alternate above and below the sheet. e ribbons are drawn in such a way as to eliminate the pleated structure of the sheet but the atness of FIGURE 1.14 Side view of the previous ribbon diagram showing pleated conformation.FIGURE 1.15 Ribbon diagram with side chains for parallel beta strands of Figure1.12.
Introduction ◾ 15 the ribbons brings out another signicant observation: the sheet is not perfectly at; it has a slight twist. is twist is not a peculiarity of this protein*; rather, it is typical of many beta sheets.Let us now consider a set of beta strands that have an antiparallel con-formation. All of the gures for this discussion have been prepared by viewing an antiparallel beta sheet within the protein 1QYS. As before, the beta strands make up a sheet but now they run in directions that alternate as illustrated in Figure 1.16. e hydrogen bonds that stabilize this sheet are shown in Figure 1.17. e reader should compare the appearance of these hydrogen bonds with that of Figure 1.12. In general, the successive hydrogen bonds that join two beta strands in an antiparallel conguration tend to be more uniform in their direction. ey do not exhibit the slightly slanted appearance of hydrogen bonds in a parallel beta strand sheet as seen in Figure 1.12. e antiparallel construction of the sheet illustrated in Figure 1.17 has a pleated structure that is very similar to that seen in beta strands that make up parallel sheets. If the structure in Figure 1.17 is viewed from a line of sight that is almost along the surface of the sheet, the * Figures 1.12 through 1.15 were done with UCSF Chimera, selecting a beta sheet from protein 1AY7.FIGURE 1.16 Ribbon diagram for antiparallel beta strands.FIGURE 1.17 Hydrogen bonds in antiparallel beta strands.


===== [13/99] chapter-13.html =====

16 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsobserver would see an arrangement of strands that is very similar to that of Figure 1.14. Because of this pleated formation we can observe the same patterns as before when looking at the orientations of the side chains. ey seem to sprout o the sheet in rows and the successive rows alternate in their directions above and below the sheet. is is seen in Figure 1.18.Sheet twist can also be observed for antiparallel beta strands. In fact, researchers have collected empirical evidence that such deformations are typically larger for antiparallel sheets than for parallel sheets ([EM04] and [HC02]). Figure 1.18 shows an illustration of this twist for the anti-parallel case.It should be stated that the ribbon diagram is very suitable when illustrating a twisted sheet. A diagram that shows only the atoms (without ribbons) is very complicated and the sheet structure becomes hidden in a forest of atoms that hide this pattern.It is possible for a beta sheet to have a mix of both parallel and antipar-allel strand pairs. An example of this can be seen in the salivary nitropho-rin protein 1YJH.1.4.2.3 Loopse nal category of secondary structure that we describe is the loop. Loops are chains of amino acids that have no particular hydrogen bond-ing patterns with other parts of the protein. ere are proteins that con-sist of nothing more than a loop stabilized by disulde bridges. A good example of this is avoridin (PDB code 1FVL) which is a blood coagula-tion inhibitor from the habu snake. Another example is (PDB code 1ANS) a neurotoxin from the sea anemone, Anemonia sulcata. is protein has three disulde bridges and while it does not contain any helices or beta sheets it does have seven beta turns.FIGURE 1.18 Ribbon diagram with side chains for antiparallel beta strands of Figure 1.17.
Introduction ◾ 17 In Figure 1.19, the loop is portrayed as a ribbon diagram, whereas the disulde bridges have been drawn in ball and stick form.Proteins that are all loop are fairly rare. Most proteins will have beta sheets and helices forming a hydrophobic core and these secondary struc-tures will be interconnected by loop segments. An example of this is given in Figure 1.20, where we see short loops connecting the adjacent strands of an antiparallel beta sheet within the Escherichia coli ribonuclease 1V74. is is the simplest way to connect such strands; it is possible to nd other more complicated interconnections for adjacent strands involving helices and other beta strands.For a sheet made of parallel beta strands, the adjacent strands may be con-nected with simple longer loops. However, in most cases, one will nd that helices and other beta strands are used to connect adjacent parallel strands.1.4.3 Tertiary Structure1.4.3.1 What Is Tertiary Structure?e tertiary structure of a protein species the positional relationships of all secondary structures. For example, the tertiary structure will show how the beta strands and helices combine to form the hydrophobic core of a globular protein. Interconnecting loops also play an important role FIGURE 1.19 Loop structure and stabilizing disulde bridges of the neurotoxin 1ANS.FIGURE 1.20 Loops connecting adjacent beta strands in an antiparallel sheet.
18 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsand their placement is critical in various applications. Tertiary structure is essentially established once all the three-dimensional coordinates of the atoms are determined.In Section 1.4.4, we will see that tertiary structures can combine to form larger quaternary structures. However, many proteins are single peptide chains and can be described by specifying the tertiary structure of that single chain. If we want to describe a protein’s functionality from a biological perspective, then starting with the tertiary structure of the protein is a minimal requirement.Because proteins interact with other molecules, they will have bind-ing sites that must be organized in a way that facilitates some interac-tion while avoiding any other reactions that might produce harmful side eects. is is the most signicant raison d’être of tertiary structure but there are other issues as well. To illustrate this, Section 1.4.3.2 provides a quick sketch of the myoglobin binding site and aer that we cover some other topics related to tertiary structure.1.4.3.2 Tertiary Structure of Myoglobine three-dimensional structure of myoglobin provides an interesting example of a tertiary structure. It has a biological functionality that has been extensively studied and it also has the distinction of being the rst protein structure to be determined by x-ray analysis. is was reported by Kendrew et al. in 1958 [KB58]. e structure of the myoglobin molecule was not deposited into the PDB until later because the PDB was not established until 1971. Myoglobin appeared there in 1973 with identifying code 1MBN.Figure 1.21 provides a view of the entire molecule. It has 153 residues that form eight helices interspersed with short loops. ese helices are com-bined into a special arrangement called a globin fold. It consists of a hydro-phobic pocket that contains a structure called a prosthetic heme group (Figure 1.22). e heme group for this gure was extracted from the PDB le for oxymyoglobin (PDB code 1MBO), which has a molecule of oxygen hovering over the iron atom at the center of the heme group. e function of myoglobin is to carry oxygen in muscle tissue. More specically, it stores oxygen and carries it to the mitochondria for oxidative phosphorylation. For x-ray analysis, both proteins (1MBN and 1MBO) were extracted from the muscle of sperm whale (Physeter catodon), a mammal that has this protein in great abundance because of the necessity to stay under water for long periods of time. As any structural biologist can tell you, the myoglobin proteins and hemoglobin proteins share similar structures and functional-ity. Hemoglobin genes have been in the biosphere for at least 1.8 billion 
Introduction ◾ 19 years and may have originated as proteins that were meant to sequester oxygen thus protecting the cell from harmful eects of too much oxygen produced by the photosynthetic processes [SG99].At the center of the heme structure is an iron atom that is coordinated by the nitrogen atoms of the four pyrrole rings. In normal myoglobin the iron atom is ionized to the Fe2+ (ferrous) state. e heme group is not sym-metric and contains two highly polar propionate side chains that appear on the right side of Figure 1.22. A close inspection of Figure 1.21 will reveal that these carboxylic acid side chains (ionized at physiological pH) avoid the interior of the hydrophobic pocket. is is also shown with more clarity in Figure 1.23. In this presentation, a surface has been put over the protein and it has been shaded so that portions of the surface near hydrophobic FIGURE 1.21 Tertiary structure of myoglobin (Protein Data Bank code = 1MBN).FIGURE 1.22 Heme group from 1MBO.
20 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsresidues (as specied in Figure 1.3) are white while any surface over a nonhydrophobic residue is shown in gray tones. If you look carefully at Figure1.23 you can see a gray bump immediately under the iron atom. is is the NE2 nitrogen atom of a histidine residue (H93). ere is another gray bump just above the oxygen molecule due to another histidine residue (H64). ese will be discussed further when we look at Figure1.24.Figure 1.25 is provided so that you can get a better appreciation for the construction of the heme binding pocket. is diagram shis the perspec-tive of the viewer so that the individual is looking at the heme group from a position that is below the plane of the heme. Furthermore, a portion of the surface has been cut away to reveal the residues that create the sur-face. e heme group (above the surface but in the pocket) is drawn in a ball and stick fashion while all structures below the surface are drawn in stick form. Hydrophobic residues appear in white and all other residues FIGURE 1.23 Heme group in its binding pocket.DistalhistidineProximalhistidineHemeplaneFIGURE 1.24 Heme group and histidine residues.


===== [14/99] chapter-14.html =====

Introduction ◾ 21 are have darker shades of gray. e dashed arrow indicates the position of the iron atom. If you look carefully, you can see H93 just below and to the le of the iron atom. e main point of this diagram is to see the several hydrophobic residues that surround the underside of the heme binding pocket. It should be noted that these nonpolar residues protect the Fe2+ from oxidation to the Fe3+ (hematin) state, which will not bind O2.Figure 1.25 shows the placement of the iron atom relative to the two histi-dine residues mentioned earlier. Coordination of the heme iron atom is done by the NE2 atom of H93 (called the proximal histidine) and the NE2 of H64 (called the distal histidine). e distal histidine crowds in on the binding space and causes the oxygen molecule to bind at an angle. is makes the bond to the iron atom weaker and so O2 is more easily removed when needed.1.4.3.3 Tertiary Structure beyond the Binding PocketPerhaps the most remarkable features of the molecule are its com-plexity and its lack of symmetry. e arrangement seems to be almost totally lacking in the kind of regularities which one instinc-tively anticipates, and it is more complicated than has been pre-dicted by any theory of protein structure.J. C. Kendrew et al. describing myoglobin, 1958Biologists must constantly keep in mind that what they see was not designed, but rather evolved.Francis Crick, 1988FIGURE 1.25 Heme group in pocket—cutaway view.
22 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsIn Section 1.4.3.2, we have seen that myoglobin tertiary structure provides a binding site that not only holds the heme group with its nonpolar residues but also has a particular geometry that manages the storage of O2 in a very precise fashion. It is fairly clear that all the residues near the binding site par-ticipate in the support of these activities. However, there are many other resi-dues that are considerably further away from the binding site. It is reasonable to ask about the participation of these residues in the primary functionality just described. Are they really needed? To add more signicance to the ques-tion, it should be noted that the protein cytochrome B562 from E. coli is only 106 residues in length and it also has a binding site with a heme group. To be fair, it should be noted that the B562 binding site lacks the critically positioned distal histidine seen in myoglobin and so the functionality is somewhat sim-pler. However, it is possible to nd other proteins that seem to be quite huge in comparison to their rather small binding sites.It is perhaps this type of additional complexity that prompted Kendrew and his associates to express the statement quoted at the start of this section. is quote was taken from the Nature paper [KB58] and it gives us some per-spective on the mindset of the early explorers venturing into the unknown territory of protein structure. e anticipated regularities of protein struc-ture seem to be reminiscent of the earlier expectations of Copernicus and his assumption that planetary orbits would be circular. In line with the admonition made by Francis Crick [C88] in the preceding quote, our cur-rent thinking provides a somewhat dierent perspective on the structure of the myoglobin molecule: It is the result of an evolutionary process driven by functional requirements with less attention paid to elegant design.At the macroscopic level, we see many examples of this function-driven evolution with problematic design principles. For example, breathing and food ingestion share a common tract, much as reproductive systems and urine elimination share the urethra in male mammals. ere are draw-backs to this tissue sharing: breathing will be accompanied by choking if food is taken into the trachea and in the case of shared reproductive/urinary systems, we can consider the unfortunate psychological associa-tions due to such an arrangement. Even though tissue sharing provides a kind of time-sharing eciency, this type of tissue parsimony does not always occur in the evolutionary process: everyone is born with a vestigial appendix that is not needed and men have nipples.At the molecular level, we may also see redundant substructures in a protein simply because evolutionary processes have maintained them as legacy contributions inherited from an earlier protein (see [KD99] in which 
Introduction ◾ 23 the authors entertain the idea that a particular folding topology may reect a vestigial structural remnant of an ancestral SH2-containing protein).Even though there is the possibility that various helices or strands might simply constitute vestigial excess baggage, there are other more signicant reasons to have extensive and very complicated structure in a protein.e functionality of tertiary structure relates to the following issues: 1. Formation and management of the binding site e residues (usually hydrophobic) create a pocket that promotes the docking of the protein with a ligand molecule. As just discussed in the myoglobin example, the positions of particular atoms in the binding site may be critical for the optimal functioning of the reac-tion. ere is also the necessity of forming a binding site that does not combine with other ligands in a way that produces a deleterious eect. Protein evolution can do only so much in this regard and may not protect a cell against toxins that are relatively new to the organ-ism. For example, hemoglobin will avidly take on carbon monoxide in lieu of oxygen molecules with disastrous results. 2. Flexibility ere are situations in which a protein interacts with a ligand or another protein and this interaction is accompanied by a change in protein conformation that facilitates the reaction with yet another molecule. Allosteric proteins demonstrate this functionality and the overall change in the protein’s conformation may involve residues that are quite distant from the binding site that initiates the change. 3. Control of a correct folding pathway In some sense, the folding of a protein involves many of the forces that contribute to the formation of a binding site. However, folding is functionality that must be accomplished before the binding site can be established. As such, the tertiary structure must have a level of orga-nization that will ensure the correct fold. It has been experimentally observed that various peptide sequences will simply not fold. For those that do fold, it may be necessary to have a primary sequence with key residues that foster particular intermediate transitory folds that act as transitional conformations. Presumably, these are necessary to guide the folding process so that the nal conformation is indeed the lowest energy conformation. e reader may consult [S05] for an opinion that stresses the importance of folding pathways and [D03] for a discussion 
24 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsabout transition state conformations that act as a quality control mech-anism in protein folding. A discussion of ultrafast and downhill protein folding may be found in [D07].* Models for folding and misfolding can be found in [D06]. Another aspect of the correct folding of proteins deals with cotranslational folding. is involves the assumption that proteins start to take on signicant aspects of their tertiary structure during translation when they are still attached to the ribosome. Such an assumption also has implications about the folding pathway ([FB97] and [K01]). It should be stressed that there is still considerable con-troversy about the various phases of the folding process (e.g., [LB98]). Much of this should be settled as more data becomes available. 4. Stability of the protein Aer the completion of folding, a complex interaction of the resi-dues must ensure that the nal structure will be maintained without the possibility of a dierent conformation being formed. In the ideal situation, a protein folds to a tertiary structure that is characterized as the lowest energy conformation and it stays in this conformation except for any exible changes that are necessary for its functional-ity. As described earlier, disulde bridging enhances the preservation of conformation. In less than ideal situations, it is possible that the protein undergoes a refolding that produces a dierent conformation. e endogenous cellular prion protein PrPC that can undergo a con-formational change to become the scrapie isoform PrPSc gives a good example of such metastable behavior. e PrPC conformation con-tains 43% alpha helix and no beta sheets, whereas the PrPSc form con-tains 20% alpha helix and 34% beta sheet. Unfortunately, PrPSc has a tendency to form aggregates in cerebral tissue and existing proteolytic mechanisms do not clear these aggregates. With unchecked accumu-lation, neurological damage occurs, ultimately leading to death.ese points emphasize that tertiary structure is necessarily complex because it must do a lot more than simply provide a foundation for the binding site. e additional responsibilities of tertiary structure include the support of delicate mechanisms that foster the proper behavior of the protein over its entire life cycle. is includes its creation by means of a guided folding pathway, the stable maintenance of its conformation and binding site, and its nal susceptibility to a degradation process that will lead to the reuse of its amino acids.* Current Opinion in Structural Biology, 17(Issue 1) has several papers devoted to protein folding issues.
Introduction ◾ 25 Meeting all of these requirements is a complex optimization prob-lem with multiple objectives. Furthermore, it is usually quite dicult to explain the functional signicance of any one amino acid in terms of its contribution to one or more of the four issues just described. e proximal and distal histidine residues in myoglobin, various other residues that act as secondary structure breakers, and particular residues that form hairpin structures [IA05] are exceptions to this statement, but in the general case, a particular residue serves along with several other amino acids to dene the various functional aspects of the tertiary structure.Despite the possible lack of regularity in a tertiary structure, the fold appearance of the structure may be replicated in another protein even though its primary sequence is reasonably dierent. In Figure 1.26 we can see an obvious similarity between myoglobin and a single chain within hemoglobin, which is also an oxygen carrying protein. is structural similarity is present even though the primary sequences have only 29% of their primary sequences matching identically. As noted in [OM97]: “At 30% sequence identity, proteins will almost certainly have the same over-all fold.” is is especially signicant for the globin family where similar folds have been seen for even lower sequence identities (less than 15%). e alignment (Figure 1.27) was done using the TCoee server [PO03]. is example underscores the observation that tertiary structure is more conserved than sequence in an evolutionary descent.Myoglobin (1MBN) One chain of hemoglobin (1JEB)FIGURE 1.26 Structural comparison of myoglobin and a single chain of hemoglobin.FIGURE 1.27 Sequence comparison of myoglobin and a single chain of hemoglobin.


===== [15/99] chapter-15.html =====

26 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsEven though there are several amino acids that can be changed while still maintaining the functionality of the globin fold, there is a critical location at which a mutation can produce a signicant change in func-tional behavior. e reader may note that the sixth residue of 1JEB is “E” for glutamic acid. Sickle-cell anemia is an inherited disease that leads to single mutational change in which this glutamic acid is replaced by valine. is produces a small hydrophobic patch on the surface of the protein. Unfortunately, this patch is able to bind with a hydrophobic pocket in the deoxygenated conformation of another hemoglobin molecule. is sticki-ness of the hemoglobin proteins causes a clumping that leads to distortion of the red blood cell, which then takes on a sickle-cell appearance. ese blood cells have a shorter life span than normal cells and so the patient has anemia caused by low levels of hemoglobin. Sickle cells can also become trapped in small blood vessels preventing blood ow.As a nal note on tertiary structure, Figure 1.28 is presented to illus-trate a protein that does have a remarkable amount of regular structure. is is from a human placental ribonuclease inhibitor that binds the blood vessel-inducing protein human angiogenin [PS97]. e angiogenin mol-ecule is presented to show the extraordinary repetition of alpha helix and beta sheet structures that combine to form the large horseshoe tertiary structure. Although there is an extensive beta sheet present, it does not have the same twist that is oen seen for smaller sheets. e beta strands have collected into a cylindrical formation that almost goes full circle. e regularity of their positions seems to be coordinated by the hair roller placement of the helices in the structure.FIGURE 1.28 A tertiary structure involving repeated secondary structures (chain D of 1A4Y).
Introduction ◾ 27 Many other remarkable folds can be seen in [OM97] and especially [PR04]. Space limits the presentation of these diagrams but the interested reader may fetch and display the ribbon diagrams for the more picturesque titles: β Barrel (2POR), β 7 Propeller (2BBK chain H), β 2 Solenoid (1TSP), and αβ 4-Layer Sandwich (2DNJ chain A). For most of these examples, the regularities in the structure are best seen by using a protein visualizer that allows the viewer to freely rotate the structures.1.4.4 Quaternary StructureA protein has quaternary structure when it is an assembly of multiple ter-tiary structures. We refer to such structures as oligomeric complexes and we describe these structures using labels that start with a prex represent-ing the number of subunits followed by the sux mer. e progression is monomer, dimer, trimer, tetramer, pentamer, and so forth. If the subunits are dierent, then an additional hetero prex is used, as in heterodimer. If the subunits are the same, then the homo prex is used, as in homotet-ramer. From an eciency point of view, it is in the best interest of a cell to build complex structures from smaller building blocks that are all the same. Each unit will be prescribed by the same DNA sequence and so there is a parsimonious genetic representation of the full oligomeric structure.In some cases, the quaternary structure can show a low level of recur-sive assembly. For example, three heterodimers may be assembled to form a trimer of dimers. A beautiful example of this construction is the insulin protein illustrated in Figure 1.32 later in the chapter. e assembly of this hexamer is a bit complicated, so we will explain it as a series of steps start-ing with the monomer illustrated in Figure 1.29. is is a single molecule made up of two peptide chains that are joined together using two disulde bridges. ere is a third disulde bridge, but it connects two cysteine resi-dues within the same chain. To see how the three disulde bridges inter-connect the residues in the three chains, consider Figure 1.30.Two of these monomers make up the insulin dimer by having their beta strands combine in an antiparallel fashion to make a small beta sheet. is is illustrated in Figure 1.31, where the A and B chains appear in the background with C and D chains in the foreground. Chains C and D correspond to chains A and B in the dimer assembly, and they have the same type of disulde con-nectivity. In Figure 1.31, all disulde bridges have been removed for clarity.Figure 1.32 shows the full insulin hexamer made up of three dimers each one of the same construction as that shown in Figure 1.31. e positions of the three dimers are coordinated by means of two zinc atoms. To see how the zinc atoms are related to a dimer, they have been included in Figure 1.31.
28 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsA-ChainB-Chain21 amino acids30 amino acidsGGGGFFFIIVVVVEEREENNNQQHHQCCCCCCTTTPKSSSLLLLLLAYYYYFIGURE 1.30 Six cysteine residues of the monomer are interconnected using disulde bridges.FIGURE 1.31 One of the three dimers making up the hexamer of an insulin structure.Phe1BAsn21AGly1Ar30BFIGURE 1.29 e insulin monomer has two chains connected by disulde bridges.
Introduction ◾ 29 To understand how the dimers combine to make a hexamer, imagine taking the dimer of Figure 1.31 and tilting the entire assembly so that your line of view is such that the darker zinc atom is exactly behind the brighter zinc atom. is will put the dimer into the exact orientation that the upper third of the hexamer shows in Figure 1.32. Notice that in this orientation, the beta sheets are seen on edge and so they are somewhat dicult to discern.ere are many other examples of quaternary structure, some of which we will see later.1.4.5 Protein FunctionalityAs already stated, protein structure facilitates protein functionality. Even though this book does not consider functionality in any signicant depth, we now present a very high level overview of the various processes and structural elements that use proteins.e study of protein function includes the following:• Enzymatic catalysis• Almost all chemical reactions in a cell are facilitated by a cata-lytic mechanism involving a protein.• Rate of reactions is accelerated, sometimes by as much as a factor of 1017.FIGURE 1.32 Hexamer structure of insulin (PDB code 1ZNJ).
30 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics• Enzymes may use any of the following strategies: − Provide an alternative reaction route. − Stabilize reaction intermediates. − Facilitate alignment of reacting groups.• Signal transmission• Information can be moved from one part of a biological system to another. is is done, for example, by neurotransmitters, hor-mones, and cytokines. − Cytokines act as signals in immune systems and during embryogenesis. − ey typically bind to a cell-surface receptor and this initi-ates a signal cascade resulting in an upregulation or down-regulation of gene expression.• Regulation• Protein–protein interactions (PPI): PPI may enable or inhibit one of the proteins involved in an interaction.• Transcription regulation: Proteins may assemble to form tran-scription factors that regulate gene expression in DNA.• Immune system• e immunoglobulins are examples of proteins that play a cen-tral role in the defense mechanisms of the body. ey recognize foreign molecules and help the body to destroy viruses and bac-teria. Other components of the immune system include major histocompatibility complexes and various receptor proteins.• Molecular transport• Some membrane proteins are capable of moving small molecules into or out of a cell. For example, the Na+/glucose transporter is membrane protein that brings in both sodium ions and glucose molecules with sodium ions moving down their concentration gradient while the glucose molecules are pumped up their con-centration gradients.


===== [16/99] chapter-16.html =====

Introduction ◾ 31 • Motor elements• Changes in protein conformation produce mechanical move-ment, be it large muscle movement or the small agellar motors of a bacterium.• Structural systems• Proteins act as the building blocks of living systems.• In large complex systems, they contribute to the formation of large structures such as bone, hair (collagen), nails (keratin), and many other tissues.• Smaller structures include strands of silk, viral coats, and frame-works for the movement of molecules within cells.1.4.6 Protein DomainsWe have already seen the progression of structural organization: primary sequence, secondary structure, tertiary structure, and quaternary struc-ture. e protein domain is another structural concept that is important in the discussion of protein functionality. Although the denition of a domain varies somewhat in protein research papers, here is a reasonable denition:A domain is a region of a protein that has more interactions within itself than with the rest of the chain.ese interactions include the formation of a hydrophobic core. Indeed, it has been observed that protein domains can oen fold independently. e observation of independent folding is due to experiments that have shown that the subsequence of amino acids in a domain can oen fold into the nal conformation even when the rest of the protein is absent.e following points provide more information about the formation of domains:• Domains can be structurally similar even though they are in pro-teins that are otherwise quite dierent. Such domains usually show a high sequence similarity.• Domains tend to be compact and globular. Linkages between domains are oen loop structures and hardly ever helices or beta strands.
32 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics• Domains have distinct solvent accessible surfaces and are typically separated by water molecules.• Residues within a domain will contact other residues in the same domain. ere is very little contact, if any, between residues in dif-ferent domains.• Usually, a domain is formed from a contiguous residue sequence of the protein. In rare cases, a domain is made up of two or more regions of protein that are subsequences from one or more polypep-tide chains. is is why expert visual inspection is oen required to determine domains.Multiple domains within a single protein oen cooperate to accom-plish related tasks. For example, reverse transcriptase protein of HIV has various domains that work together to convert viral RNA to DNA followed by destruction of the viral RNA. So, by studying the domain structure of a protein we can strive to understand how design principles facilitate particular types of functionality. Although this is an important goal, the mechanisms of cooperative function are not fully understood in many cases.Figure 1.33 presents a simple example of the 6PAX protein that uses two domains to interact with a segment of DNA. is protein is part of a family called the homeodomain proteins. ey interact with DNA to provide transcription regulation and they are important in development and cell dierentiation. When the 6PAX protein interacts with DNA, the event initiates a cascade of protein interactions that lead to the develop-ment of various eye structures. In the gure it is clear that the protein has two hydrophobic cores each responsible for interacting with a par-ticular DNA segment. e two cores are linked by a rather lengthy loop structure.FIGURE 1.33 e two domains of 6PAX interact with DNA.
Introduction ◾ 33 1.5 EXERCISESWork through the topics in the rst part of the tutorial in the User Guide that can be found at (http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/current/docs/UsersGuide/frametut.html).Aer practicing with menu invocations, you should be able to do the following: 1. Getting familiar with Chimera menus Use the Chimera menus to fetch the protein structure with PDB ID 1AY7. en do the following exercises: a. Work with the menus to isolate the three strands of the beta sheet to display them in round ribbon form with the residues in stick form, as in Figure 1.15. b. Use the menus to isolate the beta sheet and display the backbone atoms in the strands, as in Figure 1.14. c. Use the Favorites… Sequence menu to select the amino acid sequence LSALPPEAT within chain A. Proline is usually regarded as a helix breaker (Figure 1.34). Use the Chimera menus to show this sequence in three representations: ribbon, ribbon plus atoms, and atoms/bonds only. Avoid any molecular rota-tions between each of these scenes. Pick a vantage point that best demonstrates the bend in the helix. d. Get familiar with the menu operations needed for a hydrogen bond display. You will also need to select the backbone atoms that are conned to the beta sheet as Figure 1.12. e. Use the Actions… Surface… menu to put a surface over the 1AY7 protein.FIGURE 1.34 Coil with proline residue.
34 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics 2. Structure and functionality Figure 1.35 shows the ribbon diagram of rice cytochrome c (PDB ID 1CCR). ere are only two histidine residues in this protein and they are shown colored in black. One other residue has been made visible: ere is a methionine residue with its sulfur atom hovering just above the Fe atom in the heme group. Do some web searching to discover the biological function of cytochrome c. Compare the structures of myoglobin and cytochrome c by referring to Figures 1.21 and 1.35, respectively. How is the dierence in functionality supported by the dierences in structure? 3. Searching the PDB Figure 1.36 shows the ribbon diagram of a 12-residue fragment of a longer protein. What is the PDB identier of that protein? 4. Beta sheet topologies Taking into account both parallel and antiparallel associations of strands, how many dierent topologies can we have for a three-stranded beta sheet? How many for a four-stranded beta sheet? Draw each sheet as a set of arrows. Ignore the connectivity between the strands. Be sure that you do not count a sheet twice when it is the same sheet already listed but with a dierent orientation in three-space.FIGURE 1.35 Rice cytochrome c (Protein Data Bank ID 1CCR).FIGURE 1.36 (See color insert.) What is the Protein Data Bank ID?
Introduction ◾ 35 5. Cyclotides Essay assignment: Cyclotides are peptides that have a cyclic backbone. ey usually have short primary sequences and oen fold into loop structures that are stabilized by cysteine bridges. What are the anticipated uses of cyclotides? How would their structure facilitate these applications? How is the loop closure accomplished? 6. Heme anity for carbon monoxide Essay assignment: It has been observed that the heme prosthetic group shows an anity for CO that is up to 100,000 times higher than the anity for O2 in an unhindered model [JK95]. However, a distal histidine can provide some steric hindrance (discussed in [OM88]). It should be noted that the geometry of the Fe–C–O con-guration has been debated. For example, Lim et al. [LJ95] state: “ese solution results help to establish how myoglobin discrimi-nates against CO, a controversial issue dominated by the miscon-ception that Fe–C–O is bent.” However, a casual inspection of the Fe–C–O triplet in co-crystallizations such as 1VXF would seem to indicate otherwise. You may also nd [KP99] to be of interest. e investigation for your essay should cover the various issues that relate to binding anity of CO relative to a heme group. In particular, how does anity depend on issues such as hydrogen bonding, electrostatic attraction, Fe–C–O angle, steric hindrance, and the containing protein (hemoglobin vs. myoglobin)?REFERENCES[C88] F. Crick. What Mad Pursuit: A Personal View of Scientic Discovery. Basic Books, New York, 1988 (a reprint edition came out in June 1990).[D05] R. E. Dickerson. Present at the Flood: How Structural Molecular Biology Came About. Sinauer, Sunderland, MA, 2005.[D03] C. M. Dobson. Protein folding and misfolding. Nature, 426 (2003), 884–890.[D06] N. V. Dokholyan. Studies of folding and misfolding using simplied models. Current Opinion in Structural Biology, 16 (2006), 79–85.[D07] R. B. Dyer. Ultrafast and downhill protein folding. Current Opinion in Structural Biology, 17 (2007), 38–47.[EM04] E. G. Emberly, R. Mukhopadhyay, C. Tang, and N. S. Wingreen. Flexibility of β-sheets: principal component analysis of database protein structures. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics, 55 (2004), 91–98.[FB97] A. N. Fedorov and T. O. Baldwin. Cotranslational protein folding. e Journal of Biological Chemistry, 272 (1997), 32715–32718.


===== [17/99] chapter-17.html =====

36 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics[F79] J. S. Fruton. Early theories of protein structure. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 325 (1979), 1–20.[HC02] B. K. Ho and P. M. G. Curmi. Twist and shear in β-sheets and β-ribbons. Journal of Molecular Biology, 317 (2002), 291–308.[IA05] K. Imai, N. Asakawa, T. Tsuji, M. Sonoyama, and S. Mitaku. Secondary structure breakers and hairpin structures in myoglobin and hemoglobin. Chem-Bio Informatics Journal, 5 (2005), 65–77.[JK95] P. Jewsbury and T. Kitagawa. Distal residue-CO interaction in carbon-monoxy myoglobins: a molecular dynamics study of three distal mutants. Biophysical Journal, 68 (1995), 1283–1294.[KB58] J. C. Kendrew, G. Bodo, H. M. Dintzis, R. G. Parrish, H. Wycko, and D. C. Phillips. A three-dimensional model of the myoglobin molecule obtained by x-ray analysis. Nature, 181 (1958), 662–666.[K01] V. A. Kolb. Cotranslational protein folding. Molecular Biology, 35 (2001), 584–590.[KD99] J. Kuriyan and J. E. Darnell Jr. An SH2 domain in disguise. Nature, 398, Mar. 4 (1999), 22–24.[KP99] G. S. Kachalova, A. N. Popov, and H. D. Bartunik. A steric mechanism for inhibition of CO binding to heme proteins. Science, 284 (1999), 473–476.[LB98] D. V. Laurents and R. L. Baldwin. Protein folding: matching theory and experiment. Biophysical Journal, 75 (1998), 428–434.[LJ95] M. Lim, T. A. Jackson, and P. A. Annrud. Binding of CO to myoglobin from a heme pocket docking site to from nearly linear Fe-C-O. Science, 269 (1995), 962–966.[MG00] T. Mizutani, C. Goto, and T. Totsuka. Mammalian selenocysteine tRNA, its enzymes and selenophosphate. Journal of Health Science, 46 (2000), 399–404.[OM88] J. S. Olson, A. J. Mathews, R. J. Rohlfs, B. A. Springer, K. D. Egeberg, S. G. Sligar, J. Tame, J.-P. Renaud, and K. Nagai. e role of the distal histi-dine in myoglobin and haemoglobin. Nature, 336, Nov. 17 (1988), 265–266.[OM97] C. A. Orengo, A. D. Michie, S. Jones, D. T. Jones, M. B. Swindells, and J.M. ornton. CATH—a hierarchic classication of protein domain struc-tures. Structure, 5 (1997), 1093–1108.[PC53] L. Pauling and R. B. Corey. A proposed structure for the nucleic acids. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 39 (1953), 84–97.[PO03] O. Poirot, E. O’Toole, and C. Notredame. Tcoee@igs: a web server for computing, evaluating and combining multiple sequence alignments. Nucleic Acids Research, 31 (2003), 3503–3506.[PR04] G. A. Petsko and D. Ringe. Protein Structure and Function. New Science Press, London, UK, 2004.[PS97] A. C. Papageorgiou, R. Shapiro, and K. Ravi Acharya. Molecular recog-nition of human angiogenin by placental ribonuclease inhibitor—an x-ray crystallographic study at 2.0 Å resolution. e EMBO Journal, 16 (1997), 5162–5177.
Introduction ◾ 37 [SG99] A. W. Sowa, P. A. Guy, S. Sowa, and R. D. Hill. Nonsymbiotic haemoglo-bins in plants. Acta Biochimica Polonica, 46 (1999), 431–445.[S05] J. Skolnick. Putting the pathway back into protein folding. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 102 (2005), 2265–2266.[TR01] C. Tanford and J. Reynolds. Nature’s Robots: A History of Proteins. Oxford University Press, UK, 2001.
This page intentionally left blankThis page intentionally left blank


===== [18/99] chapter-18.html =====

39Chapter 2Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera2.1 MOTIVATIONPython scripting with Chimera allows the user to design, develop, and execute a variety of algorithms that can work with macromolecular data (e.g., the atom coordinates of these molecules), perform any needed cal-culations, and subsequently print results to the IDLE Shell window or to a le. A script can also change the molecular scene being displayed.As described earlier, Chimera provides the user with a wide range of capabilities that can be invoked using menus and command lines. In many situations, these high-level capabilities are sucient for many of the standard tasks that need to be done by the structural biologist. So, why would we need to work with the lower level computations provided by Python scripting? is is an important question because Python script-ing requires a time consuming commitment to develop skills in object-oriented programming.e following points give three reasons for such an investment of your time: 1. Specialized applicationsIn many situations you may need to develop your own special-ized applications that are not achievable by using current menus and 
40 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticscommand lines. For example, you might want to develop a dierent approach for the visualization of some molecular feature or molecu-lar functionality. In general, the ability to do scripting will reduce your dependency on canned programs and thus avoid the con-straints they may impose. 2. Standard procedures might need some customized modicationsIt might be the case that Chimera does provide the basic capabil-ity, but you simply need to extend this functionality to meet some extra project requirements. For example, Chimera does provide structure comparison tools but structure comparison is very compli-cated and there are several dierent criteria for measuring structural similarity. Your application goals might require a dierent approach to the problem. 3. Calculations that are repeated across several instancesVarious applications involve data collection to gather statistical information about macromolecules such as RNA or proteins. is might involve the processing of thousands of instances of side chains or even the processing of thousands of les. For these situations, simple menu invocations will not suce and you will need a script that can automatically si through the extensive data.2.2 PYTHON SKILLSis book will assume an understanding of object-oriented program-ming concepts. Although it is not necessary to be an expert Pythonista, you should be equipped with a basic level of Python programming skills. If you are new to Python, there are several freely available tutorials on the Internet. You can also purchase introductory books on Python, some with an emphasis on bioinformatics. A list of these sources is given in the Reference section. Fortunately, Python is very user friendly and is typically regarded as an easy language to learn. is is especially true if you already have some experience with an object-oriented language such as C++ or Java. Suggested references ([B10], [B09], [HM00], and [K09]) and website links can be found at the end of the chapter. You should have a working knowledge of the following concepts and topics before proceeding:Numbers: integer and oating point arithmeticStringsCollectives: lists, tuples, dictionaries, and sets
Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera ◾ 41 Conditionals: if statements, else statementse range() functionLooping techniques: for statements and while statementsOther control statements: break, continueDening functions: including default arguments and keyword argumentsInput and Output: including formatting and reading/writing of lesClasses: understanding instances, methods, attributes, and inheritanceA novice Python programmer may nd it dicult to follow the mean-ing and intention of a script and so I have tried to provide extra comments as the need arises. Application functionality has been expressed through function denitions and class denitions when object-oriented encapsula-tion was considered to be achievable. To make the scripts more compre-hensible, variable names have oen been given suxes as follows:_A Array_B Boolean_D Dictionary_L List_M Matrix_P Point_S Set_T TupleSo a variable such as hydrophobes_L is a list of objects and we would expect it to be used with methods such as append, count, or extend.2.3 PYTHON SCRIPTINGPython is part of the Chimera download. To get a Python Shell you can invoke the menu item Tools… General Controls… IDLE. You might nd it extremely helpful to set up an IDLE button on your Toolbar. is will allow you to get the Python Shell with a simple button click, thus avoiding the menu descent. To set up this, invoke the menu item Favorites… Add to Favorites/Toolbar…. You will be presented with a dialog box that can be used to put an IDLE button on your Toolbar.
42 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsConsidering the material that will be covered in the rest of this book, it is advisable to set up three more buttons in the Toolbar: the Model Panel, Side View, and Sequence buttons. Aer you complete these preferences, the top-le corner of your Chimera window should look something like that in Figure 2.1.e Python Shell has multiple uses as follows:• You can test syntax or execution of short Python scripts.• You can use the Shell window to get output results from a script that is in execution.• You can open an editing window that may be used to generate a new Python script or to modify a recently produced script.• You can also provide input to a running script.Let us discuss each of these in turn. You can consider the Shell win-dow to be a sophisticated calculator. Type in an expression or small code sequence and it can be immediately executed. e triple “>>>” is a command prompt that awaits input of Python statements. For example, consider the following statements:>>> x = 3.0>>> x**3 + 5.32.0>>>e variable x has been set to 3.0 and the next statement computes the value of an expression that uses x. Note that the result is given on a line without the prompt.FIGURE 2.1 Recommended toolbar buttons for Chimera.
Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera ◾ 43 Let us try something with more relevance to structural bioinfor-matics. To get a protein from the Protein Data Bank (PDB), we can execute:ourProtein = chimera.openModels.open('1AY7', type = 'PDB')[0]If you execute this script line, Chimera will fetch the 1AY7 PDB le fromthe RCSB and it will be displayed in the Chimera application window. We will deal with the details of this statement in Section 2.4. Incidentally, it is possible to delete the model holding the protein data and, as a result, clear the contents of this window by invoking the menu item File… Close Session in the Chimera window.Suppose we want to set up this code snippet as a script in a le. We would go through the following steps:• Use the File… New Window… menu item to get a new edit window.• Type in lines:import chimeraourProtein = chimera.openModels.open('1AY7', type = 'PDB')[0]• Use the File… Save As… menu item to get a Save As dialog. Give the file a relevant name with a “.py” suffix, for example, myTestProg.py. The file can be saved in some directory, which is appropriate for these initial test cases. Now, the edit window can be closed with the assurance that the script has been stored in a.py file.• Later, aer launching Chimera and getting a Python Shell win-dow, we can invoke the menu item File… Open… to open an edit window containing the contents of this le. By invoking Run… Run Module we can execute the script and it will bring in the 1AX7protein.So, that was our rst Python script. It was a very short program, but it did have the power to fetch data from the PDB and display it on the screen. If we wanted to fetch a PDB le from a local directory, we would simply replace the PDB ID string with a string that contained the pathname of the target PDB le.


===== [19/99] chapter-19.html =====

44 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsWe can add a statement that asks for user input. For example, consider the following script:import chimerapdbID = raw_input(“Type in a PDB ID \n”)ourProtein = chimera.openModels.open(pdbID, type = 'PDB')[0]for i in range(len(ourProtein.residues)) print ourProtein.residues[i].type2.3.1 Script 2.1: Using Raw Input to Get a PDB IDIt will ask the user for a PDB ID. When this is typed into the Shell window, the script will fetch the protein le and will iterate through all the residues printing out the type of each residue. For example, if we typed in 1AY7, we would get a list of residue types: ASP, VAL, SER, and so on.Important notes:• Be sure to realize that you will oen be dealing simultaneously with two windows: the Shell window and the Chimera display window. Your next appropriate interaction will depend on which window is currently active. For example, if the Shell window needs more input from you, but the display window is active because you have done some scene manipulation, such as a rotate or zoom, then you will have to use a mouse click to make the Shell window active before you can type in the needed input.• When running one script aer another, be sure to get the display back to its initial state, thus clearing it for the next script. You will need to do a File, Close Session menu invocation before running the next script.Section 2.4 will provide some details that explain the signicance of the Chimera functions used in Script 2.1. Aer that we can get back to other functions that can be used to extract data from a PDB le.2.4 CHIMERA OBJECT HIERARCHYPython is an object-oriented programming language that supports the use of data structures and their associated methods. By starting our scripts with the statementimport chimera
Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera ◾ 45 we immediately gain access to all the objects that are available within Chimera. For example, the Chimera object openModels will track the molecular models that have been extracted from a le that has been opened. For example,model_L = chimera.openModels.open('1AY7', type = 'PDB')will set up a list of models that we have designated as model_L. e list contains only one model because that is all there in this PDB le. is can be veried by looking at the Model Panel (brought to your screen by the menu invocation Tools… General Controls… Model Panel or by simply clicking on the Model Panel button if you have that set up on your Toolbar). We can get the single protein model by using an index of 0, as inourProtein = model_L[0]that accomplishes the same thing as our earlier statement dening ourProtein.It is possible to have a PDB le with several models. is is oen the case with PDB les that give us the results of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) experiments. For example, fetching the le 1ZNF will give you 37models. Look at the Model Panel to verify this. Any one of these mod-els can be accessed by using an index in the range of integers running from 0 to 36 inclusive.Chimera takes full advantage of Python’s object-oriented provisions by creating an object hierarchy that reects the hierarchy of constituents in chemical structures. For example, a protein is a molecule that would have a list of residues, atoms, or bonds. is hierarchy is illustrated in Figure 2.2.Each of the objects just mentioned (chimera.Molecule, chimera.Residue, chimera.Atom, chimera.Bond) has a set of methods. An important aspect of object-oriented programming is that computations dealing with an object are constrained and must use one or more of the methods that are encapsulated with the object. In Figure 2.2, each box contains a set of attributes for the object named in the header of the box. For the sake of simplicity, many of the attributes have been le out. To view a full list for a molecule object, type the following line in the Python Shell:>>> ourProtein = chimera.openModels.open('1AY7', type= 'PDB')[0]
46 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsIn response to the next prompt that appears after the file has been fetched, type in “ourProtein” immediately followed by a period. You should get a list box containing all the attributes for that mol-ecule, as in Figure 2.3. Do not use the mouse with the scroll bar; the list will simply disappear. Instead, use your up/down arrow keys to go through the list. You will see that the list of attributes is far lon-ger than those given in Figure 2.2. Using the arrow keys will move the highlighting band to the attribute that you want to use. It will be selected as an autocompletion append to your statement if you simply resume typing.Attributes include methods for the object and various data descriptors. For example, ourProtein.findAtom(33) is a method that would get the atom corresponding to index 33 in the list of atoms that can be accessed as an object by typing: ourProtein.atoms. So, we could get the name of atom 33 by indexing a list of atoms or by simply using the ndAtom method:>>> ourProtein.atoms[33].nameu'CA'>>> ourProtein.findAtom(33).nameu'CA'>>>Chimera.MoleculeChimera.AtomChimera.BondChimera.ResidueContains a list ofContains a list ofContains a list of+atoms+bonds+residues+color+display+name+atoms+molecule+display+drawmode+color+halfbond+atoms+molecule+id+ribbonDrawmode+ribbonDisplay+ribbonColor+isHelix+isSheet+isTurn+type+bonds+residue+molecule+color+element+display+drawmode+nameFIGURE 2.2 Chimera’s object model. (From http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/docs/ProgrammersGuide/Examples/Main_ObjectModel.html.)
Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera ◾ 47 How many atoms are in the 1AY7 molecule?>>> len(ourProtein.atoms)1678You can get a full list of the attributes and more details about these attributes by using the help function in the Python Shell. For example,Help(ourProtein)prints text in the Shell window describing all the attributes that are associ-ated with the Molecule ourProtein.Now that we have the basic techniques for dealing with Python scripts in the Chimera environment, we can review some of the attributes that will prove to be useful for building larger programs.In Sections 2.5, we will assume that the following statement has been executed:qorProt = chimera.openModels.open('1qor', type = 'PDB')[0]is protein with PDB ID 1QOR is a quinone oxidoreductase from Escherichia coli. It will be a good running example for the next sections because it has two chains, a good representation of secondary struc-tures and two ligands. Although somewhat complicated, it has a rather elegant structure involving an extensive beta sheet and other barrel like structures.** Let us pause to appreciate the intricate molecular beauty of a protein that does its work within the fecal coliform bacteria living in our intestines.FIGURE 2.3 Autocompletion list for a molecule.
48 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics2.5 ATTRIBUTES FOR MOLECULE OBJECTSAs described at the end of Section 2.4, we are assuming that qorProt is a molecule object. In this case, the molecule is a protein so we can also reference its residues as well as atoms and bonds. We now consider some attributes that will prove useful later in the text.Each of the following statements will generate a list of objects:qorProt.atomsqorProt.bondsqorProt.residueseir meaning should be obvious. We can access any object in a list by specifying an index. For example, we can access the atom object at index 44 by using qorProt.atoms[44].Each of the following is a function that can be used to get an object specied by an index:qorProt.findAtom()qorProt.findBond()qorProt.findResidue()For example, we can access the residue object at index 21 by using the construct qorProt.findResidue(21). e following represents two more approaches for referencing residues:qorProt.residueAfter()qorProt.residueBefore()In these cases, the argument for the function is a residue object. For example, we could nd the rst residue in the protein by dening:resObj = qorProt.findResidue(0)en inside a while loop we can progress through the sequence of resi-dues by using a replacement statement such as:resObj = qorProt.residueAfter(resObj)For example, the following script will print the types of all the residues in 1QOR:


===== [20/99] chapter-20.html =====

Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera ◾ 49 resObj = qorProt.findResidue(0)while resObj: print resObj.type resObj = qorProt.residueAfter(resObj)If you execute this code in the Python Shell, you will notice that nal “residues” in the list are all “HOH.” If the programmer wants a residue list that is free of water, then the code should be modied to avoid the “HOH” entries.To get the name of the molecule, we can use:qorProt.nameIn this case, the Python Shell would return the character string “1qor.”Finally, to delete the model we can use:chimera.openModels.close([qorProt])is removes the molecule object and clears it from the display.Chimera does not explicitly support a Chain class. However, it does have a Sequence class that essentially covers the same functionality.2.6 ATTRIBUTES FOR SEQUENCE OBJECTSWe can extract a list of sequences from a protein molecule by working with the sequences() function. Consider the following Python Shell interaction aer dening qorProt:>>> sequences_L = qorProt.sequences()>>> len(sequences_L)2is is expected because 1QOR has two chains. is can be veried by checking the menu item Select… Chain, which will drop a submenu containing the two chain identiers “A” and “B.”2.6.1 Referencing a Sequence ObjectSuppose we continue by extracting the rst member of this list, calling it seqA:>>> seqA = sequences_L[0]>>> seqA<chimera.Sequence.StructureSequence object at 0x000000000A4E14A8>
50 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsIf you happen to know the chain identifiers for the chains (not always “A,” “B,” …) you can get the sequence by using the sequence() function:seqA = qorProt.sequence('A')To get a list of chain identiers, you can demand that the sequences() function provides its results as a dictionary and then you may ask for the keys to the dictionary:chainId_L = qorProt.sequences(asDict = True).keys()2.6.2 Identication of a SequenceIf the sequence was extracted from the list of sequences, then you might not have the chain identifier. This is available with the chain attribute:>>> seqA.chainu'A'ere are various other attributes that will provide more information describing the sequence:>>> seqA.fullName()u'1qor (#0) chain A'>>> seqA.molecule.nameu'1qor'>>> seqA.nameu'chain A'2.6.3 Sequence EntriesTo get the single letter residue types that are in the sequence, we can work with the sequence attribute:>>> seqA.sequence['M', 'A', 'T', 'R', …., 'L', 'I', 'P']To conserve space on this page, most of the sequence entries have been replaced with “….”
Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera ◾ 51 2.6.4 Getting Residue Objects from a SequenceFinally, we can get a list of the residue objects within the chain by using:seqA.residuesYou have to exercise a bit of care here. e length of this list is the same as the length of the sequence but some of the residue entries may be Python “NoneType” objects. Consider the following code snippet that accesses the protein with ID = “2FIF,” builds a dictionary of sequences and then attempts to put all the alpha carbon atoms of chain “A” into an atom list:alphaCarbs_L = []prot = chimera.openModels.open(“2FIF”, type=“PDB”)[0]chains_D = prot.sequences(asDict = True)for r in chains_D['A'].residues: alphaCarbs_L.append(r.findAtom(‘CA’))e snippet produces the following error display in the Python Shell window:Traceback (most recent call last): File “<pyshell#30>”, line 2, in <module> alphaCarbs_L.append(r.findAtom('CA'))AttributeError: 'NoneType' object has no attribute 'findAtom'Run the same code again with a slight change in the last line: if r: alphaCarbs_L.append(r.findAtom(‘CA’))Now the code works. If you use the menu invocation: Favorites… Sequence and then show the sequence for chain “A,” you can see why this happens. e sequence ends with the residues …RLRGG. However the last three entries (RGG) do not have structure information. e PDB le says that the protein has these amino acids in the sequence, but the x-ray analysis of the protein does not give coordinate information for the nal three residues in the chain. e change in the code snippet uses an if statement to check whether the residue object actually exists before attempting to access any of its structural attributes.
52 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics2.6.5 Residue Maps for Sequencese attribute resmap is a dictionary that maps residue objects to a zero-based sequence position. Consider the following Shell interactions:>>> resAtIx2 = qorProt.findResidue(2)>>> resAtIx2.typeu'ARG'>>> seqA.resMap[resAtIx2]3>>> seqA.sequence[3]'R'You might see this as a curious inconsistency because there are twodierent indices associated with the same object. e PDB le for 1QOR states that the residue sequence starts with MATRIEF… (see Figure 2.4b). However, residues corresponding to the 3D structure (com-plete with all atomic coordinates) start with ATRIEF… (see Figure 2.4a). e findResidue(2) expression is nding the residue with index 2 in the 3D structure as displayed. is is zero-based indexing, so ALA is at index 0, THR is at index 1, and ARG is at index 2.So, resAtIx2, the residue object at index 2 is ARG. e resMap attri-bute is reporting that this residue object is at index 3 in the sequence. is is rearmed by the last expression that assures us that seqA.sequence[3] is indeed “R” (the single letter specication for ARG). is is also zero-based indexing. Of course, zero-based indexing is what programmers expect. A biologist looking at the sequence will want to see the number-ing start at 1. is is what we see in Figure 2.4b. In this situation the ARG residue has position 4. is can be determined in a script by using the id.position attribute:>>> resAtIx2.id.position4A2.AR4.AT3.A(a) (b)FIGURE 2.4 (a) Labels on the rst three. (b) Start of sequence for 1QOR.
Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera ◾ 53 So, we have the cautionary note: Be careful! Depending on the context, a residue can be located using any one of three dierent numbers. In our running example with 1QOR, the ARG residue is located using 2,3,or 4.ese issues have implications for the execution of code that is work-ing with the residues attribute of a sequence object. You might not get a residue object if the index corresponds to a residue that is miss-ing from the 3D structure. is is illustrated in the following Shell interactions:>>> seqA.residues[1].typeu'ALA'>>> seqA.residues[0].typeTraceback (most recent call last): File “<pyshell#5>”, line 1, in <module> seqA.residues[0].typeAttributeError: 'NoneType' object has no attribute 'type'>>>In this last example, we have only one residue missing from the struc-tural display, namely, the methionine at the beginning of chain A. It is also possible to have missing structural information within a chain. If you inspect the sequence for 3ZY7, you will see that the residues NTNP have been outlined in a red rectangle to indicate that they are missing from the 3D representation of the structure. In the display, the missing backbone is represented by a straight dashed line. To see a more severe example of missing residues, look at Exercise 2.2.7 ATTRIBUTES FOR RESIDUE OBJECTS2.7.1 Referencing a Residue ObjectIn this section we assume that resObj is a residue object that has been taken from our protein molecule. For example,resObj = qorProt.findResidue(555)As described earlier, it is also possible to generate a residue object by using molecule methods such as residueAfter() and residue-Before(). We can also extract a residue object by axing an index to a list of residue objects generated by using the attribute residues on a protein molecule object.


===== [21/99] chapter-21.html =====

54 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics2.7.2 Identication and Characterization of Residuese following Python Shell interactions show the results for various use-ful attributes of a residue object:>>> resObj.typeu'ARG'>>> resObj.isHelixFalse>>> resObj.isSheetTrue>>> resObj.isStrandTruee previous three statements produce Boolean values that specify the type of secondary structure containing this residue. Note that isSheet and isStrand produce the same results.If a residue is in a coil secondary structure (e.g., the residue with index 111) then all three of these Boolean results will be False.>>> resObj.isHetFalsee attribute isHet will be False if the residue is a standard residue (one of the basic 20 amino acids). e isHet attribute is useful for nding ligands in the protein. For example, the following code:for res in qorProt.residues: if res.isHet and not res.type == 'HOH': print res.typewill print out the names of the 4 molecules that accompany the protein. is includes the two NAP (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phos-phate) molecules that are ligands in the binding pockets of 1QOR.SO4NAPSO4NAPIf the exclusion of “HOH” was removed from the if statement, we would get the previous 4 lines, followed by 432 lines, each containing “HOH.”
Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera ◾ 55 2.7.3 Location of a Residuee id attribute has two useful subattributes:>>> resObj.id.chainIdu'B'>>> resObj.id.position231Note: r es O bj.id.p ositio n has the value 231, which is the position of the residue within chain “B.” We would expect this to dier from 555, which is the index in the entire set of residues. We can also reference the molecule object that contains this residue:>>> resObj.molecule<_chimera.Molecule object at 0x00000000047C21C0>Using this we can determine the name of the molecule containing this residue:>>> resObj.molecule.nameu'1qor'e ssId attribute provides an integer ID for secondary structure in a succession of secondary structures. A change in ssId can help to distin-guish two helices that are distinct secondary structures but are adjacent in the sequence (there is no intervening residue with a dierent secondary structure characterization). For example, the snippet:myoProt = chimera.openModels.open('1JEB', type = 'PDB')[0]for r in myoProt.residues: print r.type, r.id.position, r.id.chainId, r.ssId, r.isHelixproduces a lengthy list that species, for each residue, its type, position, chain ID, ssId, and a Boolean that is True if the residue is in a helix. is includes the six lines:GLY 16 B 8 TrueLYS 17 B 8 TrueVAL 18 B 8 TrueASN 19 B 9 TrueALA 20 B 9 TrueASP 21 B 9 True
56 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsere is a change in ssID in going from VAL 18 B to ASN 19 B. An inspection of 1JEB (see Figure 2.5) shows why this happens. ere is sud-den bend in the structure consisting of two consecutive helices meeting at an angle that is approximately 90 degrees and so these two secondary structures are considered to be dierent helices.2.7.4 Deriving Substructuree atoms attribute provides a list of the atoms in the residue:resObj.atomsFor example, with the current denition of resObj, the following snippet:outStr = ""for atm in resObj.atoms: outStr += " " + atm.nameprint "Residue ", resObj.typeprint "has the following atoms: " , outStrproduces:Residue ARGhas the following atoms: C CA CB CD CG CZ N NE NH1 NH2 OK 17.BV 18.BN 19.BA 20.BFIGURE 2.5 Change in secondary structure ID within 1JEB.
Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera ◾ 57 If you know the name of the atom, then you can get the atom object by using the atomsMap attribute:resObj.atomsMapis is a dictionary that produces a list of atoms. Here is a Shell script example:>>> resObj.atomsMap['N'][0].nameu'N'An alternative strategy is to use the find Atom() method.>>> resObj.findAtom('N')<_chimera.Atom object at 0x000000000497C6C0>To get the number of atoms in the residue we can use:>>> resObj.numAtoms()112.7.5 Other Useful AttributesTo get the Kyte-Doolittle hydrophobicity value, try:>>> resObj.kdHydrophobicity-4.5To list the names of the atoms in the residue use the atomNames() function. It will return a set of strings:>>> resObj.atomNames()set([ u'C', u'CB', u'CA', u'CG', u'NE', u'O', u'CD', u'CZ', u'NH1', u'NH2', u'N'])To determine whether two residues are bonded, you can use the bondedTo() function. It returns a Boolean value. In general, you would expect the following expression to be True (unless the residue aer resObj is in the next chain).resObj.bondedTo(qorProt.residueAfter(resObj))It should be noted that bondedTo will return True if the two residues are cysteines linked by a disulde bridge.
58 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsChi angles and phi, psi angles:>>> resObj.chi1173.89880802506943>>> resObj.chi2155.88664384279298>>> resObj.chi343.69074443200619>>> resObj.chi478.94742632085887>>> resObj.phi-58.981261074117576>>> resObj.psi134.324589201080932.8 ATTRIBUTES FOR ATOM OBJECTS2.8.1 Referencing Atom ObjectsWe can get an atom object by indexing the atom list for the molecule. For example,>>> qorProt.atoms[4128]<_chimera.Atom object at 0x000000000497C6C0>is atom has the name:>>> qorProt.atoms[4128].nameu'N'In the remainder of this section we assume that atomObj is an atom object that has been taken from our 1QOR protein. We use the follow-ing example of an atom object taken from the resObj dened as in Section 2.7.1:atomObj = resObj.findAtom('N')2.8.2 Identication of Atoms and Atom PropertiesAs seen earlier, we can get the name of an atom by using the name attribute:>>> atomObj.nameu'N'


===== [22/99] chapter-22.html =====

Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera ◾ 59 e idatmType is an attribute that is adapted from the program IDATM. is is described in a research paper of Meng and Lewis.*For example, the current atomObj has idatmType given by>>> atomObj.idatmTypeu'Npl'In this case, Np1 corresponds to the following description: sp2-hybridized nitrogen bonded to three other atoms, formally neutral (trigonal planar; amide, aniline)A complete list of IDATM atom types can be found at http://www.rbvi .ucsf.edu/chimera/current/docs/UsersGuide/idatm.htmlTo get the radius of the atom, use the radius attribute:>>> atomObj.radius1.6399999856948853To get the B-factor of the atom use the bfactor attribute. As stated in the pdbwiki, the B-factor is a mix of real thermal displacement, static dis-order (multiple but dened conformations), and dynamic disorder.>>> atomObj.bfactor22.91Finally, we note that the attribute serialNumber gives the serial number for the atom. is is the entry in the second column of the ATOM record for this atom in the PDB le for the protein. For our example, atom:>>> atomObj.serialNumber41302.8.3 Working with Atom CoordinatesIn our algorithms dealing with protein structure, it will be necessary to get the atomic coordinates of any atom in the protein. is is done using the coord() method. For example,>>> atomObj.coord()chimera.Point(38.57699, 48.56300, 8.41300)* E. C. Meng and R. A. Lewis. Determination of molecular topology and atomic hybridization states from heavy atom coordinates. Journal of Computational Chemistry, 12(7), Sept. (1991), 891–898.
60 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsNote that the result of this operation is a Chimera Point object. If need be, you can easily convert a point object to a tuple or a list:>>> tuple(atomObj.coord())(38.577, 48.563, 8.413)>>> list(atomObj.coord())[38.577, 48.563, 8.413]To extract a particular ordinate from the point, you can use an index-ing operator:>>> atomObj.coord()[0]38.577We can also set the coordinates of an atom by using the setCo ord() method as shown in the next code sample. e argument must be a Chimera Point object. To build a point object you will have to import the Point class:from chimera import PointatomObj.setCoord(Point(33.,55.,16))Caution: e display soware in Chimera does not check for the rea-sonableness of atomic positions. It simply does its best to draw the scene. In Figure 2.6, we see that an arbitrary setting of the atomic coordinates for our atomObj can produce a molecule with unrealistic bond lengths.2.8.4 Atom Attributes Related to Chemical StructureTo determine the residue or molecule to which an atom belongs, use the residue and molecule attributes. In the following examples, these attri-butes have been followed by type and name attributes, respectively, to show how they work:FIGURE 2.6 Arbitrary movement of an atom can stretch bonds!
Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera ◾ 61 >>> atomObj.residue.typeu'ARG'>>> atomObj.molecule.nameu'1qor'2.8.5 Atoms and BondsTo get the neighboring atoms bonded to the current atom, we can use the neighbors attribute:>>> atomObj.neighbors[<_chimera.Atom object at 0x000000000497C7D8>, <_chimera.Atom object at 0x000000000497C670>]or use the primaryNeighbors() method:>>> atomObj.primaryNeighbors()[<_chimera. Atom object at 0x000000000497C7D8>, <_chimera.Atom object at 0x000000000497C670>]We can index these lists to pull out a desired neighbor:>>> atomObj.neighbors[1].nameu'CA'>>> atomObj.neighbors[0].nameu'C'e bonds attribute will provide a list of bonds and by using an index we can extract a particular bond, for example,>>> atomObj.bonds[1]<_chimera.Bond object at 0x000000000CF9E490>Or we can simply use the primaryBonds() method to get a particular bond:>>> atomObj.primaryBonds()[1]<_chimera.Bond object at 0x000000000CF9E490>See Section 2.9.2 for a discussion of attributes for bonds.Suppose we dene caNbr to be the alpha carbon neighbor of our “N” atomObj:caNbr = atomObj.neighbors[1]
62 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsere are three strategies for referencing the bond object connecting atomObj to this neighboring atom:>>> atomObj.connectsTo(caNbr)<_chimera.Bond object at 0x000000000CF9E490>>>> atomObj.findBond(caNbr)<_chimera.Bond object at 0x000000000CF9E490>>>> atomObj.bondsMap[caNbr]<_chimera.Bond object at 0x000000000CF9E490>e methods connectsTo() and findBond() take the atom neigh-bor as an argument and return the bond object that connects them. Note that bondsMap does essentially the same functionality but it is a dictionary.2.8.6 Atom Attributes Related to the Displaye following atom attributes will be useful for getting information from the display:>>> atomObj.color.rgba()(0.18823, 0.31372, 0.97254, 1.0)is four component tuple gives the RGB and transparency properties of the color assigned to the atom.Finally, we can determine whether an atom is currently being displayed:>>> atomObj.displayFalseIn this example, we got a False result because the structure was displayed entirely with ribbons and no individual atoms were visible.2.9 ATTRIBUTES FOR BOND OBJECTS2.9.1 Referencing Bond ObjectsChimera maintains a bond list for the entire molecule. So, we could refer-ence these bond objects by indexing the bonds attribute:>>> qorProt.bonds[0]<_chimera.Bond object at 0x0000000009F8E3A0>
Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera ◾ 63 Most algorithms will get bond objects that are associated with specic atoms. e following Shell interaction shows how the bonds attribute for an atom object can be used to reference a list of bonds associated with atomObj.>>> atomObj.bonds[1]<_chimera.Bond object at 0x000000000CF9E490>In the next examples, atomObj will be the same as that used in earlier sections:atomObj = qorProt.findResidue(555).findAtom('N')e running example for the bond will be that between atomObj and the alpha carbon neighbor with index 1:>>> atomObj.neighbors[1].nameu'CA'e bond was referenced using:>>> alphaC_nbr = atomObj.neighbors[1]>>> bondToCA = atomObj.bondsMap[alphaC_nbr]2.9.2 Bond AttributesWe can get the molecule object that contains this bond, illustrated here with a snippet that also gets the name of the molecule:>>> bondToCA.molecule.nameu'1qor'e atoms attribute gives a tuple containing the two atoms at either end of this bond.>>> bondToCA.atoms[0].nameu'CA'>>> bondToCA.atoms[1].nameu'N'e method contains(an_atom) returns True if and only if the an_atom object is at either end of the bond. For example,>>> bondToCA.contains(atomObj)True


===== [23/99] chapter-23.html =====

64 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsSimilar in use to the atoms attribute, the method findAtom(atomIx) returns the atom object indexed by atomIx. Because only two atoms spec-ify a bond, atomIx must be 0 or 1:>>> bondToCA.findAtom(0).nameu'CA'>>> bondToCA.findAtom (1).nameu'N'>>> bondToCA.findAtom (2).nameTraceback (most recent call last): File "<pyshell#161>", line 1, in <module> bondToCA.findAtom (2).nameIndexError: index out of rangee bond method otherAtom(an_atom) returns the atom that is at the other end on the bond containing the atom designated by an_atom.>>> bondToCA.otherAtom(atomObj).nameu'CA'>>> bondToCA.otherAtom (alphaC_nbr).nameu'N'To get the length of a bond, use the length method:>>> bondToCA.length()1.4503137591569617e method sqlength() returns the square of this distance.>>> bondToCA.sqlength()2.10340999999999762.10 WORKING WITH A BATCH OF FILESLater chapters will deal with calculations involving molecular structure (atomic coordinates, bond angles, and so on), but for now, we will concen-trate on scripts that work with attributes of atoms, for example, the type of residue containing the atom and the position of that residue within the protein chain.Before covering this material, we will go through some elementary scripts that can be incorporated into various larger scripts to be covered in subsequent chapters.2.10.1 Dealing with FilesIt is common for a programmer to write a script that deals with several protein les. To avoid the delays that occur when a script must access these 
Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera ◾ 65 les from the PDB, it is convenient to have the data les stored on your own disk. By accessing all the les and putting them on your drive, these delays are encountered once and not during the repeated execution of your script (as might happen when you are debugging your script).Script 2.2 will read a simple text le containing the PDB ID’s of several proteins. en it will use Chimera to fetch the les and then store them into the directory containing the script. e text input has a simple for-mat, for example,Myoglobins1a6m Sperm whale1mba Slug sea hare1mbs Common seal1mwc Pig1ymb Horse2mm1 Human1myt Yellow n tunae rst line is to explain the signicance of the list and will be ignored by the script. In each succeeding line, only the rst four characters will beread.e following code will do the job:import chimera, urllib2, tkFileDialog# Launch dialog to get path of PDB ID list:filePathName = tkFileDialog.askopenfilename()print “Path name for PDB file list is: ”, filePathName# Read file containing list of PDB identifiers:listFileHandle = file(filePathName)listFileHandle.readline() # Skip first linepdbID = listFileHandle.readline()while pdbID: print pdbID[0:4] request = urllib2.Request('http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/files/%s.pdb' % pdbID[0:4]) try: fileHandle = urllib2.urlopen(request) except urllib2.URLError, e: print 'Failure to fetch file' if hasattr(e, 'reason'): print 'Reason: ', e.reason
66 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics elif hasattr(e, 'code'): print 'Error code: ', e.code else: pdbFileContents = fileHandle.read() fileHandle.close() outFile = file(pdbID[0:4] + '.pdb', 'w') outFile.write(pdbFileContents) outFile.close() pdbID = listFileHandle.readline() # Go for next pdbID in the listlistFileHandle.close() # Close the list file.Script 2.2: Getting a Batch of Files from the Protein Data BankNote the use of the tkFileDialog.askopenfilename() method to launch a dialog window that will allow the user to specify the pathname of the le containing the PDB ID list. Aer that, the code uses the basic le- handling statements that should be understandable to most programmers with an introductory knowledge of Python. A more esoteric statement involves the urllib2.Request() method from the urllib2 module. Its use requires that we know the exact URL and its appropriate format to access a PDB le.A variation of the above script uses Chimera to fetch the le and then write it out as a PDB le:import chimerafrom chimera import runCommandimport tkFileDialog# Launch dialog to get path of PDB ID list:filePathName = tkFileDialog.askopenfilename()print “Path name for PDB file list is: ”, filePathName# Read file containing list of PDB identifiers:listFileHandle = file(filePathName)listFileHandle.readline() # Skip first linepdbID = listFileHandle.readline()while pdbID: print pdbID[0:4] prot_L = chimera.openModels.open(pdbID[0:4], type = “PDB”) # Model 0 can be now be modified in preparation # for the PDB file write. # Insert code here to do modifications. outFilePathName = pdbID[0:4] + “.pdb” runCommand(“write format pdb 0 ” + outFilePathName) pdbID = listFileHandle.readline() # Go for next pdbID in the list. chimera.openModels.close(prot_L)listFileHandle.close() # Close the list file.
Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera ◾ 67 Script 2.3: Getting a Batch of PDB Files by Using Chimerae script is slightly shorter but more versatile, because the molecule can be changed before the le write. For example, the runCommand line can be altered to incorporate a selected option:runCommand(“write format pdb selected 0 ” + outFilePathName)Before this command, you can insert statements that select those atoms that will be written out to the PDB le. e selection can be accomplished by means of other runCommand statements or by using a more sophisti-cated selection procedure that might involve calculations. In eect, this allows the user to remove atoms that are not to be included in the PDB le that is to be written (e.g., see Exercise 3).Further options for the write command can be found at http://www .cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/docs/UsersGuide/midas/write.html.Another useful variation of this script would be to access les contain-ing a protein co-crystallized with a ligand. By selecting the ligand before the write command, we can generate a le that contains only that mol-ecule. Note that the format for such a write could be mol2. is would give us the coordinates of ligand atoms when the ligand is docked into the binding site of the protein (see Exercise 4).2.11 HILITER CLASSScripting with Chimera is particularly enjoyable when the output of your program produces a visual change in the display. ese changes can also be used to provide feedback when testing or debugging a lengthy script.e StructBio package, available from the book’s website, contains a class called HiLiter that will be useful to illustrate the behavior of vari-ous scripts in later chapters. We will not discuss the details of the script because it is reasonably straightforward. Instead, we will describe the typical use of HiLiter. e class can be accessed by doing the following import:from StructBio.Utilities.hiLite import HiLiterSuppose that prot is a molecular object that has been previously dened. e statementhiLiter = HiLiter(prot, “white”)
68 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticscreates the object hiLiter as an instance of the HiLiter class. e ini-tialization routine for the class will cause the molecule to be displayed in the wire representation and the background will be colored white. If this second argument is omitted, the default color is black. Aer the object is created, we can use the emphasize method to highlight various atoms in the molecule:hiLiter.emphasize(primaryList, secondaryList)e primaryList is a list of atom objects that will have their repre-sentation changed from wire to ball & stick. e secondaryList is a list of atom objects that will have their representation changed from wire to stick. All atoms not in these lists go back to the wire representation if not already present in that representation. Figure 2.7 (produced by the script for Exercise 11) shows the typical appearance of these changes. In this gure, the larger ball is an alpha carbon that was the single entry in the primary list, while the two smaller spheres (ball & stick representation) are the car-bon and nitrogen atoms that were the two entries in the secondary list.e function clearEm ph asis() can be used to bring the entire scene back to a wire representation without any emphasis. e function call setVerbose(True) can be used to put HiLiter instance in verbose mode. In this mode, the Python Shell window will get a print out of all atom names in both primary and secondary lists whenever the emphasis changes.e use of HiLiter during debugging and testing will help you to settle questions such as: “Did my last computation correctly identify the atoms that my algorithm needs for further computation?” Putting the empha-size method in the body of a loop that is subject to a stepping interaction (such as waiting for a user keystroke) generates an animation that helps you understand the behavior of the program.FIGURE 2.7 Example of a HiLiter instance putting emphasis on three atoms.


===== [24/99] chapter-24.html =====

Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera ◾ 69 2.12 HBONDDICTS CLASSIn a protein, it is possible for bond lengths and bond angles to change but typically with very small alterations. Protein exibility is mainly achieved by changes in the phi and psi dihedral angles. However, these changes are not arbitrary and are subject to various constraints mostly present due to the existence of hydrogen bonds. For example, beta strands tend to stay in sheet structures that are held in particular formations by the existence of hydrogen bonds.e StructBio package, available from the book’s website, contains a class called HBondDicts that is useful for the creation of dictionaries that describe the hydrogen bonds in a protein. Use the following to access the class:from StructBio.HBonds import HBondDictse interested reader can view the source code to get more details about its operation. Instead of a line-by-line analysis of the program, we will provide a higher level description of both its activities and the dictionaries that have been provided for user applications.When an HBondDicts object is instantiated, the __ini __ method will execute the findHBonds method in the FindHBond class that is part of the Chimera installation. is will generate a list of tuples that specify all the hydrogen bonds. e initialization method then builds the hBond_D dictionary to be described in Section 2.12.1. Some private sup-port functions such as __SScode and __categoryCode are used to help in the construction of these dictionaries.2.12.1 Using the HBondDicts ClassAer fetching a protein using a statement such as:prot = chimera.openModels.open(protID, type=“PDB”)[0]e protein object can be passed to the class __init __ function by instantiating an HBondDicts object, for example,hBds = HBondDicts(prot)is instantiation builds all the required dictionaries for fur-ther use in the program. Generation of hydrogen bonds is actually a 
70 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticscomplicated procedure that involves several issues. If you pull down the Chimera menu item Tools… Structure Analysis… FindHBond you will get a dialog window that shows several of the options that are available in the creation of hydrogen bond representations. In the HBondDicts initialization just shown, default values are used for the geometric constraints placed on the bond. e denition line for the __init__ function isdef __init__(self, prot, dist_Slop = 0.4, angle_Slop = 20.0):so, you can use constraints that are dierent from the default values if desired. Going along with our example, let us describe the dictionaries that would be available for the hBds object:• e dictionary hBds.hBond_D provides a mapping from donor atoms to acceptor atoms. e keys for the dictionary are atom objects representing the donor atoms (usually a subset of the nitro-gen atoms in the protein backbone). e dictionary value corre-sponding to a key is a list of acceptor atoms with each atom having a single hydrogen bond going to the donor atom specied by the key. Usually, a list will have only one entry, but occasionally one may encounter a situation involving more than one acceptor for a single donor.• e dictionary hBondSameChain_D provides some descriptive information about the hydrogen bonds. Keys for this dictionary are (donor, acceptor) tuples. Each entry in the tuple is an atom object. Naturally, each tuple species a hydrogen bond and the value cor-responding to a key is True if and only if the donor and acceptor are in the same chain.• e dictionary hBondCategory_D provides more informa-tion about the hydrogen bond. e keys are the same as for the hBondSameChain_D dictionary. e value for a key is a string that holds a code describing the signicance of the bond:• “HE”: e donor and acceptor atoms are both in the same helical secondary structure.• “PL”: e donor and acceptor atoms are in beta strands that are running in parallel.
Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera ◾ 71 • “AP”: e donor and acceptor atoms are in antiparallel beta strands.• “NA”: “None of the above,” this code is a catchall for any other H-bond scenario.See Exercises 13 and 15 for problems related to this class.2.13 EXERCISES 1. Starting with a simple Python scriptGet a Python Shell and use it to get a new window in which you will write a Python script. e script should read a PDB le when given the PDB ID of a protein (the ID can be a parameter string in the program). e script should fetch the PDB le and then print (to the Shell window) a table with a single row for each residue in the protein. Each line should contain the residue type, followed by the residue position and chain identier (the latter two entries separated by a period). A nal column should print out a code that species the secondary structure containing this residue: H for helix, S for strand, and C for coil. Here is the rst output line for the protein with PDB ID = 1QU9:SER 2.A CSome miscellaneous observations related to 1QU9: ere are no atom coordinates for the Met residue in position 1. Consequently, it is not in the residues list for the protein. Many of the residues have type “HOH.”Do some Internet searching to get information about the CSP residue at position 107. 2. Mapping atom labels to atom objectsIn later chapters, we will be doing exercises that involve nding atoms that are specied by an atom name within a residue that is identied by position and chain identier. Although it is easy to nd a residue if you know its index in the protein’s residue list, it is a bit more dicult to locate a residue by using its position in the chain. e goal of this exercise is to program a short function that will gen-erate a dictionary that maps atom labels to atom objects. If you had 
72 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsan atom object (call it a), you could map the atom object to an atom label by using the string:':' + str(a.residue.id.position) + '.' + a.residue.id.chainId + '@' + a.namee generated dictionary will allow you to reverse this mapping: When such a string is given to the dictionary as a key, it will return the atom object as the corresponding dictionary value.When your function is given a protein molecule object, it should scan the atoms in the protein and generate the dictionary. Test the dictionary with a short mainline program that fetches the PDB le “1BRF” and then calls the function. To show that the dictionary works, print out the names of the atoms with labels “:54.A@FE” and “:8.A@SG”. ey should be FE and SG. Further testing should print out the residue positions and residue types for all keys in the dictionary. 3. A Python script that deals with atom coordinatesis exercise will get you started with Python scripts that work with protein les and atom coordinates: Write a script that reads a PDB le when given the PDB ID of a protein (the ID can be a param-eter string in the program). e script should access the atomic coor-dinates in the PDB le and then print the following: a. e centroid of all atomic positions given in the le. b. e centroid of all alpha carbon atoms in the protein. c. e centroid of all atoms in each chain. d. e centroid of all alpha carbon atoms in each chain.Test your script on the PDB le 1HIV. Parts (c) and (d) should be applied to chains A and B only. Chain I is a ligand and you can ignore it for parts (c) and (d). 4. Listing bond pairs and geminal pairsWrite a script that accesses the protein with ID 1OOH. It should build a bond dictionary bondDict with 20 keys. A key will be a string with three characters specifying the type of one of the 20 amino acids. e entry corresponding to a key should be a list of pairs of atom names that specify the bonds that can be found in that residue. For example, b o n d Dic t[“C YS”] should return the list:
Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera ◾ 73 ['C-CA', 'C-O', 'CA-N', 'CA-C', 'CA-CB', 'CB-CA', 'CB-SG', 'N-CA', 'O-C', 'SG-CB']e script should also build a geminal dictionary gmnlDict with 20 keys. e keys have the same signicance as just described, but now the entry corresponding to a key should be a list of pairs of atom names that specify the geminal pairs in that residue. Two atoms form a geminal pair if they are both bonded to a third atom. For example, g m n l Dict[“ M E T”] should return the list:['CA:O', 'O:CA', 'N:C', 'N:CB', 'C:N', 'C:CB', 'CB:N', 'CB:C', 'CA:CG', 'CG:CA', 'CB:SD', 'SD:CB', 'CG:CE', 'CE:CG']e script should write out the dictionaries as two les: bonds-InResidues.txt and geminalsInResidues.txt. 5. 90° rotationRead the document at: http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/education_ discussion/molecule_of_the_month/download/PotassiumChannels .pdf. Use Chimera to get a display of the protein 1K4C. You will notice that the PDB le contains all the atoms for a single protein molecule. However, the potassium channel is actually comprised of four such mol-ecules. e objective of this exercise is to compute the coordinates of the other three proteins so that when you look down the zaxis, the display will contain a scene that is similar to that shown in the second gure of the PDF document PotassiumChannels.pdf. Each of the four proteins will be stored as a Chimera model. When your Python script is running properly, you will see the four models listed in a small dialog box that can be launched by the menu invocation: Favorites/Model Panel. e display of the four models can be controlled by checking the appropriate boxes.How do we build the other three protein models?If you look carefully at the 1K4C display you will notice that it has 7 potassium atoms within the het chain. Furthermore, if you inspect the PDB le, you will discover that the atomic coordinates of these potassium atoms are specied in the HETATM records as follows:HETATM 4021 K K 3001 155.336 155.342 -30.553 1.00 14.49 KHETATM 4022 K K 3002 155.331 155.331 -33.953 1.00 15.51 KHETATM 4023 K K 3003 155.341 155.323 -37.162 1.00 15.69 KHETATM 4024 K K 3004 155.330 155.324 -40.505 1.00 16.84 KHETATM 4025 K K 3005 155.327 155.335 -47.577 1.00 24.94 KHETATM 4026 K K 3006 155.339 155.327 -22.975 1.00 47.51 KHETATM 4027 K K 3007 155.343 155.330 -26.017 1.00 65.44 K


===== [25/99] chapter-25.html =====

74 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticse interesting observation here is that the (x, y) coordinates of all seven atoms are almost the same. In fact, the average x coor-dinate has a value of 155.335 and the average y coordinate has a value of 155.330. Allowing for a small amount of noise in the (x,y) coordinates, we see that the potassium atoms are all arranged along a line that is parallel to the z axis. Consider what happens if the 3D position of every atom in a molecule is modied by sub-tracting (155.335, 155.330, 0.0) from the coordinates. Note that the z coordinate does not change. Each potassium atom will end up on the z axis.To get the four models, you should do the following: a. Generate four models each a copy of 1K4C. Consider the models to be indexed as 0, 1, 2, and 3. b. Move the atoms in all molecules so that the potassium atoms line up on the z axis. c. Rotate model 1 about the z axis through an angle that is equal to 90°, rotate model 2 about the z axis through an angle that is equal to 180°, and nally, rotate model 3 about the z axis through an angle that is equal to 270°.Relevant notes: a. e rotation does not require any sophisticated use of matri-ces or trigonometric calculations. Chimera has a function called xform that provides an easy way to do translation and rotation, but you are not allowed to use this approach. Instead, you should note that because the angles are all mul-tiples of 90°, there is a very simple relationship between the initial coordinates of an atom and the nal coordinates aer such a rotation operation. Your script should work with the actual coordinates to achieve such a rotation. Why avoid xform if it is available? e goal of this question is for you to learn scripting techniques that deal with the access of atomic coordinates and their use in subsequent calculations. ese techniques will be very important for structural calculations in later exercises.
Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera ◾ 75 b. During the initial load of the proteins, they will be established in a viewing frustum in front of the Chimera camera. When your script modies atom coordinates, it may happen that the molecules are shied outside the frustum and the display is empty. To recover the scene, you should do the menu invo-cation: Favorites... Side View. is will get you a Viewing dialog. You can then click on View All to get the proteins back into the frustum.Your display should be similar to that of Figure 2.8. Note the orange girdle around the lower part of the channel. is part of thesurface is above residues that are generally hydrophobic. is is the region of the channel that would be embedded in the cellular membrane (note that there are no water molecules around this part of the channel). 6. Indices and positionsConsider the following Shell interactions:>>> opkProt = chimera.openModels.open('1opk', type='PDB')[0]>>> resAtIx0 = opkProt.findResidue(0)>>> resAtIx0.typeu'ASN'>>> seqA = opkProt.sequence('A')>>> seqA.resMap[resAtIx0]43>>> resAtIx0.id.position83FIGURE 2.8 (See color insert.) Potassium channel 1K4C with all chains in place.
76 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsis code fetches the PDB le with ID = “1OPK.” is protein (c-Abl tyrosine kinase) has been studied because of its relationship to chronic myelogenous leukemia. Unfortunately, the rst 82 residues of the protein are missing in the structural x-ray analysis (they are in a long loop that is dicult to localize during crystallization). In the preceding code, we have three numbers: 0, 43, and 83. Explain the signicance of each. How do they relate to the sequence display (menu item Favorites… Sequence) and the label of the rst residue in the display of the protein. Explain the results that you get when the following two expressions are executed in the Shell:seqA.residues[43].typeseqA.residues[42].type 7. Writing PDB les each with a single modelWrite and test a function w rite M o dels(prot) described as follows:Input: A protein model containing several submodels (typical of PDB les for protein structures derived from NMR experiments).Output: e function should write out one or more les in PDB format, each le containing only one submodel from the le. e le name should have an appropriate sux to distinguish it from the original PDB le. For example, the rst submodel obtained from 1A H1.p d b would have le name 1AH1_01.pdb.Test the function on any of the following PDB entries: 1BMR, 1DW5, 1QDP, 1D1H, 1N4N, 1IJC, 1PFD, 2LI3, 1AH1. 8. Writing PDB les each with a single chainWrite and test a function writeChains(prot, unique = False) described as follows:Input: A protein model and a Boolean ag unique with default value False.Output: e function should write out one or more les in PDB format, each le containing only one chain taken from the protein. If the unique parameter is set to True, then the function is to avoid the repeated writing of chains that are the same. In other words, a homodimer will generate only one le. Test the function on the fol-lowing PDB entries: 3MI1 (should generate 2 les) and 3M1I (should generate 3 les). To distinguishthese single chain les from regu-lar PDB les, you shouldappend the chain ID as a sux in the le 
Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera ◾ 77 name. For example,the rst le written out for 3MI1 would have le name: 3MI1A.pd b. 9. Writing PDB les each with a single protein substrateModify Script 2.3 so that it accesses the PDB les specied in the following text le. It should extract the substrate peptide from each le and save it to your directory as a PDB le. Each substrate peptide can be identied as chain P.HIV Protease with Substrate Complexes 1KJF 1KJG 1KJH 1KJ4 1KJ7 1F7A 10. Writing MOL2 les each with a single ligand moleculeModify Script 2.3 so that it accesses the PDB les specied in the following text le. It should extract the inhibitor from each le and save it to your directory as a MOL2 le. Each inhibitor can be identi-ed as a residue with type given by the three character code in the second column.HIV Protease Inhibitors 3NDW RIT Ritonavir 2NNP ROC Saquinavir 2AVO MK1 Indinavir 3EL5 1UN Nelfinavir 3SM2 478 Amprenavir 2Q5K AB1 Lopinavir 3EL9 DR7 Atazanavir 2O4P TPV Tipranavir 3SO9 017 Darunavir 2FDE 385 Brecanavir 11. B-factors and exibilitye B-factor of an atom is linearly related to the mean square displacement of an atom from its average position. Various research papers have used the B-factor of an alpha carbon atom as a rst approximation for the assessment of the exibility of the protein backbone at that position: a larger B-factor indicates more exibility. Note that bfactor is an attribute for an atom in the Chimera object model.
78 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsA word of caution: e B-factor is inuenced, to some extent, by the eects of crystal packing before x-ray analysis. Consequently, the use of B-factors does not necessarily give us a completely accurate assessment of the protein’s exibility as it would occur in the cyto-solic environment.*e goal of this exercise is to assess the change in exibility when HIV protease is co-crystallized with Tipranavir (one of the protease inhibitors currently available as an anti-HIV drug). e exercise will also give you some experience with the use of plotting facilities that are part of matplotlib module.Steps for this exercise are as follows: a. Get familiar with the plot facilities available with Chimera. b. Generate the data. c. Generate a bar chart for the data and make appropriate observations.Start by reviewing Script D.1 in Appendix D. is will show you how matplotlib.pyplot can be imported and used to generate bar charts.To generate the data, your script should access two PDB les: 1HHP (the “apo” or ligand-free form of HIV protease) and 2O4P (HIV protease in complex with Tipranavir). For each protein, you should generate an array containing the B-factors of the 99 alpha carbon atoms in chain A.A direct comparison of the B-factors corresponding to two dier-ent crystallizations is not advisable because each x-ray analysis may go through a renement procedure that leads to dierent scales for the B-factors.† So, each data set should be modied by a normalization calculation: σ()()=−B-factorBf BfBfwhere Bf is the B-factor that Chimera gets from the PDB le, Bf is the mean B-factor computed across all the alpha carbon atoms of * G. Song and R. L. Jernigan. vGNM: A better model for understanding the dynamics of proteins in crystals. Journal of Molecular Biology, 369 (2007), 880–893.† Z. Yuan, J. Zhao, and Z. X. Wang. Flexibility analysis of enzyme active sites by crystallographic temperature factors. Protein Engineering, 16 (2003), 109–114.


===== [26/99] chapter-26.html =====

Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera ◾ 79 the protein chain (except for the rst three and last three residues), and σ()Bf is the standard deviation computed across all the alpha carbon atoms of the protein chain (except for the rst three and last three residues). e rst three and last three residues are usually omitted because chain termini are typically very exible and may lead to bias in the computation of the mean and standard deviation values. e mean and standard deviation functions are available in the Python numpy module.Use a modied version of the Bar Chart Example script to show how the two proteins dier in their B-factors as you move along the 99 alpha carbon atoms in the backbone (Figure 2.9). (Use green for the apo form and red for the inhibited form of the protein.)Now answer the question: How is the information that you see in the bar chart consistent with the behavior of the Tipranavir inhibitor acting as an anti-HIV drug? Hint: Residues 46–56 are usually con-sidered to be the so-called ap region of the protease. 12. HiLite class testTo get familiar with use of the HiLiter class, available from the book’s website (Chapter 2 scripts), write a small mainline program that reads a protein le and then uses the HiLite class to sequentially emphasize the backbone atoms in the residues. As you step from one residue to the next, let the alpha carbon atom be the single entry in the primary list while the adjacent nitrogen and carbon atoms dene two entries for the secondary list. Step pacing can be achieved by waiting for the user to depress the enter key.40 45 50 55 60FIGURE 2.9 (See color insert.) A section of the plot comparing the B-factors.
80 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics 13. HBondDicts class testWrite a script that sequentially highlights the atoms involved in hydrogen bonding. Use the HiLiter class and the HBondDicts class. In response to the user pressing the enter key, the animation should move to the next donor, acceptor pair with the donor atom in the primary list and the acceptor atom in the secondary list of the HiLiter object. Use the verbose mode of HiLiter and, for each hydrogen bond, you should also print out the dictionary values for hBondSameChain_D and hBondCategory_D. 14. Introducing the Surfaces classe next exercise makes use of the Surfaces class (see AppendixB) that can be used to display various surfaces in your molecular scene. For this exercise, you should experiment with the add Polygon function that can be used to display convex polygons. Each polygon is specied by an ordered list of vertex coordinates. A polygon is drawn as a set of triangles. Each triangle is comprised of three vertices: two consecutive vertices in the polygon vertex list and the centroid of all vertices in the list. Note that the vertices do not have to be coplanar, but in most applications they will be either coplanar or fairly close to being coplanar.e class can be instantiated with an empty argument list, for example,pDisp = Surfaces()Aer this, we can bring polygons into the display by adding them to the instance, for example,pDisp.addPolygon(vertices_L, polyColor, transparency) Here, vertices_L is a list of numpy arrays specifying the 3D coor-dinates of the vertices of a polygon in the display space. e color is designated by polyColour. is is a three component tuple speci-fying the color in RGB format. e transparency parameter is a value between 0.0 and 1.0 specifying the transparency of the surface.pDisp.display()For example, running the next script will produce the two poly-gons in Figure 2.10.
Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera ◾ 81 import chimera, numpyfrom chimera import runCommandfrom numpy import arrayfrom StructBio.Scenographics.surfaces import SurfacesrunCommand(“set bg_color white”)pd = Surfaces()v1 = array([ 0., 4., 0.0])v2 = array([ 2., 1., 0.0])v3 = array([ 1., -3., 0.0])v4 = array([-1., -3., 0.0])v5 = array([-2., 1., 0.0])pd.addPolygon([v1,v2,v3,v4,v5], (0.0, 1.0, 0.5), 0.9)v1 = array([ 0., 2., 2.0])v2 = array([ 2., 1., 2.0])v3 = array([ 1., -3., 2.0])v4 = array([-1., -3., 2.0])pd.addPolygon([v1,v2,v3,v4], (0.0, 0.5, 1.0), 0.9)pd.display()To get familiar with this class, try the following problem: Generate the display of a cube with the eight vertex coordinates specied as ()±±±1, 1, 1,. Choose any random coloring scheme (perhaps with some bias to the primary colors: red, green, and blue). 15. Drawing H-Bond PlatesA worthwhile objective in structural bioinformatics is to represent complicated structures with simplied visual components. e clas-sic ribbon diagram is an example of this goal. In this exercise, we will generate rectangular plates that bridge neighboring beta strands. e visual objective is to get a beta sheet to look like a sheet. In Section 3.7, we will provide a more compelling argument for the construction of FIGURE 2.10 Displaying two polygons.
82 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsH-bond plates. is visualization is especially useful for larger pro-teins that have the beta meandering motif, for example, PDB ID = 1FJ1.To give these plates some biological relevance, we will stipulate the following rules: a. Each plate corresponds to a single hydrogen bond involving a backbone nitrogen donor and its associated oxygen acceptor. Both donor and acceptor atoms must be in a beta strand. e strands need not be in the same chain. b. e four vertices of a plate will be determined by the alpha carbon atoms on either side of the donor and acceptor pair. c. Each of the short sides of a plate will have vertices that are consecutive alpha carbon atoms and in the same chain.For example, Figure 2.11 shows three strands in a parallel beta sheet. e hydrogen bonds are represented by thin gray lines. In this gure, the four sided plate outlined with dashes corresponds to the hydro-gen bond donor labeled with Ni where the subscript i denotes the index for the residue containing that atom. e short sides of the plate are dened by the pairs (CAj, CAj+1) and (CAi–1, CAi). e nal rule stipulating that each member of this pair must be in the same chain is necessary to avoid peculiar situations near the start and end residues of a chain. Although the pairs can be in dierent chains, we want to avoid the undesired situation in which a short side jumps from one chain to another.Ci–2Ni–1CAi–1CAj+1Nj+1CAjNj+2Cj+1Cj–1CAiCi–1CiNiOjNjCjFIGURE 2.11 Atom numbering for parallel strands.
Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera ◾ 83 Figure 2.12 shows a plate that is in an antiparallel beta sheet.To give these plates additional structural signicance they are to be col-ored according to the following rules:Let us look at an example. e trimeric autotransporter adhesin pro-tein from Bartonella henselae (PDB ID = 3D9X). It is a beautiful struc-ture with three chains that are intertwined to form various beta sheets. Figure2.13 shows a ribbon representation with H-bonds present. Ribbons have been colored as follows: Chain A (goldenrod), Chain B (aquamarine), and Chain C (medium purple).Incidentally: If you inspect this structure, it is clear that any one of the three chains cannot adopt its nal structure when it has just been gener-ated by the ribosome. It is likely that the antiparallel sheets form early, but the nal structure can only be formed when all three chains meet up to intertwine with each other.Ci–2Ni–1CAi–1CAjNj+2Cj+1Cj–1CAiCi–1CiNiCjNjOjCAj+1Nj+1FIGURE 2.12 Atom numbering for antiparallel strands.Color RGB Code Signicanceforest green034 139 034H-bond linking parallel strands, same chaincornower blue100 149 237H-bond linking antiparallel strands, same chainspring green000 255 127H-bond linking parallel strands, dierent chainssky blue135 206 235H-bond linking antiparallel strands, dierent chains


===== [27/99] chapter-27.html =====

84 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsWith all the plates drawn, you should get a scene as in Figure 2.14. In this scene, the backbone has been drawn as a chain trace in stick form (no side chains visible). Note that each plate has two edges that are coincident with two alpha carbon to alpha carbon line segments of the chain trace.is exercise is somewhat complicated, so we will break it up by consid-ering the steps that will be necessary:FIGURE 2.13 (See color insert.) e autotransporter adhesin protein from Bartonella (PDB ID = 3D9X).FIGURE 2.14 3D9X drawn with H-bond plates.
Accessing and Displaying Molecular Data with Chimera ◾ 85 a. Aer fetching the PDB le, generate an HBondDicts instance.Suggestion: Use dist_Slop = 0.5 and angle_Slop = 35.0.b. Use the hBondCategory_D dictionary of the HBonds instance to get the hydrogen bonds and their categorization.c. Determine the residues of the donors and acceptors and then deduce the locations of the alpha carbon atoms that ank the donors and acceptors. Be careful with end of chain issues: You want to avoid hav-ing a plate that goes from one chain to another.d. Using the Surfaces class, construct the plates and subsequently display them.More details for these steps are as follows:Your script should go through all the H-bond donors and for each donor it should get the coordinates of the four alpha carbons dening the corners of the plate (as described in Figures 2.11 and 2.12). Use the addPolygon function of the Surfaces class to generate the plate in the display. Aer all the plates have been added to the surface, as a collection of polygons, the script can execute the display() function to get the surface model displayed in the Chimera window.You should be able to see the model as an entry in the Model Panel named “H-Bond Plates” if you instantiate the Surfaces object using the function call:Surfaces(modelName = “H-Bond Plates”).Recall that the Model Panel can be accessed using the menu invocation:Favorites… Model Panel.You should now have enough information to write your script. Cautionary note: If you are referencing residues in a protein, using the residueBefore or residueAfter method, be careful to take the appro-priate action when you cross from one chain to the next. If you are not careful about this, it is possible to get long skinny triangles that have no relevance to our problem.Show how your script works with the following four proteins (asusual, be sure to invoke the menu File… Close Session between each test):a. 3D9X (do you get the same result as in Figure 2.13?)b. 2F0C (note the beta prism in the middle of the protein.)
86 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsc. 1EMA (a nice example of a beta barrel.)d. 3ZY7 (see next paragraph.)e. A protein of your own choice (try to nd a protein that has a beta sheet conguration dierent from the test cases above.)Note: e 3ZY7 protein is a computational design of a symmetric homo-dimer. e research paper at: http://www.pnas.org/content/108/51/20562.abstract discusses how the designers got the two chains to stick together along two beta strands. Your output should show this bridging as a sequence of sky blue plates (everything else colored in cornower blue). Another note: e H-bond le for this protein contains extra lines for alternate positions of the donor and acceptor atoms. Use the alternates labeled “A” (e.g., “N.A”) and ignore lines designated with “B” alternates.REFERENCES[B10] S. Bassi. Python for Bioinformatics. Chapman & Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, FL, 2010.[B09] D. M. Beazley. Python Essential Reference. Fourth edition, Addison-Wesley, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2009.[HM00] D. Harms and K. McDonald. e Quick Python Book. Manning Publications, Greenwich, CT, 2000.[K09] J. Kinser. Python for Bioinformatics. Jones and Bartlett, Sudbury, MA, 2009.WEBSITES FOR PYTHONe Python Tutorial: http://docs.python.org/tutorial/TP (tutorials point): http://www.tutorialspoint.com/python/index.htmA Beginner’s Python Tutorial: http://www.sthurlow.com/python/Python via YouTube: http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLEA1FEF17E1E5C0DA


===== [28/99] chapter-28.html =====

87Chapter 3Algorithms Dealing with Distance3.1 MOTIVATIONDistance measurements are fundamental operations in the analysis of molecular structure. Most of these measurements are done to com-pute interatomic distances that are part of a more extensive analysis such as studies dealing with protein flexibility, docking of ligands, or evaluation of energy functions. All these measurements assume that the coordinates of the atoms are accessible. For example, coor-dinates would be available when a Protein Data Bank (PDB) file has been accessed and processed. This chapter also considers other cal-culations dealing with atomic coordinates such as the computation of the centroid of a collection of atoms. More esoteric computations would involve the perpendicular distance between an atom and a plane determined by other atoms in the system.3.2 CALCULATING INTERATOMIC DISTANCESere are several ways to calculate interatomic distances. One can use the following menu invocation: Tools… Structure Analysis… Distances. is will launch the Structure Measurements dialog window, and one can then designate atom pairs for the distance calculation. Since our emphasis is on Python scripts, we cover the techniques that allow one to calculate distances that can be used for further calculations in a script. All distance 
88 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticscalculations will be based directly or indirectly on the familiar Euclidean formula given by Equation 3.1: ,xx yyzz222dabababab()()()()=−+− +− (3.1)where atom a has coordinates (ax, ay, az) and atom b has coordinates (bx, by, bz).To illustrate the various techniques, we repeat some of the distance cal-culations that were done by Watenpaugh and others [WS80] in their study of rubredoxin (PDB identier: 4RXN). Rubredoxin is a metalloprotein containing a single iron atom coordinated by four cysteine sulfur atoms. In this beautiful arrangement, the cysteine residues act like the prong set-ting of a diamond ring holding the iron atom at the center of a tetrahedral structure (Figure 3.1).Calculations done by Watenpaugh and others [WS80] included the computation of distances between the iron atom and each of the four coordinating sulfur atoms. As a running example, we pose the following simple question: what is the interatomic distance between the iron atom and the sulfur atom of CYS 6 in 4RXN?We start with the following code snippet, which derives the coordinates of the two atoms:p = chimera.openModels.open(“4RXN”, type = “PDB”)[0]for r in p.residues: if r.type == “FE”: feCoords = r.findAtom(“FE”).coord() if r.id.position == 6: sgCoords = r.findAtom(“SG”).coord()FIGURE 3.1 An iron atom held by cysteine residues in rubredoxin (Protein Data Bank identier: 4RXN).
Algorithms Dealing with Distance ◾ 89 is script nds the target atoms, and for each atom the atomic coordi-nates are accessed as an attribute of the corresponding atom object. Note that the coordinates are returned by the coord() function as a Point object. With the Point objects stored in the variables feCoords and sgCoords, we can compute the interatomic distances using a straightfor-ward application of Equation 3.1. is formula uses the individual compo-nents of the coordinates of the atoms. In our case, ax, ay, and az correspond to feCoords[0], feCoords[1], and feCoords[2], whereas bx, by, and bz correspond to sgCoords[0], sgCoords[1], and sgCoords[2], so calcula-tion of the distance becomess = 0.0for i in range(3): s += (feCoords[i] - sgCoords[i])**2distance = s**0.5Experienced Python programmers will typically avoid loops when-ever possible. To get a more concise implementation of the distance func-tion, we note that some calculations can be done on Point objects. For example, subtracting a Point object from another Point object will pro-duce a c h i m e r a.Ve c t or object. So the previous four lines of code can be replaced by the following single line:distance = ((feCoords - sgCoords)*(feCoords - sgCoords))**0.5where the “*” operation is computing the inner product of the two vectors.Another approach is to use the norm function within the numerical Python module. Aer importing the linalg module (which may be needed for other calculations as well),import numpyfrom numpy import linalgwe can derive the distance using the following simple calculation:distance = linalg.norm(feCoords-sgCoords)We should also note that Chimera has a distance function for coordi-nate objects:distance = feCoords.distance(sgCoords)
90 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsIn all four cases, the value of the distance will be 2.333. is is consis-tent with the observations made in [WS80].3.3 APPLICATIONSDistance calculations are oen the rst steps performed in more extensive calculations, for example, the evaluation of potential energy between two atoms that share some sort of bond. For example, the hydrogen bonds discussed in Chapter 2 will have a bond strength that is dependent on interatomic distance. Chimera works with this dependency when it has to determine whether a hydrogen bond has enough signicance to be displayed. e threshold for this decision can be altered by the user: the menu invocation Tools… Structure Analysis… FindHBond will launch a dialog window that allows you to relax these distance constraints by an amount of your choosing.Many algorithms in structural bioinformatics rely on the collection of statistical information related to interatomic distances. For example, Zhang and others [ZL04] use a database of collected statistical informa-tion to derive a distance-dependent, pairwise statistical potential uijr(),, for the atom type pair specied by indices (i, j). ey refer to this as the distance-scaled nite ideal-gas reference state energy function. eir anal-ysis uses the inverse-Boltzmann formula: uijr RTNijrNijrobs()()()=−,, In,,,,exp (3.2)where R is the gas constant, T is the temperature, Nijr(),,obs is the observed number of atom type pairs (i, j) within the distance shell specied by the range rr−∆ 2 to rr+∆ 2 in the database, and Nijr(),,exp is the expected number of atom type pairs (i, j) in the same distance shell if there are no interactions between the atoms.In building such a database, it would be very useful to have an algo-rithm that can rapidly determine the atoms that are contained within a given distance shell. is algorithm is the topic of Section 3.4.3.4 RAPID DETERMINATION OF ATOM MEMBERSHIP IN SHELLSFor this application, we are given a radius value (maxR) and we wish to construct a data structure that will facilitate rapid access of nearby atoms. Specically, when a center atom is specied, the data structure should help 
Algorithms Dealing with Distance ◾ 91 us to generate a list of all atoms that are within maxR of the center atom. A slight modication of the algorithm will allow us to avoid nearby atoms that are closer than a radius value (minR).e algorithm is to be implemented as a Python class called Shell and stored in a module called shellNeighbors. e instantiation of the Shell object will set up a data structure that is suitable for shells with arbitrary centers but with prespecied radii (minR and maxR). In practice, maxR will be some small oating point value such as 5.0. To get the neigh-boring atoms within this distance shell centered on a particular atom, we will invoke a Shell method called getAtomsInShell. More precisely,Input for Shell object initialization:A list of atom objectsTwo nonnegative numbers minR and maxR, with minR < maxRe Shell class should have a method called getAtomsInShell:Input for getAtomsInShell():An atom object acting as the center atomOutput for getAtomsInShell(): A list of atoms such that the distance between any atom in the list and the center atom is a value that falls in the range dened by the interval [minR, maxR]e initialization of the Shell object should execute in O(n) time, wheren is the number of atoms in the list passed to the __init__ function of the Shell object. e execution time for the getAtomsInShell query function should be O(1), that is, constant time. is requirement will demand a strategy that is much faster than the straightforward approach that involves a simple scan of all the other atoms in the list, this strategy taking O(n) time to satisfy the query.3.4.1 Implementation Strategye algorithm will behave as if the atoms in the atom list are contained in a rectangular three-dimensional (3D) bounding box. To be more specic, we want the smallest bounding box with sides having lengths that are


===== [29/99] chapter-29.html =====

92 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsexact multiples of maxR. We will consider the inside of the box to be a 3D array of cubes, each cube having a length, width, and depth equal to maxR. Each cube in the box will have 3D integer grid coordinates (cx, cy, cz) that identify the cube’s position within the bounding box. Figure3.2 shows the front of the bounding box as a red grid, the bottom of the bounding box as a blue grid, and the le side of the box as a green grid. e other three sides of the box are not shown, and (as we will see) they are not needed in the computations.ese three sides will be determined by the minimum values of the atomic coordinates. ey can be computed using a small function that is private for the Shell class:# Function to compute the three minimum values of # the coordinate entries.def __minValsOfCoords(self): # Initialize to infinite values: xMin = yMin = zMin = float(“inf”) for atm in self.atoms_L: cc = atm.coord() if cc[0] < xMin: xMin = cc[0] if cc[1] < yMin: yMin = cc[1] if cc[2] < zMin: zMin = cc[2] return [xMin, yMin, zMin]Cube with integer coordinates (0,0,0)FIGURE 3.2 (See color insert.) ree sides of the bounding box.
Algorithms Dealing with Distance ◾ 93 Having these minimum values and knowing the dimensions of a cube, we can compute the integer coordinates of a cube containing an atom when we are given the coordinates of the atom:# Function to convert 3D coordinates into # grid coordinates.def __convCoordsToGridCoords(self, coords): fV = floor((numpy.array(coords) - self.minVals)/self.maxR) return (int(fV[0]), int(fV[1]), int(fV[2]))How are we going to use the grid coordinates of the atoms? A possibility is to have them act as indexes for a huge 3D array, each entry of the array containing a list of protein atoms that are in the cube with these grid coordi-nates. ere is a big drawback to this scheme: it would require a lot of space and many of the entries would be empty because the protein typically does not intersect all the cubes in the bounding box. Instead, consider a code that builds a dictionary. is dictionary will map grid coordinates to lists of atoms. More specically, a dictionary key will be a 3-tuple of integers representing the grid coordinates of a cube inside the bounding box. e dictionary contents associated with a key will be a list of atoms that can be found in that cube.e dictionary can be built as part of the initialization for the Shell object:self.gridDict = {}for atm in self.atoms_L: # Generate integer coordinates for the cube # containing this atom. gridCoords = self.__convCoordsToGridCoords(numpy.array(atm. coord())) if not self.gridDict.has_key(gridCoords): self.gridDict[gridCoords] = [] self.gridDict[gridCoords].append(atm)How do we use the dictionary? If you have a query atom object, you can easily compute a near neighbor list specifying all the atoms that are located within the distance maxR from the query atom. is can be done in the fol-lowing way: rst convert the 3D coordinates of the query atom to its grid coordinates. is will designate a central cube that is surrounded by 26 other cubes having grid coordinates that are easily computed. Central cubes near the sides of the 3D grid will need special consideration. We can use grid-Dict to getall atoms in the 3 × 3 × 3 set of cubes. Some of these atoms will be within the distance maxR of the query atom and others will be beyond this threshold, so we will have to do a nal check to verify that an atom is 
94 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticswithin threshold. We can also eliminate any neighboring atoms that are beyond the minR constraint. If the distance between an atom and the query atom is less than or equal to maxR, it is put into the return list. e return list should not include the query atom. Note that the amount of computation that is done to handle a query is not related to the total number of atoms because (realistically) there is a small upper bound on the number of atoms that can be found in a set of 27 cubes. Consequently, a query runs in con-stant time. We have just described the operation of the following function:def getAtomsInShell(self, centerAtom): # This function accepts an atom and returns a list # of all atoms that are within the shell surrounding the centerAtom. # The shell is specified by minimum radius minR and # maximum radius maxR. atomsInShell_L = [] # Generate integer coordinates for the cube containing # the center atom. gridCoords = self.__convCoordsToGridCoords(centerAtom.coord()) xI = gridCoords[0] yI = gridCoords[1] zI = gridCoords[2] # Inspect the 27 cubes to get the atoms that are within maxR. for i in range(xI - 1, xI + 2): for j in range(yI - 1, yI +2): for k in range(zI - 1, zI + 2): coordTuple = (i, j, k) if self.gridDict.has_key(coordTuple): nbrList = self.gridDict[coordTuple] for atm in nbrList: interAtomDistance = \ numpy.linalg.norm(centerAtom.coord() - atm. coord()) if interAtomDistance <= self.maxR: # Do not include the center atom. if interAtomDistance < 0.01: continue # Eliminate atoms closer than the # minimum radius. if interAtomDistance < self.minR: continue atomsInShell_L.append(atm) return atomsInShell_Le Shell class is in the StructBio package and can be imported usingfrom StructBio.Utilities.shellNeighbors import Shell
Algorithms Dealing with Distance ◾ 95 e module will prove to be useful for various other applications in the remainder of this book.3.5 CONTACT MAPS FOR PROTEINSIf we have the coordinates of all the atoms in a protein, then we can compute a distance matrix. is is a square symmetric matrix of cells that are indexed by the residues of the protein being studied. In simple versions of a distance matrix, the cell D[i, j] at row i and column j is the distance between alpha carbon [i] and alpha carbon [j]. Depending on the requirements of the application, other denitions may be used, for example, working with the beta carbons in lieu of the alpha carbons with the alpha carbon atoms being used only for glycine. Another possi-bility is to measure distances between the centers of mass of the various side chains.A contact map is essentially a visual discretization of the distance matrix. A cell is colored black if the distance between alpha carbon [i] and alpha carbon [j] is less than some particular threshold (say, 10 Å); other-wise, it is le white. Note that cell D[i, j] will have the same coloration as cell D[j, i], and so the matrix is symmetric.Contact maps provide a reduced two-dimensional (2D) representation of a protein and have the advantage of being invariant to rotations and translations of the coordinates. Contact maps may be used to describe similarity between protein structures. An example of a contact map is shown in Figure 3.3.e protein used here is chain A of a bovine Rabex-5 fragment cocrys-tallized with ubiquitin (PDB identier: 2FIF). It was chosen because it is a small protein that has a good selection of secondary structural ele-ments: helices and a beta sheet made up of both parallel and antiparallel strands.Note that row numbering starts at the top and increases as you go down to the bottom of the gure. is is the simplest type of contact map with only two levels of distance information. In Figure 3.4, we show the top half of the contact map, but this is using ve levels of distance infor-mation. As values from the distance matrix are being mapped to a range of gray levels, we will refer to this type of representation as a distance map. By comparing Figures 3.3 and 3.4, you can see the similarities of the main structural elements with Figure 3.4 giving a ner representation of the same data.
96 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics0Contact plot for 2ﬁf102030405060700 10 20 30 40 50 60 70FIGURE 3.3 Contact map for chain A of 2FIF.FIGURE 3.4 (See color insert.) Distance map for chain A of 2FIF.


===== [30/99] chapter-30.html =====

Algorithms Dealing with Distance ◾ 97 Below the top half of the distance map, there is the strung out version of 2FIF chain A with the Chimera visualization of the protein in the lower le corner. e secondary structure elements (SSEs) have been labeled as A, B, C, …, H. Notice the contributions made by these secondary struc-tures in the distance map. Dark areas in the map correspond to secondary structure pairs that are near to each other. e areas labeled as AB, EF, and EH represent antiparallel beta strands. e area labeled as BC is caused by the B strand coming near the C helix. Note that this is also seen as an antiparallel interaction, and if you follow the direction of increasing alpha carbon indices in the helix you will see why this is so. ere is a sudden backbone turn between helix C and helix D to the extent that D comes up against C, thus producing the darker area in the distance map labeled as CD. As seen in the structure image, strands A and H run parallel to one another and this is seen in the map as area AH, which runs parallel to the main diagonal but some distance away from it. Finally, it should be noted that the helices C, D, and G produce dark areas along the diagonal, a typical distance map signature for a helical structure where residues are interact-ing with other nearby neighboring residues. Below the diagonal, we have inserted the primary sequence of the protein along with the correspond-ing residue positions ranging from 1 to 73 inclusive.3.5.1 Script for Generating Contact and Distance MapsSuppose we have a 2D array of numbers with each number in the range [0, 1]. We wish to display a 2D dot plot of these numbers subject to the fol-lowing rule: if the matrix number at row i and column j is between 0 and 0.5, then the corresponding dot plot cell [i, j] is colored black; otherwise, it is colored white. e following function will draw a 2D plot that follows this rule:import matplotlib.pyplot as plotfrom matplotlib.colors import ListedColormapdef generate2Dplot(zG_A, plotTitle): # [0,.5) black; [.5, 1.] white: cmap = ListedColormap([‘#000000’, ‘#FFFFFF’]) n = int(zG_A.shape[0]) xSeq = arange(0, n+1, 1) ySeq = arange(0, n+1, 1) xG, yG = meshgrid(xSeq, ySeq)
98 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics plot.ion() plot.pcolor(xG, yG, zG_A, cmap = cmap) plot.axis([0, n, n, 0]) plot.axes().set_aspect(‘equal’) plot.title(plotTitle) raw_input(“Hit Enter to dismiss the plot.”) plot.close()is function is an adaptation of the density plot code (Script D.2 in Appendix D). Here is an explanation of the code. e rst argument for the function call is the array of numbers, and the second argument is a title that will be displayed at the top of the plot. e rst executable state-ment denes a list of colors that will be used in the plot. Hexadecimal numbers “#000000” and “#FFFFFF” designate black and white, respec-tively. is color map will be used in the pcolor function. e value of n is the number of atoms in the atom list, and the statements dening xSeq, ySeq, xG, and yG are used to set up a grid of coordinates that will act as the independent variables specifying locations for the cells in the dot plot.e plot.ion() function call establishes interactive mode. With this established, each drawing command will immediately update the plot, so there is no need for a draw command. Aer all the updates are displayed in the plot, the script can issue a close() command so that control returns to the Python shell window.e pcolor function works with the mesh grid and the distance map matrix to color the plot according to the color map specied by cmap. Since two colors are specied, the distance range [0.0, 1.0] is split into two equal subranges, and colors from the color list are given to cells according to the following rule: distance maps in the range [0.0, 0.5] color a cell black, whereas distance maps in the range [0.5, 1.0] color a cell white. If you wish to make a correspondence between a color and the interatomic distance, you need only multiply the range corresponding to the color by the value of the distanceThreshold. For example, with a distanceThreshold value of 16, any plot cell colored black corresponds to an interatomic dis-tance between 0.0 and 8.0 Å.e axis function establishes tick values for the horizontal and vertical axes of the plot, whereas the command axes().set _ aspect(‘equal’) makes each of the plot cells a perfect square. e remaining lines have obvious functionality.
Algorithms Dealing with Distance ◾ 99 Script 3.01, available from the book’s website (www.structuralbioin formatics.com), contains the generate2Dplot function along with a mainline script that fetches a PDB le, extracts the alpha carbon atoms from a specied chain, and then displays a contact or distance map plot depending on the choice of cmap statements. e mainline works with the Shell class to illustrate the use of this class, and it does save some time because interatomic distances are only evaluated for atom pairs with an interatomic distance that is less than the distanceThreshold value. is allows us to compute all needed distances in O(n) time because the number of atoms that are within the distance threshold from some specic alpha carbon is bounded above by some small con-stant. Strictly speaking, the entire algorithm is O(n2) because the ini-tialization of the distance map array [done by the o n e s(( n ,n ), f l o a t) call] is intrinsically O(n2).To adapt the script to your own requirements, it is expected that you would choose the appropriate denition of cmap and also establish the value of distanceThreshold.3.6 INERTIAL AXES3.6.1 MotivationVery oen in a structural analysis, we want to approximate a secondary structural element with a single straight line. For example, Figure 3.5 shows a straight line that acts as the longitudinal axis of a helix.Figure 3.6 shows the alpha carbon atoms of the same helix and gives us an indication of a reasonable strategy for the determination of the axis: we should have the straight line positioned among the atoms so that it is closest to all these atoms in a least-squares sense. is is called the inertial axis.FIGURE 3.5 Longitudinal axis for a helix.
100 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsVarious research studies have used the inertial axis as a simplifying geometric construct to represent secondary structural elements. is is especially important when one wishes to compare the tertiary structures of related proteins. e following references are good starting points: [A86], [AM88], [OB92], and [YS99].Finally, here is an interesting note related to the principal axes of inertia computed for an entire protein (taking into account atomic masses): some researchers have observed that, with high frequency, at least one principal axis penetrates the surface of a protein in a region used for ligand binding (see [FR00]).3.6.2 Mathematical AnalysisOur strategy for computing the inertial axis is to have the axis pass through the centroid of the atoms with a direction chosen to minimize the sum of squares of the perpendicular distances from the atoms to the helix axis.More precisely, if di represents the perpendicular distance between atom a(i) and the helix axis, then we choose the axis direction so that the sum S is minimized with S dened as SdiiN∑==21 (3.3)Depending on the needs of the application, it is possible to dene the position of this axis using a dierent set of atoms, for example, all the atoms in the backbone or even all the atoms in the helix (backbone plus side chains). Before going further in this discussion, it should be stated that such an axis could also be computed to go among the atoms of a beta strand or, in fact, any arbitrary set of atoms.zyxFIGURE 3.6 Longitudinal axis dened relative to the alpha carbon atoms of thehelix.
Algorithms Dealing with Distance ◾ 101 We now provide an analysis that shows how the axis is dependent on the coordinates of the chosen atoms. To make the analysis simpler, we rst consider one atom; call it a, with position vector aaaaxyz()= ,,T. As noted earlier, this vector is using a frame of reference that is an x, y, z coordinate system with origin positioned at the centroid of the atoms under consideration (Figure 3.6). e perpendicular distance from the atom to the axis is illustrated in Figure 3.7. We are trying to determine the values of wx, wy, and wz that dene the directions of the inertial axis. ese are set up as components of a unit vector w, and so wwwwxyz()= ,,T with ww=1T. e required axis is essentially a sca-lar multiple of w, and d represents the perpendicular vector going from atom a to this axis.Some trigonometry denes the square of the norm of d as []()=θ=−θ= −sin1cos1222222T222da aaawaw (3.4)We have replaced θcos with its equivalent formulation in terms of a dot product. As ww w==1T2, we can remove w2 from the denominator and replace the 1 in the square brackets in Equation 3.4 with w2. en, multiplying the terms in the large square brackets by a2 yields da aw aw aw() ()=⋅−= −122T222T2 (3.5)zywxapdaθFIGURE 3.7 Relationship between the axis and one atom.


===== [31/99] chapter-31.html =====

102 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticse replacement of 1 with w2 might seem a strange step in this deri-vation, but it is extremely useful because we now have a formula for d2 in which w appears in each term as a quadratic. We will see that this leads to an elegant matrix formulation for d2 and lays the groundwork for a subsequent strategy to solve our minimization problem. Deriving the matrix formulation for d2 is straightforward but somewhat daunt-ing due to the lengthy expressions that are involved. We continue as follows: daaawwwawawawAw Bw Cw Fw wGww Hw wxyzxyz xx yy zzxyzyzzxxy()()()=++++− ++=++− ++222222222222 (3.6)where Aa aFaaBa aGaaCa aHaayzyzzxzxxyxy=+ ==+ ==+ =222222 (3.7)Now the quadratic formulation pays o and we can write as follows: dwwwAHGHB FGFCwwwxyzxyz=−−−−−−2T (3.8)is gives us an elegant and concise representation for the d2 value related to a single atom a; but you will recall that we want to minimize S, which is the sum of all such squared norms going across all the N atoms in the set. We let the coordinates of the ith atom a(i) be represented as aaaaixiyizi()=()() () (),,T; then SdwwwDEEED EEEDwwwiiNxyzxx xy xzyx yy yzzx zy zzxyz∑==−−−−−−=21T (3.9)
Algorithms Dealing with Distance ◾ 103 where DaaEEaaDaaEEaaDaaEEaaxx yiziiNyz zy yiziiNyy zixiiNxz zx zixiiNzz xiyiiNxy yx xiyiiN∑∑∑∑∑∑()()()()()()=+ ===+ ===+ ==() () () ()() () () ()() () ()()======221122112211 (3.10)is gives a concise representation for S: SwTw=T (3.11)where TDEEED EEEDxx xy xzyx yy yzzx zy zz=−−−−−− (3.12)Equation 3.12 is dependent only on the components of the vectors hold-ing the atomic positions of all atoms in the given set. In physics, T is called the inertial tensor and it oen appears in discussions involving studies of rotational inertia.We can now formulate our minimization problem as a Lagrange mul-tiplier problem in which we minimize S subject to the constraint ww=1T. e Lagrangian will be as follows: Lw wTwww()()λ= −λ −,1TT (3.13)where λ is the Lagrange multiplier. Proceeding with the usual dierentia-tion, we get LwTw w∂∂=−λ22 (3.14)
104 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsSetting this to 0 gives us the following eigenvalue problem: Tw w=λ (3.15)e 3 × 3 tensor matrix T is symmetric, and considering that S is always positive for any vector w we see that T is also positive denite. Consequently, all three eigenvalues are positive. Note that once we have an eigenvalue–eigenvector pair we can write SwTw ww==λ=λTT (3.16)erefore, we have the solution to our problem. Once T is calculated, we compute its eigenvalues and the required w (specifying the directions for our axis) will be the eigenvector corresponding to the smallest eigenvalue. It should be noted that three eigenvectors are produced by this procedure and, because of the symmetry of T, they are mutually orthogonal and can be used as an orthogonal basis for the set of atoms under consideration. Insome applications, this inertial frame of reference is a useful construct and the eigenvectors are called the principal axes of inertia.3.6.3 Script for Computing the Inertial AxisChimera already has a menu item (Tools… Depiction… PipesAndPlanks) that provides this functionality, but it is instructive to develop the code that computes the inertial axis and, of course, having your own code means that you can modify the algorithm to meet any individual needs. e algorithm has been implemented in the class called InertialAxes, which is imported as follows:from StructBio.LeastSquares.inertialAxes import InertialAxesSpecications for the class are as follows:Input for InertialAxes object initialization:A list of atom objectsInput for projectionOnAxis() an InertialAxes method:An atom objectInput for distanceToAxis() an InertialAxes method:An atom object
Algorithms Dealing with Distance ◾ 105 Let us go over some of the essential core functions that are needed for the problem. We start with the routines that are to generate the inertial axis for a list of ordered atoms, for example, the N, CA, and C atoms in a protein backbone. In the code that follows, we assume that atoms_L is a list of atoms prepared by the mainline script.As seen in Figure 3.6, we need to compute the centroid for atoms inthelist:def centroid(self): sum = zeros(3, float) for a in self.atoms_L: sum += a.coord() return sum/float(len(self.atoms_L))Code for computing the centroid is quite straightforward and is presented mainly to illustrate the utilization of the collection of atoms that will deter-mine the inertial axis. In the discussion that follows, it is important to realize that atoms will have coordinates dened in one of two frames of reference. ese are the original PDB frame of reference and a frame of reference estab-lished by shiing the origin to the centroid. e latter is needed when doing computations for the inertial axes corresponding to a particular atom list. e next function, tensorMatOneAtom, will be responsible for the calcula-tion of the matrix in Equation 3.8. First, note the following identity: AHGHB FGFCaa aa aaaa aa aaaa aa aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa aaaaaa aa aaaaIaaaaaayz xy zxxy zx yzzx yz xyxyzxyzxyzxxyzxx yyyzzx yz zxyzxyzxyz()−−−−−−=+− −−+−−− +=++++++−=++ −000000222222222222222222222So, given the coordinates of an atom, we can do some simple calcula-tions on vectors to derive the matrix result. Note that coordArray is used 
106 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsto pass the coordinates of the atom to the function. If you are not familiar with the various array calculations available in numpy, then it may be of benet to review some of the statements in this script: # This computes the contribution made by one atom to the tensor # matrix. # The return value is a matrix that will be added to other matrices # corresponding to other atoms. # The 3D coordinates of the atom are provided by coordArray. # This routine relies on the observation that this contribution is # equal to: # the identity matrix multiplied by the norm squared of the # coordinates minus the outer product of the coordinate vector # with itself. # This routine assumes that coordArray holds the coordinates # of the atom relative to the centroid. # Note: array([coordArray]) is a 1 by 3 array. def __tensorMatOneAtom(self, coordArray): sumSquares = sum(coordArray*coordArray) return sumSquares * numpy.identity(3) - \ array([coordArray])*array([coordArray]).transpose()With these two functions being available, generation of the inertial axes can be done in the _init_ function for the class:def __init__(self, atoms_L): self.atoms_L = atoms_L self.centroid = self.centroid() # List of vectors that are the inertial axes: self.inertialAxes_L = [] # The primary axis will be at index 0. self.primaryAxis = None tensorMat = numpy.zeros((3,3)) for atom in self.atoms_L: tensorMat += self.__tensorMatOneAtom(numpy.array(atom.coord()) – self.centroid) # With the tensor matrix now computed, we extract the eigenvector # corresponding to the smallest eigenvalues: eigvals, eigvecs = linalg.eig(tensorMat) ind = eigvals.argsort() # Sort the eigenvalues. # Be careful here to extract eigenvectors # from the transpose of eigvecs! for i in range(3): self.inertialAxes_L.append(eigvecs.transpose()[ind[i]]) self.primaryAxis = self.inertialAxes_L[0]


===== [32/99] chapter-32.html =====

Algorithms Dealing with Distance ◾ 107 e initialization function sums the matrix contributions made by all the atoms in the atom list to get the matrix in Equation 3.12. It then solves the eigenvalue problem described in Equation 3.15 and denes the primary axis (the inertial axis that we want) to be the eigenvector corre-sponding to the minimum eigenvalue.On completion of the initialization function, we have the primary axis dened as a direction vector that originates from the centroid. Referring to Figure 3.7, the direction vector is shown as w and the origin of the x, y, and z axes are positioned at the centroid. For many applications, we will need some extra functionality, which is provided by the following two functions:# Given an atom object this function gets the coordinates of # the atom and projects these coordinates onto the primary axis. # It returns the coordinates of this projection.# The coordinates are given in the PDB frame of reference.def projectionOnAxis(self, atom): # Compute atom coords relative to centroid. atmCoords = numpy.array(atom.coord()) - self.centroid return sum(self.primaryAxis * atmCoords) * self.primaryAxis + \ self.centroid # The centroid was added to convert back to the PDB # frame of reference.# ------------------------------------------------------# Given an atom object this function computes # the perpendicular distance from the atom to the primary axis.def distanceToAxis(self, atom): atmCoords = numpy.array(atom.coord()) return numpy.linalg.norm(atmCoords - self.projectionOnAxis(atom))e rst function projectionOnAxis computes the coordinates of the projection of an atom onto the primary axis. Referring to Figure3.7, we are computing the coordinates of the point labeled p. is is done by shiing the coordinates of the atom so that its frame of reference has origin at the centroid. is essentially gives us the vector going from the origin to the atom labeled a in Figure 3.7. Computing the inner product of this vector with the vector w will give the distance from the origin to the point p. is distance can be used as a scaling factor that stretches vector w out to point p. en, adding the centroid to this p vector gives us the coordinates of p in the PDB frame of reference.e function distanceToAxis computes the distance between an atom and the primary axis. e computation is very straightforward. We use the norm function to calculate the distance between the atom and its projection on the axis.
108 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticse InertialAxes class will be used in Exercises 7, 8, and 9 at the end of this chapter.3.7 DEHYDRONS3.7.1 MotivationAs discussed in [C05], hydrophobic attraction between two nonpolar groups involves a major electrostatic contribution because it increases the hydrogen bonding among the surrounding water molecules. As a reminder on the strength of hydrophobic interactions, recall from Section 1.4.3.3 that a disease state (sickle-cell anemia) can be induced by the cre-ation of a hydrophobic surface patch due to a mutational change in a single amino acid. It is well known that proteins fold due to electrostatic forces [A73], [FS02], [C05], [JP03]. In particular, hydrophobic collapse into the folded state is likely coupled with hydrogen bond formation [FK03]. is is supported by recognizing that the backbone of an unfolded pro-tein is highly polar due to the amide and carbonyl groups in each residue. Inan unfolded state, these groups are typically surrounded by polar water molecules, so the hydrophobic collapse and its concomitant removal of water (dehydration) leads to the thermodynamically favored formation of hydrogen bonds between the carbonyl and the amide groups.Empirical evidence has shown that the strength and stability of a hydrogen bond depends on various structural attributes such as the atom types acting as donor and acceptor; distance between donor and acceptor; and angle formed by the three atoms (donor, hydrogen, and acceptor). But this is not the full story. e strength and stability of the hydrogen bond also depends on the local microenvironment of the bond. In particular, the strength of the bond is best preserved when it is shielded from the weaken-ing eects of nearby polar water molecules.Consequently, a sustainable hydrophobic collapse involves the forma-tion and protection of hydrogen bonds occurring between the various backbone amides and carbonyls.Using the terminology and procedures introduced by Fernández and Scott [FS03], we consider a hydrogen bond to be protected when it is suf-ciently surrounded or wrapped by hydrophobic carbonaceous nonpolar groups having the form CHn, n = 0, 1, 2, 3. e microenvironment con-taining these groups will be dened as the interior of two intersecting desolvation spheres with radii 6.5 Å and centered at the alpha carbons of the residues containing the hydrogen bonded amide and carbonyl groups. 
Algorithms Dealing with Distance ◾ 109 Using the guidelines stipulated in [FS03], we consider a hydrogen bond to be deciently wrapped, or under wrapped, if the number of carbonaceous wrapping atoms is less than or equal to 19. Deciently wrapped hydrogen bonds are referred to as dehydrons. As noted in [FS03], these simple rules provide a fast but not exact strategy for the determination of deciently wrapped hydrogen bonds. Figures 3.8 and 3.9 show well-wrapped and deciently wrapped hydrogen bonds. In both gures, the atoms and bonds are represented in wire form with the following exceptions: dehydrons appear as green lines, well-wrapped hydrogen bonds appear as gray lines, the very large translucent desolvation spheres are colored blue (red) if the central alpha carbon is in the residue providing the hydrogen bond donor (acceptor), the smallest spheres designate the alpha carbon centers of the desolvation spheres, the middle-sized spheres represent the carbonaceous FIGURE 3.8 (See color insert.) Well-wrapped hydrogen bond.FIGURE 3.9 (See color insert.) Dehydron: a deciently wrapped hydrogen bond.
110 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticswrapping groups, and the spindle designates the hydrogen bond under consideration (colored green if it is a dehydron, otherwise gray).Counting the carbonaceous atoms (25 in Figure 3.8 and 14 in Figure3.9) reveals the categorization of the hydrogen bond when each count is com-pared with the value 19. Figure 3.8 shows the CYS 26–PRO 22 hydrogen bond of 1CRN, whereas Figure 3.9 shows the GLY 20–ARG 17 hydrogen bond of 1CRN.Why are dehydrons important? ere is mounting evidence that wrap-ping deciencies constitute areas on the protein surface that are essen-tially an invitation for other molecules to form a local binding that reduces or eliminates the wrapping deciency. Consequently, the wrapping defect is a sticky substructure that can play a role in various protein associa-tions such as protein–protein interactions, ligand binding, and deleterious aggregations such as the formation of amyloid plaques.Over the last decade, several papers have been written dealing with dehydrons and their relevance to various protein topics. e reader may consult the following references: dehydrons and their utility for drug design [F10], [FC08], [FR04], protein evolution and complexity [FS04], and protein–protein interfaces [FSS03].Work done by Fernández and Berry [FB10] indicates that an abundance of dehydrons oen represents a structural deciency that is compensated by an inordinately large number of disulde bonds. We return to this dis-cussion in Exercise 14.3.7.2 Script for Identifying DehydronsFigures 3.8 and 3.9 were created by a program (presented as Exercise11). It makes use of the Dehydrons class, which is contained in the StructBio package. e class can be accessed by using the following import statement:from StructBio.HBonds import Dehydronse arguments for the instantiation of the Dehydrons class are as follows:prot: the protein molecule object that will be processed to nd dehydrons.
Algorithms Dealing with Distance ◾ 111 distSlop: the distance slop used when this instantiation calls FindHBond.findHBonds (default value 0.4).angleSlop: the angle slop used when this instantiation calls FindHBond.findHBonds (default value 20.0).sphereRadius: the radius used for the desolvation spheres (default value 6.5).wrapThreshold: if the number of carbonaceous atoms in the desolva-tion spheres is less than or equal to this threshold, then the hydrogen bond is considered to be a dehydron (default value 19).lineWidth: the width of the lines used in the wire representation of prot when designating a hydrogen bond (default value 5.0).Aer the instantiation of the Dehydrons class, we can use the follow-ing attributes to access data related to the hydrogen bonds:hBonds_L: this is a list containing 2-tuples, each tuple holding a pair of atom objects corresponding to the donor and acceptor atoms for a hydrogen bond. As the description of a dehydron involves alpha carbon atoms, the hBonds_L list will only contain hydrogen bonds between standard amino acid residues. Consequently, hydrogen bonds between standard residues and water molecules will have been ltered out.dehydrons_L: this is a list of dehydrons each designated by a 2-tuple. It is a subset of the entries that are listed in hBonds_L.wrapper_D: this is a dictionary that allows one to determine all the carbonaceous atoms in the microenvironment of a hydrogen bond. A key will be a (donor, acceptor) atom pair that denes a hydrogen bond, and the corresponding dictionary value will be a Set that holds the atom objects designating all the carbonaceous atoms in the microenvironment.See the nal exercises of this chapter to nd examples of scripts that use the Dehydrons class.


===== [33/99] chapter-33.html =====

112 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics3.8 EXERCISESe following exercises will deal with distance calculations and will include problems that incorporate the various classes covered in this chapter: 1. Testing the Shell class To demonstrate the use of the Shell class, write a mainline pro-gram that performs the following animation, subject to the following: a. Use the raw_input() function to get a PDB identier from the user. b. Fetch the PDB le from the PDB (or from your local disk). c. Create a Shell object using all the atoms in the protein. Let minR = 2.0 and maxR = 4.0. d. Run a loop that goes over all the alpha carbon atoms in the pro-tein, and for each such atom use a HiLiter object to empha-size the alpha carbon (a single member of the primary list) and its shell neighbors (set up in the secondary list). Use the verbose mode to print atom identiers for both lists, under appropriate headings. For example, the rst alpha carbon of 1HIV with minR = 2.0 and maxR = 4.0 should produce the following:Alpha Carbon:PRO 1.A@CANear neighbors in shell (r = 2.0, R = 4.0):PRO 1.A@CGPRO 1.A@CDPHE 99.B@OGLN 2.A@CAGLN 2.A@NHOH 353.A@OPRO 1.A@O 2. Cysteine tetrahedrons Consider the rubredoxin protein from Clostridium pasteurianum (PDB ID 4RXN). is structure supersedes an earlier structural study reported by Watenpaugh and others [WS80] in 1980 when the PDB had only 70entries (current content is over 102,000 structures). e pro-tein has four cysteine residues (positions 5, 8, 38, and 41) surrounding an iron atom to make up the FeS4 complex. In their paper, the authors report on various geometric properties of the complex including the Fe–S bond distances. Recall that Figure 3.1 shows this complex. If you 
Algorithms Dealing with Distance ◾ 113 fetch the protein and view it with Chimera, you will see that the sulfur atoms seem to be at the vertices of a tetrahedron. is is to be expected because of the coordination forces of the iron atom. A perfect tetra-hedron is undoubtedly compromised by the extraneous forces placed on the sulfur atoms by their cysteine residues that have to meet the positional constraints imposed by the protein backbone. In the spirit of this investigation described in [WS80], we pose the following additional question: how well do the sulfur atoms in these cysteine residues coordinate with the iron atom to form a tetrahe-dron? To answer this question, compute all six S–S distances and calculate the average distance. en, calculate the percentage devia-tion of each distance from this average. e output format should be three columns with appropriate headings: Column 1: a pair of integers identifying the two chain positions for the CYS residues Column 2: the distance between the sulfur atoms in these two CYS residues Column 3: the deviation of this distance from the average (expressed as a percentage) See also 1RB9 and 1BRF. Note: to make the code simpler, you can take advantage of the fact that the structures each contain only four cysteine residues. 3. Finding disulde bridges Various researchers have been involved in the protein fold pre-diction problem. In some studies, algorithms can predict the con-formation of the backbone but without specication of the disulde bridges between cysteine residues. As a nal step in the renement of positions for the backbone atoms, a dierent algorithm will then try to predict the occurrence of these bridges and make adjustments to the backbone atoms so that the bridges can be put into the nal predicted model. To do this, it is usually necessary to collect statis-tics that characterize the geometry of disulde bridges. is seems to be a simple task, but it can be complicated if you have to deal with redundancy in the data. For example, if a protein is a dimer com-prising two structurally identical chains, do you include disulde bridges from both the chains in the collection of statistics? We will consider these issues to be beyond the scope of the question. To make 
114 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsthe exercise more straightforward, our goal will be to write a Python script that deals with all the sulde bridges in the entire protein. Your script should fetch a protein le specied by user input typed into the Python Shell. It should nd all cysteine residues, and for each such residue it should determine whether or not that residue is involved with a disulde bridge. Be careful, not all cysteine resi-dues are involved with bridges (e.g., the D chain of 1A4Y has sev-eral cysteine residues that are not involved with disulde bridges). In Figure3.10, we can see a disulde bridge linking CYS 191.A with CYS 220.A in chain A of 1BQY. For each bridge found in the protein, your script should print out the following information: a. Residue names and positions of the cysteine residues that are involved (e.g., CYS 191.A and CYS 220.A). b. Distance between the alpha carbon atoms in the cysteine resi-dues involved with the bridge. c. If a cysteine residue is in a backbone but does not participate in a disulde bridge, then it should be part of the output with a note indicating that there is no bridge structure associated with this residue. Use the following as input for your program: 1BQY (all CYS involved with disulde bridges), 1TCR and 1A4Y (a mix of bridged and non-bridged CYS residues), and 1ZNJ (note the bridges between chains). Note: if you are studying cysteine bridges and need data, it might help to start with toxins from various species of scorpions, snails, and CBSGCBSGC 191.AC 220.AFIGURE 3.10 (See color insert.) Disulde bridge in chain A of 1BQY.
Algorithms Dealing with Distance ◾ 115 snakes. Your investigation could start with the studies by Saucedo and others [SF12], Jin and others [JN07], and the references therein. 4. Distances between beta carbons in beta sheets When considering beta sheets, are consecutive residues of a strand closer than neighboring residues on dierent strands? To answer this question, let us assume that the coordinates of a residue are approxi-mated by the coordinates of the beta carbon atom within a residue. Write a program that reads a PDB le and calculates the average dis-tance between Cβ atoms of consecutive residues in a beta strand. See the dotted line in Figure 3.11 for an example of one such distance. e program should also calculate the average distance between neighboring Cβ atoms of hydrogen bonded residues that are in dier-ent strands of the beta sheet (see the dashed line in Figure 3.11). Test your program on the parallel and antiparallel beta sheets of a glycosyl hydrolase (PDB ID 1QBA). To test your program on other beta sheet–rich proteins, you can consult [ZK00] for some interesting examples. Note: nding Cβ atoms of consecutive residues in a beta strand is fairly easy. Finding neighboring Cβ atoms of parallel and antiparallel strands will be more of a challenge, but you can apply the following strategy: generate an instance of the HBonds class and pull out all the hydrogen bonds that are in the category “PL” or “AP.” Each donor and acceptor pair will correspond to atoms Ni and Oj in Figures 2.11 and 2.12. Now you can compute each of the needed distances (once and only once) by nding the residues containing Ni and Oj. For example, the neighboring Cβ atoms in consecutive residues are in the donor residue and the residue just before the donor residue. e Cβ atoms for the residues in dierent strands can be determined by studying Figures 2.11 and 2.12. One of them will be in the donor residue, whereas the partner will be in the residue holding the accep-tor atom if the strands are running antiparallel or in the residue just aer the acceptor residue if the strands are running parallel. Before FIGURE 3.11 Distances between beta carbon atoms.
116 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsdoing any computations, it will be necessary to ensure that all the Cβ atoms actually exist. For example, glycine residues will be ignored because they do not have Cβ atoms. You can use the HiLite class to put visual emphasis on the atoms involved, and this will aid in debugging. e verbose mode can also be used for output of atom labels. In addition, your output should report on all averages and related statistics. e following output snippets pro-vide an example of the output when the protein 1QBA was processed.Output for a typical beta carbon:Beta carbon:THR 72.A@CBConsecutive and adjacent strand beta carbons:PHE 71.A@CBASN 41.A@CBDistance between consecutive beta carbons: 5.862 Distance between beta carbons across anti-parallel strands: 4.214Final output lines are as follows: Average distance between consecutive beta carbons: 5.719Number of these distances: 96 Average distance between beta carbons in parallel strands: 5.181Number of these distances: 31 Average distance between beta carbons in anti-parallel strands: 5.007Number of these distances: 65 5. Oxygen to imidazole ring distances In a research study by Chenoweth and Dervan [CD09], they consider an eight-ring cyclic Py/Im polyamide molecule (1P1) that is bound to the central six base pairs of a short DNA structure (Figure3.12). In this gure, the 1P1 ligand has a ball and stick display representation, whereas the DNA is shown in the pipes and planks depiction. e study considers various issues related to the interaction of 1P1 and the DNA segment. is includes the measurement of dis-tances between the O4′ oxygen atoms in the DNA backbone and the centroids of nearby imidazole rings (Figure 3.13). All the imidazole atoms are in a ligand accessible with Chimera as residue type 1P1 with position 500 in chainB. e following table provides the names of atoms within the 1P1 imidazole rings and for each ring the speci-cation of the nearby oxygen atom (its position, chain identier, and name). All these oxygen atoms have the name O4′.


===== [34/99] chapter-34.html =====

Algorithms Dealing with Distance ◾ 117 FIGURE 3.12 (See color insert.) DNA segment and polyamide ligand (Protein Data Bank identier: 3I5L).C19C20N8N9C18O4ʹFIGURE 3.13 (See color insert.) Distance from centroid of imidazole ring to O4′.(Chain B) 1P1 DNAC13 C14 N5 C16 N66.B O4′C18 N9 C19 C20 N85.B O4′C39 C40 N17 C42 N186.A O4′C44 N21 C45 C46 N205.A O4′
118 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics Your script should getall needed atomic coordinates and, for each of the four imidazole rings, it should calculate the centroid of the atoms making up an imidazole ring and then print out the distance from that centroid to the nearby O4′ atom. Figure 3.13 shows this centroid to O4′ distance as a dashed line. 6. Generating test data for distance geometry algorithms e distance geometry problem can be stated as follows: can you derive the coordinates of all the atoms in a molecule if you are given the distances between pairs of atoms? It can be shown that the problem is fairly easy if all possible O(n2) distances are accurately known. e problem becomes much more dicult if only a subset of the distances is given, for example, if we only get as input the distances between any atom and its nearby neighbors. Nearby in this context might mean within 5 Å. Researchers developing algorithms to solve this problem typically build input data sets that are used to test the capabilities of the algorithm. ey start with a protein le from the PDB, generate the input test data, apply the distance geometry algorithm to calculate the coordinates of the atoms, and then measure the agreement between the calculated coordi-nates and the original coordinates from the PDB le. In this exercise, you are to write a script that asks the user for a PDB le identier and a threshold. e script should fetch the PDB le and generate a le that lists all atom pairs such that the distance between the atoms in a pair is less than the specied threshold. A line in the output le should fully identify the atoms in an atom pair followed by the distance and then a code that indicates the type of interaction between the atoms. For example, the following are four lines taken from the test data le generated for 1CRN with threshold = 3.0 Å:THR 1.A O ILE 35.A N 2.859 HTHR 1.A O THR 1.A N 2.668 NTHR 1.A O THR 1.A CA 2.355 GTHR 1.A O THR 1.A C 1.237 B An output line contains the residue type, residue position, residue chain identier, and atom name within the residue for both atoms in the pair. is is followed by the distance (less than the threshold, of course) and the atom pair code. Use the following codes: B: bonded (the two atoms are covalently bonded) G: geminals (the two atoms are both bonded to a third atom)
Algorithms Dealing with Distance ◾ 119 H: hydrogen bonded (the two atoms have a hydrogen bond between them) N: none of the above e codes are of value if the test data distances are to be subsequently modied by adding some small amount of noise. Usually, the amount of noise to be added will depend on the nature of the atom pair. is exercise should make use of the HBonds and Shell classes. e test data should be written out to a text le that has a le name indi-cating that it contains near neighbor data, the threshold value, and the PDB identier. For example, processing 1CRN with threshold 3.5 Å uses the le name NN_3_5_1CRN.txt. 7. Introducing the Solids class Exercise 8 makes use of the Solids class,* which can be used to display a set of elongated bullet-like structures that we will call tubes (shapes are similar to test tubes). In the next exercise, they will be used to represent the inertial axes of helical secondary struc-tures. e class can be instantiated with an empty argument list, for example,tubeScene = Solids() Aer this, we can bring tubes into the display by adding them to the instance, for example,tubeScene.addTube(startPoint, endpoint, tubeRadius, tubeColour) Here, startPoint and endPoint are two numpy arrays specify-ing the 3D coordinates of two points in the display space. e radius of a tube is dened by the oating point number tubeRadius, and its color is given by tubeColour, which is a three-component tuple representing the color in RGB format. When all the tubes are added into the scene, we can display it using the following function call:tubeScene.display() To get familiar with this class, you should try it with various arguments. If you run Script 3.08, available from the book’s web-site (www.structuralbioinformatics.com), you should get a scene that looks like Figure 3.14.* A full description of this class can be found in Appendix B.
120 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics 8. Using the InertialAxes class: inertial axis tube visualization Very often in a structural analysis, we want to approximate a secondary structural element with a single straight line or some type of visual structure that is positioned using such a line. In this exercise, you are to calculate the inertial axes for the helical secondary structures and then use these axes to define the end points of tubes (see previous Exercise 7) that are drawn within the helix structures. If the secondary structure ribbons are drawn in licorice form, your final display should look something like Figure 3.15. Note: the rounded end of a tube corresponds to the residue of the secondary structure that is farther along in the primary sequence. is exercise involves the following steps: a. Generate a tube display: write a Python script that opens a user-specied PDB le and subsequently generates a list of inertial axes, one for each SSE of the protein. Do this with a class called AxesForSSEs. Suggestion: this class should use the InertialAxes class. Caution: be careful when handling protein chains that might possibly end and start within a sec-ondary structure; you do not want an axis that starts in one chain and continues into the next chain. e atoms contribut-ing to the computation of an inertial axis will be alpha carbon atoms only. Test the AxesForSSEs class by displaying tubes in helices.FIGURE 3.14 Testing addTube in the Solids class.
Algorithms Dealing with Distance ◾ 121 e code should then generate the end points dening the 3D posi-tions of tubes that are to be drawn in the display. is can be done by using the projectionOnAxis function of the InertialAxes class. Assuming that the atom list is ordered, you can get the start point by projecting the coordinates of the rst atom onto the pri-mary axis and then get the end point by projecting the coordinates of the last atom onto the primary axis. Aer all the tube points are set up in a list of pairs, they can be used to generate tubes in the display by making use of the addTube function. b. Recursive tubing: although the inertial axis provides a simple approx-imation for a secondary structural element, it does not do well when the secondary structure involves a sudden bend. In the 1MBO display in Figure 3.15, you will notice that there is a tube that is, at times, out-side its helix structure. In this part of the exercise, you are to modify the script generated for part (a) of this exercise so that it uses a divide and conquer approach to the placement of tubes within secondary structures. e goal is to get a display such as that in Figure 3.16. Note that the frontmost helix now has two tubes in place of the single tube shown in Figure 3.15. ere are several ways to achieve this, and you should use your own ingenuity to devise a reasonable strategy. e simplest approach is to use a divide and conquer strategy that succes-sively splits the atom lists into halves until all smaller lists produce axes that satisfy a tolerance criterion described next.FIGURE 3.15 Inertial axes illustrated with tubes positioned by the TubesForSSEs class.


===== [35/99] chapter-35.html =====

122 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics For each secondary structure, compute the distances between the alpha carbon atoms and the inertial axis. If the maximum distance is less than some prespecied tolerance (say 3.5 Å), then the axis is considered to be a faithful representation of the secondary structure. If the maximum distance is greater than the tolerance, then the set of residues in the secondary structure is split into two shorter helices and the end point generation function is called for each one. is exercise should not require any modication of the InertialAxes and Solids classes. Your goal is to modify the AxesForSSEs class so that it uses recursive calls to generate a list of inertial axes that meet the tolerance requirements. Try your script on 1MBO, 2FIF, and 2BG9. 9. Combining hydrogen bond plates with inertial axis tubes Write a script that displays a protein using both hydrogen bond plates and inertial axis tubes. Test your script on various proteins including 2BYS. For 2BYS, the results should be similar to that displayed in Figure3.17. is display of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (from the snail Aplysia californica) shows both the top and bottom views of the structure (both views can be seen simultaneously because of the orientations of the mol-ecules in the crystal). e lobeline ligand is represented in sphere form. 10. Computation of helical hydrophobic moment e papers by Eisenberg and others [EW82a], [EW82b] deal with the spatial distribution of hydrophobic side chains in a protein. At this point in our studies, we have an excellent opportunity to extend this FIGURE 3.16 Using recursive tubes.
Algorithms Dealing with Distance ◾ 123 work so that computation of the hydrophobic moment is accompanied by a visual representation of the hydrophobic moment as an arrow that starts at the inertial axis of the helix and goes through the center of the side chain. ere are several ways to dene the hydrophobic moment of the side chains in a helix. Let us go with the following procedure: a. Aer fetching a protein le, use the TubesForSSEs class to con-struct tube solids for all the helices and strands of the protein. b. Note that you can access attributes of an object of this class to derive the primary axis of each SSE. e attribute axes.inertialAxes _ L will be a list of objects instantiated from the InertialAxes class. Attributes of this class will give you access to the atom list (atoms _ L), the centroid of these atoms (cen-troid), and the primary axis (primaryAxis). c. For each residue Ri associated with an axis, compute si, dened as the center of the atoms in the side chain (exclude backbone atoms N, Ca, C, and O). Skip any glycine residues. d. For each helix residue, project si onto its inertial axis. Designate the projection point on the axis as pi. Compute Ni, which is a unit nor-mal vector rooted at pi with the same direction as the vector going from pi to si. Dene Hi = hi Ni, where hi is the Kyte–Doolittle hydro-phobicity value for residue Ri. Note that Hi will point away from si if the residue is hydrophilic. Use the Solids class to visually display the normal Hi as an arrow. For a helix, you should get a display that looks something like that seen in Figure 3.18. Note that the coloring is consistent with the hydrophobicity of the corresponding residue.FIGURE 3.17 (See color insert.) Plates and tubes for 2BYS.
124 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics e. At the request of the user, the display should change so that all the arrows are translated along the principal axis so that they are rooted at the centroid (Figure 3.19). is produces the helical wheel seen on page 372 of [EW82a]. In our case, the arrows in the wheel can be related to the surrounding structure. In par-ticular, one can oen see a clear indication of amphiphilicity with the hydrophobic arrows pointing to the core of the protein. f. For each axis, compute the hydrophobic moment vector Mi as the vector sum of all Vi vectors, where each Vi is the Hi vector trans-lated from pi to ci. Compute the sum of all Vi vectors that corre-spond to hydrophilic residues. Display both arrows. is should produce a result such as that shown in Figure 3.20. g. Finally, the user should have a fourth display option that gener-ates the previous vector sums divided by the number of residues involved. ese average vectors will have an appearance that is similar to Figure 3.20 (the arrows are simply shorter). Since the script involves a more extensive interaction with the user, it is best to implement two dialogs to facilitate user interaction. Test the script on various helix-rich proteins (e.g., 1JEB).FIGURE 3.18 Arrows for hydrophobic and hydrophilic moments.FIGURE 3.19 Arrows in a helical wheel.
Algorithms Dealing with Distance ◾ 125 11. Visual constructs for dehydrons (starter script) Write a script that does the following: a. Ask the user to type in a PDB identier. b. Fetch the protein le and uses the following lines to display hydrogen bonds as gray-colored lines: runCommand(“select #” + str(prot.id)+ “ & backbone.full”) runCommand(“findhbond selRestrict both lineWidth “ + str(self.line_width) + “ color gray distSlop %4.1f” % self.dist_Slop + “ angleSlop %4.1f” % self.angle_Slop) runCommand(“~sel”)c. Invoke the function FindHBond.findHBonds to get a list of hydrogen bonds. Be sure to use the same distSlop and angleSlop parameter values as in the previous step. d. Use a for loop to go through the list of hydrogen bonds, and for each hydrogen bond generate the visual elements seen in Figures 3.8 and 3.9. Successive iterations of the loop can be paced by asking the user to hit the “Enter” key (use the raw_input function). You should use the Dehydron class both to nd the carbonaceous atoms around each hydrogen bond and to determine whether it is a dehy-dron. As in Figures 3.8 and 3.9, use the following visual constructs: i. e hydrogen bond is emphasized by surrounding it with a spindle (radius = 0.25). Use the Solids class within Scenographics of the StructBio package to generate a spindle. e spindle should be colored green if it corresponds to a dehydron; otherwise, it is colored gray.FIGURE 3.20 Sum of normal vectors.
126 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics ii. Use the HiLiter class imported from StructBio.Utilities.hiLite to get small- and middle-sized spheres amid the wire representation seen in Figures 3.8 and 3.9. Entries for the primary list in the instantiation of HiLiter will be the atom objects corresponding to the carbonaceous atoms, and entries for the secondary list will be the two atom objects corresponding to the alpha carbons in the residues linked by the hydrogen bond. iii. Define the microenvironment by using two transpar-ent spheres that are ellipsoids with all semiaxes set to the sphereRadius value. Use the Ellipsoid class imported from StructBio.Scenographics.ellipsoid to gener-ate the spheres along with the displaySurface method to put a colored transparent surface over the ellipsoid frame. Use color and transparency values that you con-sider to be most appropriate for your needs. iv. Note: when the loop progresses from one hydrogen bond to the next, all the visual constructs associated with the previ-ous hydrogen bond should be eliminated (use the chimera.openModels.close function).Note that this script provides a signicant number of visual constructs; but by using the classes provided by the StructBio package, they can be displayed with about two pages of script (about 40 lines). 12. Visual constructs for dehydrons (graphical user interface [GUI] script) Modify the script for Exercise 11 so that it works with a GUI. e following requirements should extend the capabilities of the script in Exercise 11:• e user should enter the PDB identier via a text box.• e user should be able to select a single chain or the entire pro-tein for further analysis.• In the case of nuclear magnetic resonance les, the user should be allowed to specify a model number.• ere should be two options for the centers of the desolvation spheres:


===== [36/99] chapter-36.html =====

Algorithms Dealing with Distance ◾ 127 − e alpha carbon atoms of the residues holding the donor and acceptor atoms. − e donor and acceptor atoms.• Before initiating function calls that nd dehydrons, the user should be allowed to use default or text box–specied values for distSlop, angleSlop, sphereRadius, wrapThreshold, and lineWidth.• Instead of using a for loop to cycle through all the hydrogen bonds, the visual constructs should be generated for a hydrogen bond that is selected in the Chimera display window. Note that Chimera does allow one to select a hydrogen bond. Designating a hydrogen bond by selecting an end atom (donor or acceptor) is not advised because in some situations a donor or acceptor may be involved with two hydrogen bonds and so there is some ambi-guity in the choice of hydrogen bond.• e GUI should allow the display representation to be either wire or ribbon. Since the path of the ribbon does not follow the backbone exactly (for the sake of smoothness, it is more like an approximation of the backbone), the spindle end points will have to be changed when the ribbon representation is used. Under these conditions, the coordinates of the spindle end would be taken from the labelCoord attributes of the donor and acceptor.• e GUI should display data related to the hydrogen bond, such as the number of carbonaceous atoms, the length of the bond, and whether or not it is a dehydron. 13. Coloring H-bond plates according to wrapper count Recall the H-bond plates application described in Exercise 15 of Chapter 2. Modify the script contained in the Generate_hBond_plates class so that the plates are colored with respect to the number of carbonaceous atoms that are wrapping the hydrogen bond within each plate. Recall that this class is within the Str uctBio.HBonds.generate _ hBond _ plates package. You should allow the class to work with hydrogen bonds between all standard residues, not just the residues that are within helices and beta strands. e goal is to get structure visualizations like that shown in Figure3.21, which illustrates STI-571 inhibition of a c-Kit tyrosine kinase [MD04]. 
128 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticse following is a suggestion for the code snippet to compute the coloration:# Normalize wrap count to a value in range [-1, 1].normalizedWC = 0.1*(min(max(wC, wThrshld - 10), wThrshld + 10) - wThrshld)greenEntry = .5 - .5*normalizedWCredBlueEntry = .5 + .5*normalizedWCplateColor = (redBlueEntry, greenEntry, redBlueEntry) where wC is the number of carbonaceous atoms around the hydro-gen bond, and wThrshld sets the threshold for under wrapping (usually set to 19). With wThrshld set to 19, colors range from green to purple as the wrapper count goes from 9 to 29. e color gray indicates a count of 19. Although the hydrogen plates of Exercise 15 in Chapter 2 may seem somewhat frivolous, the wrapper coloration gives them a bio-chemical relevance that is informative for a variety of discussions:• e surfaces dened by the wrapper count–colored H-bond plates provide information about the local hydrophobic environment cre-ated by the hydrophobic collapse characterizing the protein folding FIGURE 3.21 (See color insert.) Hydrogen bond plates colored with respect to wrapper atom count (1T46).
Algorithms Dealing with Distance ◾ 129 process. Note that most of the H-bond plates in the interior of the protein have a purple color and the amphiphilicity of a helical sec-ondary structure is immediately apparent.• e chain traces bordering a plate and the knowledge that the plate is stabilized by the strength of the hydrogen bond across it serve to indicate where the protein has its most signicant structural integrity.• In some cases, the coloration of plates dening a binding pocket will help to elucidate the interaction of the protein and its substrate. For example, consider Figure 3.21. Wrapper atom counts did not include atoms in the STI-571 ligand, and so we see a wrapper deciency for some of the hydrogen bonds near the binding pocket. For another example, see the note about HIV protease in Exercise 14. 14. Relating dehydrons to biological function Use the dehydron soware built in Exercise 12 to investigate the occurrence of dehydrons in various proteins. For example, consider HIV protease and its peptide substrate. Figure 3.22 shows the apo form of HIV protease. Note the deciently wrapped hydrogen bonds at the ends of the ap structures as indicated by the green coloration of the H-bond plates. When the protein interacts with its peptide substrate, hydrogen bonds are formed between residues in the aps and residues in the substrate. is explains the extra plates that can FIGURE 3.22 (See color insert.) HIV protease without substrate (1HIV with ligand removed).
130 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsbe observed in Figure 3.23 immediately above and below the sub-strate. is gure also shows that the substrate has taken a position within the binding pocket that allows it to donate wrapper atoms to the desolvation spheres of the hydrogen bonds in the aps, and so their plates are now colored purple.Here are some more suggestions:• Acetylcholine binding site: the apo form of the acetylcholine bind-ing protein (PDB identier: 2Y7Y) has a ap region that hovers over the binding site. It has three dehydrons dened by the atom pairs (CYS189, TYR 186), (GLN 184, TYR 143), and (TYR 143, GLN 184). What happens to each of these dehydrons when the protein binds to cocaine (PDB identier: 2PGZ) and to the toxin curare (PDB identi-er: 3PMZ)?• Protein dimers: formation of protein dimers is oen accompanied by a loss of dehydrons (see [FS03]). Use the scripts built for Exercise 13 to illustrate this.• Golden rule: as noted in Section 3.7.2, some proteins with an extraordinarily high number of dehydrons use disulde bridges to achieve more structural stability [FB10]. is can be seen for proteins such as hirudin (1HIC, Figure 3.24) and ribonuclease A (1RHB, Figure3.25). e antifreeze proteins found in some insects such as Tenebrio molitor, a darkling beetle that is the adult form of the mealworm larva, are more remarkable. is protein (1EZG) is FIGURE 3.23 (See color insert.) HIV protease with substrate (1F7A).
Algorithms Dealing with Distance ◾ 131 shown in Figure 3.26 using wrapper count–colored H-bond plates with disulde bridges emphasized with a gold color. Recall that the color green is used to indicate a hydrogen bond that is decient in hydrophobic protection. Another antifreeze protein (2PNE) can be seen in Figure3.27. is protein can be found in the snow ea, which is actually a springtail insect that forages for algae on the surface of snow (http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VjLKzogOj8Q). is pro-tein has been studied by researchers [LG07] in Canada (a country not unfamiliar with snow).FIGURE 3.24 (See color insert.) Hirudin (1HIC).FIGURE 3.25 (See color insert.) Ribonuclease A (1RHB).


===== [37/99] chapter-37.html =====

132 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsREFERENCES[AM88] R. A. Abagyan and V. N. Maiorov. A simple quantitative representation of polypeptide chain folds: Comparison of protein tertiary structures. Journal of Biomolecular Structure and Dynamics, 5 (1988), 1267–1279.[A73] C. B. Annsen. Principles that govern the folding of protein chains. Science, 181 (1973), 223–230.[A86] J. Åqvist. A simple way to calculate the axes of an ɑ-helix. Computers & Chemistry, 10 (1986), 97–99.[CD09] D. M. Chenoweth and P. B. Dervan. Allosteric modulation of DNA by small molecules. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 106 (2009), 13175–13179.[C05] D. Chandler. Interfaces and the driving force of hydrophobic assembly. Nature, 437 (2005), 640–647.FIGURE 3.27 (See color insert.) Snow ea antifreeze protein (2PNE).FIGURE 3.26 (See color insert.) Tenebrio molitor antifreeze protein (1EZG).
Algorithms Dealing with Distance ◾ 133 [EW82a] D. Eisenberg, R. M. Weiss, and T. C. Terwilliger. e helical hydrophobic moment: A measure of the amphiphilicity of a helix. Nature, 299 (1982), 371–374.[EW82b] D. Eisenberg, R. M. Weiss, T. C. Terwilliger, and W. Wilcox. Hydrophobic moments and protein structure. Faraday Symposia of the Chemical Society, 17 (1982), 109–120.[FB10] A. Fernández and R. S. Berry. Golden rule for buttressing vulnerable solu-ble proteins. Journal of Proteome Research (ACS), 9 (2010), 2643–2648.[FC08] A. Fernández and A. Crespo. Protein wrapping: A molecular marker for association, aggregation and drug design. Chemical Society Reviews, 37 (2008), 2373–2382.[F10] A. Fernández. Transformative Concepts for Drug Design: Target Wrapping. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, 2010.[FK03] A. Fernández, J. Kardos, and J. Goto. Protein folding: Could hydrophobic collapse be coupled with hydrogen-bond formation? Federation of European Biochemical Societies Letters, 536 (2003), 187–192.[FR00] J. Foote and A. Raman. A relation between the principal axes of inertia and ligand binding. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 97 (2000), 978–983.[FR04] A. Fernández, K. Rogale, R. Scott, and H. A. Scheraga. Inhibitor design by wrapping packing defects in HIV-1 proteins. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 101 (2004), 11640–11645.[FS02] A. Fernández, T. R. Sosnick, and A. Colubri. Dynamics of hydrogen-bond desolvation in folding proteins. Journal of Molecular Biology, 321 (2002), 659–675.[FS03] A. Fernández and R. Scott. Dehydron: A structurally encoded signal for protein interaction. Biophysical Journal, 85 (2003), 1914–1928.[FS04] A. Fernández, R. Scott, and R. S. Berry. e nonconserved wrapping of conserved protein folds reveals a trend toward increasing connectivity in proteomic networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 101 (2004), 2823–2827.[FSS03] A. Fernández, R. Scott, and H. A. Scheraga. Amino acid residues at pro-tein-protein interfaces: Why is propensity so dierent from relative abun-dance? e Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 107 (2003), 9929–9932.[JN07] A.-H. Jin, H. Brandstaetter, S. T Nevin, C. C. Tan, R. J. Clark, D. J. Adams, P. F. Alewood, D. J. Craik, and N. L. Daly. Structure of α-conotoxin BuIA: Inuences of disulde connectivity on structural dynamics. BioMed Central Structural Biology, 7 (2007). Open Access: http://www.biomedcentral .com/1472-6807/7/28.[JP03] A. Jewett, V. S. Pande, and K. W. Plaxco. Cooperativity, smooth energy landscapes and the origins of topology-dependent protein folding rates. Journal of Molecular Biology, 326 (2003), 247–253.[LG07] F.-H. Lin, L. A. Graham, R. L. Campbell, and P. L. Davies. Structural modeling of snow ea antifreeze protein. Biophysical Journal, 92 (2007), 1717–1723.
134 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics[MD04] C. D. Mol, D. R. Dougan, T. R. Schneider, R. J. Skene, M. L. Kraus, D.N.Scheibe, G. P. Snell, H. Zou, B. C. Sang, and K. P. Wilson. Structural basis for the autoinhibition and STI-571 inhibition of c-Kit tyrosine kinase. e Journal of Biological Chemistry, 279 (2004), 31655–31663.[OB92] C. A. Orengo, N. P. Brown, and W. R. Taylor. Fast structure alignment for protein databank searching. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Genetics, 14 (1992), 139–167.[SF12] A. L. Saucedo, D. Flores-Solis, R. C. Rodríguez de la Vega, B. Ramírez-Cordero, R. Hernández-López, P. Cano-Sánchez, R. N. Navarro, etal. New tricks of an old pattern: Structural versatility of scorpion toxins with com-mon cysteine spacing. e Journal of Biological Chemistry, 287 (2012), 12321–12330.[WS80] K. D. Watenpaugh, L. C. Sieker, and L. H. Jensen. Crystallographic rene-ment of rubredoxin at 1.2 Å resolution. Journal of Molecular Biology, 138 (1980), 615–633.[YS99] M. M. Young, A. G. Skillman, and I. D. Kuntz. A rapid method for explor-ing the protein structure universe. Proteins, 34 (1999), 317–332.[ZK00] C. Zhang, S.-H. Kim. e anatomy of protein β-sheet topology. Journal of Molecular Biology, 299 (2000), 1075–1089.[ZL04] C. Zhang, S. Liu, H. Zhou, and Y. Zhou. e dependence of all-atom sta-tistical potentials on structural training database. Biophysical Journal, 86 (2004), 3349–3358.


===== [38/99] chapter-38.html =====

135Chapter 4Algorithms Dealing with Angles4.1 MOTIVATIONIn addition to distance calculations, computations that derive bond angles and dihedral angles are fundamental to the evaluation of molecular struc-ture. Usually, these evaluations are done for a static molecule. In a more dynamic setting, we may attempt to evaluate these quantities as they change with time due to exibility of the molecule. For now we assume that the model is static and that we know the positions of atoms in three-dimensional (3D) space. In particular, we will be dealing with proteins for which the coordinates of all atoms are known with a fairly reasonable accuracy. Typically, we will get these coordinates from a le that is down-loaded from the Protein Data Bank (PDB).4.2 BOND ANGLERecall from linear algebra that an inner product of normalized vectors u and v can be viewed as the cosine of the angle between these vectors. is is expressed using the formula: cos, .()θ= uv uv (4.1)Consider two atoms a and c (with coordinate vectors a and c) both bonded to a third atom b with coordinates given by vector b as in Figure 4.1.
136 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsIf we set =− =−anduabvcb, then the cosine of the bond angle will be given by ()()θ=−−−−cos.Tabcbabcb (4.2)Once this quantity is calculated, the required bond angle can be easily derived by taking the inverse cosine of the quantity on right-hand side of the last equation.4.2.1 Calculating Bond Angles in a ScriptIf you need to calculate a very small number of bond angles, then it is advisable to use the Chimera menu invocation: Tools… Structure Analysis… Angles/Torsions, which will launch a dialog window that allows you toselect atoms followed by a request for the angle calculation. In this section we are assuming that you need several, perhaps thousands, of these calculations and so a script is the only reasonable approach. e following code follows the formula given in Equation 4.2 and serves to calculate the bond angle formed when atomB is connected to both atomA and atomC:def bondAngle(atomA, atomB, atomC): baVec = atomA.coord() - atomB.coord() bcVec = atomC.coord() - atomB.coord() baVec.normalize(); bcVec.normalize() angleRadians = arccos(baVec * bcVec) return angleRadians * 180.0/pie return value is the bond angle measured in degrees. An obvious modication of the code will allow you to get the bond angle in radians. acbbθacFIGURE 4.1 Bond angle dened via vectors.
Algorithms Dealing with Angles ◾ 137 As one might expect, Chimera has a built-in function to compute angles. e following two lines will generate the same results:angle = bondAngle(atomA, atomB, atomC)angle = chimera.angle(atomA.coord(), atomB.coord(). atomC.coord()4.3 DIHEDRAL ANGLES4.3.1 Dening Dihedral AnglesConsider atoms in the protein backbone: ααNC CNC1112 2 αCNCCN23 334. As we move from residue to residue, the corre-sponding bond lengths do not change much.For example: αN-Cii has approximately the same bond length as αN-Cjj for arbitrary i and j. Similarly, corresponding bond angles tend to be the same (see Exercise 1 at the end of this chapter). You cannot make this same statement for dihedral angles. Dihedral angles are due to a “swivel” action around a single bond and are primarily responsible for dening the position of the backbone atoms in 3D space. Be sure to under-stand that changing a dihedral angle will not aect bond angles between successive atoms in the backbone. In fact, we could keep all bond angles constant while moving Ni relative to Ni+1 by using a swiveling rotation around the αC-Cii bond.While a bond angle is determined by a sequence of three bonded atoms, a dihedral angle is dened by a sequence of four consecutive bonded atoms. In general, the rst three atoms and the last three atoms of this sequence dene two planes that intersect in a line that is coincident with the bond between the middle two atoms. For example, Figure 4.2 shows how the four consecutive atoms αCNCC-1iiii of the backbone dene two planes that intersect in the line that is coincident with the αN-Cii bond. e angle between these two planes is referred to as the φ (phi) angle associated with residue i. In a similar fashion, Figure 4.3 shows how the four consecutive atoms α+NC CN1iiii of the backbone dene two planes that intersect in the line that is coincident with the αC-Cii bond. e angle between these two planes is referred to as the ψ (psi) angle associated with residue i. Since the backbone atoms go through consecutive repetitions of the atoms N, Cα, and C, we have discussed only two of the three possible starting positions for a sequence of four atoms that dene a dihedral angle. In fact, there is another dihedral angle to be considered, namely the dihedral 
138 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsangle that is dened by the four-atom sequence αα++CCNC11iiii. is is called the ω (omega) angle and it has the carbon and nitrogen of the peptide bond as the middle two atoms. e peptide bond has a partial double-bond character due to resonance eects. Because of this and the steric interactions between the two side chains attached to the alpha car-bon atoms at either end of the sequence, the ω dihedral angle typically shows a trans conguration for this four-atom sequence. In other words, ω= °180. As a consequence, αα++C,C,N,C11iiii, the O atom attached to the carbonyl Ci atom and the H atom on the nitrogen are all very close to Unit normal ofCi-1, Ni, Cαi planeUnit normal ofNi, Cαi, Ci planeCαi–1CαiCαiCβiCi–1Ci–1Oi–1Hi+1Ni+1NiHiCiCiOiNiφ dihedralFIGURE 4.2 (See color insert.) Phi dihedral angle.Unit normal ofNi, Cαi, Ci planeUnit normal ofCαi, Ci, Ni+1 planeCαi–1CiCαiCαiCβiCi–1NiOi–1Hi+1Ni+1Ni+1NiHiCiOiψ dihedralFIGURE 4.3 (See color insert.) Psi dihedral angle.
Algorithms Dealing with Angles ◾ 139 being coplanar. is planar nature of the peptide bond usually puts the side chains in positions that are as far apart as possible.4.3.2 Mathematics for the Computation of a Dihedral Anglee next few sections give a complete presentation of the theory needed for the computation of a dihedral angle. It is included for the sake of com-pleteness and can be skipped if you simply need the script that does the calculation (Section 4.3.7).Our denition of a dihedral angle as the angle between two planes has to be made more precise. Since an angle is determined by the intersection of two lines, we will need to derive two such lines from the planes dened by the sequence of four atoms. For example, we could have each line lie within a plane and have both lines perpendicular to the line of intersec-tion of the two planes. e analytic derivation required by this approach is somewhat lengthy and is less preferable to a strategy that generates the needed lines by computing the normals of the two planes. ese normals are illustrated in Figures 4.2 and 4.3. A short deduction using Euclidean geometry will show that the dihedral angle between the two planes is equal to the angle between the two normals.Since the normal to a plane dened by two intersecting lines (in our case, two consecutive bonds) is easily computed using a cross product for-mula, we can use this formula as a convenient “algebraic subroutine.”4.3.3 Computation of a NormalTwo lines that intersect in 3D space dene a plane. To construct a normal to this plane, we calculate a cross product. Suppose we have two vectors u and v. e cross product is a vector that is perpendicular to both u and v and it has a magnitude that is equal to the area of the parallelogram spanned by the vectors. It can be shown that this is ()()()×==− +− +−det12312323 32 31 13 12 21uvijkuuuvvvuv uv iuvuvj uv uv k (4.3)e result of this computation is a vector that is expressed as a linear combination of the three basis vectors i, j, and k. Alternatively, we could


===== [39/99] chapter-39.html =====

140 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsexpress the right-hand side of the previous equation using a column vector notation ×=−−−23 3231 1312 21uvuv uvuv uvuv uv (4.4)To see why these formulae are correct, consider the following argument: If the magnitude of the normal is the area of the parallelogram dened by u and v, then its magnitude is given by the base times height formula sin=θuh uv, where h is the height of the parallelogram and θ is the angle between u and v. So, we can write sin1coscos222222222222T2()()()×= θ=−θ=− θ=−uv uv uvuv uvuv uv (4.5)Continuing ∑∑ ∑()×= −=−== =222T2213213132uv uv uv uv uvkkkkkkk (4.6)We can now apply Lagrange’s Identity to see that the last expression is actually ∑∑()−=+=21312uv uvij jijii (4.7)To prove this, you can simply expand both expressions (a somewhat tedious procedure).*Now note that ()()()=−+− +−ijkuuuvvvuv uv iuvuvj uv uv kdet123123223 32 31 13 12 212 (4.8)and we see that this is the same as the double sum just given.* A proof of the general case can be found at en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lagrange’s_identity.
Algorithms Dealing with Angles ◾ 141 So far we have shown that working with this “area of parallelogram” denition, we get a vector that has a magnitude given by det123123ijkuuuvvv (4.9)Is the vector dened by this determinant perpendicular to both u and v? Yes. If you calculate the inner product of this vector with u or v, you get 0. For example −−−≡ 023 3231 1312 21T123uv uvuv uvuv uvuuu (4.10)So, we have shown that the determinant-based calculation for the cross product has given the correct magnitude and we have the “perpendicular to both u and v” requirement. e resulting vector could be illustrated by either of the two diagrams contained in Figure 4.4. We now have to decide which of these is correct since they both show a vector perpen-dicular to both u and v. For ×uv, we use the “right-hand rule” that is also seen in the usual 3D Euclidean i, j, k coordinate system: If the ngers of your right hand curl around the k unit normal with ngers going in the direction from i to j, then the thumb points in the positive direction assigned to k. Similarly, if the ngers of the right hand curl around the ×uv normal with ngers going in the direction from u to v, then the thumb points in the positive direction assigned to ×uv. So, the rst dia-gram is for ×uv, while the next diagram is for ×vu (which is the same as ()−×uv).θθvvuuFIGURE 4.4 Right-hand rule.
142 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsOne last vector algebra issue is that the cross product evaluated using the determinant does not necessarily have a unit length. Recall that our dihedral angle calculation requires vectors that are unit normals. In such a situation, we will have to normalize the cross product vectors. Given ×uv, we calculate ××uvuv (4.11)4.3.4 Calculating the Phi Dihedral AngleSuppose we want to calculate the φ dihedral angle as shown in Figure 4.2. For simplicity, we will just use the atom names to label vectors that contain the coordinates of these atoms. We let =−−NC1uii and =α−CNvii. en ()()()×= −+−+−23 32 31 13 12 21uv uv uv iuvuvj uv uv k (4.12)Dividing this by its norm will give the unit normal (call it C,N,C).1()α−niiiSimilarly, to calculate the other required normal we let =α−CNvii and =−αCCwii. en calculate()()()×==− +− +−det12312323 32 31 13 12 21vwijkvvvwwwvw vw ivwvwj vw vw k (4.13)Dividing this by its norm will give the second unit normal (call it ()αN,C,Cniii).Finally with both unit normals computed, we can get the value of the φ dihedral for this alpha carbon using the inverse cosine function: ()()()()φ=τα=α•α−−C,N,C,CarccosC,N ,C N,C,C11nniiii iiiiii (4.14)4.3.5 Sign of the Dihedral AngleBy convention, a dihedral angle is assumed to be in the range []−π π,. Since the calculation of the arccos function may lead to an angle in 
Algorithms Dealing with Angles ◾ 143 the range []π0,, we typically have to adjust the sign. To derive the sign of a dihedral angle, we look along the bond lying in the intersection of the two planes (be sure to look in the increasing i direction, as shown in Figure4.5).Consider the unit normal of the plane dened by the rst three atoms. Compute its inner product with the vector going from the third atom to the last atom. If this inner product is positive (as in the diagram), then the sign of the dihedral angle is positive, otherwise it is negative. In the case of φ this computation is ()()α• −α−C,N,CCC1niiii i (4.15)For positive dihedral angles, the projection of the unit normal is in the same direction as the last bond. For negative dihedral angles, the projec-tion of the unit normal is in the direction opposite to the last bond. In both cases, we are looking down along the central bond in the increasing i direction. e views for positive and negative dihedral angles are given in Figure 4.6.DihedralFIGURE 4.5 Sign of the dihedral angle.+–Atomnumbers2 and 32 and 34141Positive dihedral anglesNegative dihedral anglesFIGURE 4.6 Sign of the dihedral angle.
144 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics4.3.6 Calculating the Psi Dihedral AngleTo calculate the ψ dihedral angle, we follow the same analysis but this time compute ()()()()ψ=τα =α•α++N,C,C,NarccosN,C ,C C,C,N11nniiii iiiiii (4.16)In other words, all the previous computations work to get ψ if you do the following substitutions: ←←αα←←−+CNNCCCCN11iiiiiiii (4.17)4.3.7 Calculating Dihedral Angles in a ScriptUsually, explicit computation of dihedral angles can be avoided by sim-ply extracting the appropriate attribute from the residue object. For example, consider the following user interactions with the Python Shell window:>>> r = chimera.openModels.open("1CRN", type="PDB")[0].residues[4]#1, chain A: crambin>>> r.typeu'PRO'>>> r.phi-76.1815060916024>>> r.psi-18.979386491402792>>> r.chi132.04248431338714>>> r.chi2-41.38196278264455>>> r.chi3>>>e rst line denes r to be the residue with index 4 within the protein 1CRN. e next lines indicate that it is a proline. Aer this, we have four statements that are used to retrieve the dihedral angles designated by the names: phi, psi, chi1, and chi2.


===== [40/99] chapter-40.html =====

Algorithms Dealing with Angles ◾ 145 4.4 RAMACHANDRAN PLOTSWhile the dihedral angles in a polypeptide can change with the conforma-tion of the chain, they cannot freely adopt just any arbitrary values. It has been known since the early 1960s that steric collisions will prohibit certain combinations of the phi and psi angles on either side of a given alpha car-bon atom. An observed combination of phi/psi angles is oen represented by a single point in a two-dimensional plot that has a horizontal axis for phi ranging over values []−π π, (i.e., −180° to +180°) and a vertical axis for psi ranging over the same values. A collection of many such points can be used to record the observed phi/psi combinations corresponding to a set of alpha carbon atoms. is type of scatter plot is called a Ramachandran plot since Ramachandran and his colleagues (see [RR63]) were the rst people to study the allowable phi/psi angles and the dependency of their values on the type of residue associated with the alpha carbon.Figure 4.7 is derived from a Ramachandran scatter plot of 121,870 phi/psi combinations taken from 463 protein structures [MM92]. e 180135BbaAbL1b~b~a~pp~b~b~190450–45–90–135–180–135–90–4509013518045ψϕFIGURE 4.7 (See color insert.) Ramachandran plot for 121,870 residues (463 protein structures). A - Core alpha L - Core left-handed alpha a - Allowed alpha l - Allowed left-handed alpha~a - Generous alpha ~l - Generous left-handed alpha B - Core beta p - Allowed epsilon b - Allowed beta ~p - Generous epsilon~b - Generous beta
146 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsfollowing procedure was used to generate this pixilated gure: e area of the original scatter plot was subdivided into square “pixels,” each having a side length of °10. In this way, the entire plot is covered with 362=1296 pixels. A pixel was given a dark color and characterized as “core” if it cov-ered at least 100 points in the scatter plot. A pixel was given a color of medium intensity and characterized as “allowed” if it was not a core pixel but covered at least eight points in the scatter plot. Pixels in the “gen-erous” region are obtained by extending an allowed region with a bor-der area of width °20. e generous region is given a color that is lighter than an allowed region. Any pixel that is not core, allowed, or generous is given the lightest color or simply le as white. So, in summary, the darker areas correspond to regions of the plot where the density of points is high-est and other colors represent regions of lower density. White regions or those with the lightest color are used to denote areas of the plot where there is the least likelihood of observing a point, for example, φ= °90 and ψ=−°90. e plot of Figure 4.7 was created using PROCHECK,* a program that checks the stereochemical quality of protein structures (see [LM93] and [MM92]).As indicated in the list following Figure 4.7, various regions of the plot are labeled with single-letter designations that indicate some secondary structure properties such as alpha helices, beta strands, and epsilon turns. Alpha helices are typically right handed although le-handed helices do occur but with considerably less frequency. e epsilon region of the Ramachandran plot is for phi/psi combinations that are usually associ-ated with a turn that is just prior to a helix or beta strand. A good example of this occurs in the protein 1JAL for residue VAL287, which occurs on a tight turn between two antiparallel beta strands. More information about two-residue turns can be found in [MP94].Since an angle rotation of 180 + n degrees is the same as an angle rotation of n − 180 degrees, any Ramachandran plot has a “wraparound” continuity. We could consider the uppermost row of pixels to be adjacent to the lowest row of pixels and the lemost column of pixels is essen-tially adjacent to the rightmost column. Inspection of Figure 4.7 will verifythis.As noted earlier, PROCHECK checks the stereochemical quality of a protein structure. An example of such processing is given by Figure4.8, where the Ramachandran scatter plot for 1A4Y is superimposed on the * http://www.ebi.ac.uk/thornton-srv/soware/PROCHECK/.
Algorithms Dealing with Angles ◾ 147 background distribution discussed earlier and illustrated by Figure 4.7. Note that most of the points reside in the core alpha and core beta regions. Aer the protein’s backbone conformation has been computed, PROCHECK soware can be used to detect the existence of any anoma-lous dihedral angles. For example, Figure 4.8 indicates that residues SER 15 (chains A and D), GLU 58 (chain E), and SER 4 (chain E) all have phi/psi angles that produce points in the white region. A point in the white region may indicate an error in the computation of the conformation or it may simply be a valid entry that rarely occurs.To some extent, Ramachandran plots can also show how the dihedral angles on either side of an alpha carbon atom are aected by the type of residue associated with that alpha carbon. For example, the glycine residue essentially lacks a side chain and so it does not have the steric constraints of the other amino acids. Figure 4.9 shows the scatter plot for phi/psi angles that are limited to glycine residues. One can see that the distribu-tion is somewhat dierent from the general case illustrated in Figure4.7. Although there are fewer constraints on dihedral angles for glycine, there are still some distribution patterns that can be observed and Figure 4.9 180Ramachandran plot pdbla4yBab~b~bb~11ASN 59(E)GLU 58(E)GLU 353 (A)GLU 353 (D)SER 15 (D)SER 15 (A)SER 4(B)HIS 65(B)ARG 65(B)HIS 65(E)ASN 82(D)ASN 82(E)~pp~b~bbSER 4(E)13590450–45–90–135–135–180–900Phi (degrees)Psi (degrees)4590135180–45FIGURE 4.8 Ramachandran plot for residues of protein 1A4Y.
148 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsshows ve clusters within the scatter plot. An in-depth analysis of this plot can be found in [HB05].While glycine provides an example of dihedral angles that are subject to few steric constraints, we nd that the phi/psi angles for proline are severely constrained. e PROCHECK version of the Ramachandran plot for the 42 proline residues of 1A4Y is given in Figure 4.10. We see that phi is constrained to values that are within a narrow band typically ranging from −°60 to −°90 depending on the secondary structure of its local envi-ronment. Inspection of Figure 4.11 shows why this is expected. e phi dihedral angle just prior to the proline alpha carbon is severely restricted because the chain arising from the alpha carbon loops back to bond with the backbone nitrogen atom bonded to that alpha carbon. e psi angle –180αϕψαL–180–900–90180900βPRβPβPβPRβS90180FIGURE 4.9 Ramachandran plot for glycine residues.1801800Pro (42)ϕ9090ψ0–90–180 –90FIGURE 4.10 Ramachandran plot for proline residues.
Algorithms Dealing with Angles ◾ 149 aer the alpha carbon has much less restriction as can be seen in the plot of Figure 4.10.Another interesting example of a constraint is seen in “pre-proline” residues. In this case, the side chain of the residue prior to proline bends away from the proline loop to avoid a steric clash. is is clearly illustrated in Figure 4.11, where the phenylalanine ring of residue 70 in 1AG9 veers away from the proline loop in the next residue. Figure 4.12 (taken from [HB05]) gives the Ramachandran plots and associated analysis for pre-proline residues.4.4.1 Scripts for Generating Ramachandran PlotsGenerating a Ramachandran plot can be done using the matplotlib module. is will require some familiarity with scatter plots. You should review the scatter plot section of Appendix D.Proline alpha carbonPre-proline alpha carbonFIGURE 4.11 Phe 70 a pre-proline residue in 1AG9.180900ϕααLβPβS–90–180–180–90180900ζψFIGURE 4.12 Ramachandran plot for pre-proline residues.


===== [41/99] chapter-41.html =====

150 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsScript 4.1: Generating a Ramachandran Plot for a ProteinScript D.3 can be adapted to a variety of applications that need a scatter plot output. e next script shows how we can generate a Ramachandran plot for a given protein:import matplotlib.pyplot as pltdef ramaPlot(res_L, saveFilePath = ""): plt.ion() fig = plt.figure(figsize = (8,8)) ax = fig.add_subplot(111, aspect = 'equal') ax.set_title("Ramachandran Plot " + saveFilePath, fontsize = 14) ax.set_xlabel("PHI (degrees)", fontsize = 12) ax.set_ylabel("PSI (degrees)", fontsize = 12) ax.set_xlim([-180, 180]) ax.set_ylim([-180, 180]) ax.set_xticks([-180, -135, -90, -45, 0, 45, 90, 135, 180]) ax.set_yticks([-180, -135, -90, -45, 0, 45, 90, 135, 180]) ax.grid(True, linestyle = '-', color = '0.75') ax.hlines(0, -10, 10, colors='k', linestyles='dashed') ax.vlines(0, -10, 10, colors='k', linestyles='dashed') # Initialization: # List indicies: 0 for Helix, 1 for Strand, and 2 for Coil. colors_T = ('k', 'g', 'b') # Marker colors for Helix, Strand, Coil. shapes_T = ('o', 's', 'd') # Marker shapes for Helix, Strand, Coil. phi_L = [[], [], []] # Phi lists for Helix, Strand, and Coil psi_L = [[], [], []] # Psi lists for Helix, Strand, and Coil # Generate the phi, psi coordinate lists: for r in res_L: # Skip if residue has no phi, psi attributes: if r.phi is None or r.psi is None: continue if r.isHelix: phi_L[0].append(r.phi) psi_L[0].append(r.psi) if r.isStrand: phi_L[1].append(r.phi) psi_L[1].append(r.psi) if not (r.isHelix or r.isStrand): phi_L[2].append(r.phi) psi_L[2].append(r.psi) # Drop in the markers: for i in range(3): ax.scatter(phi_L[i], psi_L[i], s = 20, color = colors_T[i], marker = shapes_T[i]) # Save file if the saveFilePath parameter is not the empty string. if saveFilePath != "": fig.savefig(saveFilePath + "_RamachandranPlot", dpi = fig.dpi)
Algorithms Dealing with Angles ◾ 151 raw_input("Hit Enter to dismiss the plot.") plt.close()#==================================================================pdbIDchars = raw_input("Type in 4 character PDB ID or PDB file name: \n")prot = chimera.openModels.open(pdbIDchars, type="PDB")[0]ramaPlot(prot.residues, pdbIDchars)Note that this script gives some extra information by using dierent mark-ers for phi, psi pairs situated in dierent secondary structures. Markers are black circles for helix residues, green squares for strand residues, and blue diamonds for coil residues. Plotting is set up in a function that can be called with parameters that specify a residue list and an optional string that can be used to generate the plot title and provide a le name for image saving. e script, available from the book’s Web site (le name:Script 4_01 Ramachandran plot for a protein.py). Executing this script on 1YJH (the “bedbug spit” protein) shows the capabilities of the scatter plot because the protein has a good mix of helices, strands, and coils (see Figure 4.13).4.4.2 Background Densities for Ramachandran PlotsWhile using a scatter plot to display the phi, psi pairings in a set of resi-dues, it is helpful to see the plot displayed above a background image that shows the expected distribution of points. is strategy is illustrated by Figure 4.8. e colored background used by PROCHECK is a render-ing of the statistical densities reported in the work done by Morris et al. (see page 350 of [MM92] to view the original version of this background distribution).Soware for this book includes a script that can generate this back-ground (Script 4_02 Generating the Ramachandran back-ground distribution.py). e script draws the background by using a scatter plot that uses square markers with a large size. e coloration of the markers is determined by a rather large list of lists forming a 36 by 36 array of color codes (baseColorCodes in the script). e idea is to generate the background which is then written to an image le. e image le can be cropped to eliminate titles and axes numbers and sub-sequently used as an image that can be loaded into other scatter plots. is image loading eliminates all the computations necessary to establish the background. Another advantage is that the background image will be 
152 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsautomatically resized if the user changes the plot window size. e direc-tory containing the script also contains the cropped version in the le: croppedRamachandranBackGround.png.e next script (Script 4_03 Ramachandran Plots with Background.py) is the same as Script 4_01 but with the three extra statements that bring in the background as an image. If you run this script on the protein with ID 1A4Y, you should get a plot that is very similar to that shown in Figure 4.8. Running the script on chain A of the protein 1PTM produces the result in Figure 4.14. You should note the presence of six black circle markers within the core le-handed alpha region near (phi, psi) = (50, 40). is is unusual and it is due to the presence of a le-handed helix in 1PTM. More information about such anomalies can be found in [NK05].4.4.3 3D Ramachandran Plotse next script (see Script 4_04 3D RamachandranPlot.py) is oered as a novel way to give your Ramachandran plots some extra air. Instead of using a scatter plot to track the frequency of the phi, psi pairs, Script 4.04 uses narrow box towers to represent the frequency distributions. Each of the 36 by 36 cells of the plot has a height that is –180–180–135–90–4504590135180Ramachandran plot 1 YJH–135 –90 –45 0Phi (degrees)Psi (degrees)45 90 135180FIGURE 4.13 (See color insert.) Ramachandran plot for 1YJH.
Algorithms Dealing with Angles ◾ 153 proportional to the number of phi, psi points that would fall into that cell if a scatter plot was used. Figure 4.15 shows the plot for the A chain of 1PTM. Rotating and zooming of the plot will give you the best perspec-tive for the scene.–180–180–135–90–4504590135180Ramachandran plot 1PTM_A–135 –90 –45 0Phi (degrees)Psi (degrees)45 90 135180FIGURE 4.14 Ramachandran plot for 1PTM_A.–180–180–135–90–4504590135180Psi–135–90–450Phi4590135180FIGURE 4.15 (See color insert.) ree-dimensional Ramachandran plot for 1PTM_A.
154 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics4.5 LEAST SQUARES PLANE4.5.1 MotivationIn biochemistry, we have seen several structures in which the atoms are almost coplanar, for example, aromatic rings and heme rings. e last example is seen in the myoglobin protein: 1MBO (see Figure 4.13). In this section, we wish to calculate the equation of the “best” plane that goes among the “almost coplanar” atoms. In this case, the best plane will be the plane that minimizes the sum of the squares of the distances between the almost coplanar atoms and the plane. We call this the least squares plane.Suppose we wish to nd the equation of the least squares plane for the heme ring of 1MBO. We know that three points can dene a plane, but which three should we pick? Since making a choice of some particular set of three atoms would introduce some bias, a reasonable approach would be to use more than three atoms, the idea being to nd a plane that goes among the atoms of the heme ring and minimizes the sum of the squared distances measured from the atoms to that plane (Figure 4.16).We will see that a mathematical representation of this least squares plane has several uses. For example, we may dene a line in 3D space (such as the line coincident with a bond) and then we can measure the angle that this line makes with the plane.4.5.2 Least Squares Plane: Mathematical AnalysisWhile the analysis of this problem follows a development that is similar to that for the inertial axis, there are some mathematical niceties that merit an individual treatment.We will consider the almost coplanar atoms to make up a target list. In the discussion to follow, we will designate the target list atoms as =()1,2, ,ai ni. e ith atom in the list, ()ai will have coordinate vector FIGURE 4.16 Hemoglobin ring with “almost coplanar” atoms.


===== [42/99] chapter-42.html =====

Algorithms Dealing with Angles ◾ 155 ()() () (),,Taaaxiyizi. e goal of this section is to go through a sequence of steps that will derive the formula for the least squares plane. e derivation will be somewhat similar to the derivation of the inertial axis seen in the last section. We wish to minimize ∑==21Sdiin (4.18)where di represents the perpendicular distance between atom ()ai and the least squares plane.Note that, using vector notation, we can derive the equation of a plane as follows: Let R be a vector going from the origin to the plane meeting it in perpendicular fashion, that is, R is normal to the plane (Figure 4.17). Consider P to be any point in the plane. en the vector P − R can be con-sidered to lie in the plane and hence perpendicular to R, as shown in the next gure (Figure 4.18). Since P − R is perpendicular to R, we have the inner product of P − R and R equating to zero. is is the equation of the plane since it characterizes all points P in the plane: ()−=0TPRR (4.19)R vectorzyxPP–R vectorNormalto planeFIGURE 4.17 Normal dening a plane.Plane viewed‘‘on edge’’.Ryxzd(i)a(i)FIGURE 4.18 Plane viewed on edge.
156 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsis is a realistic expectation: We only need a single vector R to determine a plane. e direction of R will determine the orientation of the plane, while the length of R will establish the perpendicular distance from the origin to the plane.A naive computational strategy could now proceed as follows: Given ,()ai we can derive 2di in terms of ()ai and the components of R. We can use Equation 4.18 to express S in terms of these components and then we would seek to determine the components of R that minimize S. If we assume that ()= ,,,TRrrrxyz this minimization can be attempted by calculating partial derivatives of S with respect to the components of R and then setting these partial derivatives to zero. Unfortunately, the equations arising from the par-tial derivatives are quite complicated and dicult to solve. You might want to verify this just to see how bad the situation can become. It so happens that a better representation of R is R = mN, where ()= ,,TNnnnxyz is a unit vector that essentially species the direction of R (much like w did for the inertial axis in Section 3.6) and m is a simple scalar that species the length of R. is representation of R is somewhat counterintuitive because, instead of only three variables (),, ,rrrxyz we now have to solve for four variables: nx, ny, nz, and m. However, the number of degrees of freedom in the solution is still only 3 because N is a unit vector and so we have NTN = 1, which is a con-straint acting on N. e presence of a constraint turns this into a Lagrange multiplier problem that has a reasonably straightforward solution.e reader should note that the naive strategy demands that the com-ponents of R essentially dene both the direction of R and its length. Setting R = mN allows us to “disentangle” length information from direc-tion information leading to a more eective mathematical analysis.We now derive the Lagrange formulation. Suppose ()ai represents the coor-dinates of an atom that is not on the plane dened by R = mN. We can derive the formula for ()di in terms of m, N, and ()ai by observing that the length of R is m, which is the sum of ()di and the projection of a(i) onto the unit nor-mal N, which is parallel to R. is is illustrated in Figure 4.14. Consequently, =−() ()TdmNaii (4.20)We wish to minimize ∑∑()==−() ()==21T21SdmNaiiniin (4.21)subject to the constraint =1.TNN
Algorithms Dealing with Angles ◾ 157 So, the Lagrange formulation is as follows: Find m, N, and λ to mini-mize ()λ,,LmN, where ∑()()()λ= −−λ−()=,, 1T21TLmNmNa NNiin (4.22)Taking partial derivatives of the Lagrangian, we get ∑∑()()∂∂=⇒ −=∂∂=⇒−+λ=∂∂λ=⇒ =()() ()==000001T1T1TLmmNaLNmNaa NLNNiiniini (4.23)Solving the rst equation for m gives us ∑=()=1T1mNnaiin (4.24)Now suppose that the coordinates of all the =()1,2, ,ai ni are not the coordinates given by the PDB le but instead the PDB coordinates trans-lated so that they are in a frame of reference with the origin at the centroid of the atoms in the target list. at is, suppose a(i) = p(i) − C was computed prior to the beginning of our discussion. Here, =()1,2, ,pi ni are the PDB coordinates of the target list atoms and C is the centroid of all these atoms. In other words ∑=()=11Cnpiin (4.25)It is easily seen that this gives us ∑=()=01aiin because ∑∑ ∑∑()=−=−=−=() () ()== ==011 11apCpCnCnCiiniiniinin (4.26)e value of m is computed to be ∑∑()====() ()==100T1T1TmNnaNnaNniiniin (4.27)
158 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsSince m = 0, we can now consider our frame of reference to have its origin situated among the atoms of the target list and the least squares plane will go through the origin. e unit vector N will be a direction vector that determines the orientation of the plane.With m = 0, the rst equation in the set of Equation 4.23 will be consis-tent with Equation 4.26 and second equation can be restated as ∑∑()()∂∂=⇒−+λ==⇒ =λ() ()() ()==000T1T1LNmNaa NmNaa Niiniiini (4.28)Since the terms in the parentheses form a simple inner product of two vectors, we can reverse the order of N and a(i) to get T1aNaNiini∑()=λ() ()= (4.29)If we set =() () ()12Aaa an (4.30)then AT has rows that are the transposes of the a(i) so the n by 1 matrix ATN has the form: =()()()T1T2TTANaNaNaNn (4.31)and the n by 1 matrix AATN can be calculated as .T121T2TTT11T21T1T1T2T1∑∑∑∑()()()()()()()===() () ()()()()()()()()()()()()()()()()====AANaa aaNaNaNaNaaNaaNaaNaaNaaNanniiiniiinimiiniiiiimiin 
Algorithms Dealing with Angles ◾ 159 However, this column vector can be rewritten as ∑()=()()=.TT1AANaNaiiinConsequently, Equation 4.29 can be rewritten as an eigenvector equation: =λTAA NN (4.32)Now referring to Equation 4.31 and Equation 4.21 with m = 0, consider the inner product: ∑()()()===() () ()()()()()=TTT1T 2T T1T2TTT21AN ANaNaN aNaNaNaNNa Snniin (4.33)But the right-hand side of this can be simplied by appealing to Equation 4.32: ()==λ=λTTTTTTAN AN NAAN NN (4.34)and so we see that the value of S is simply the eigenvalue. Consequently, when solving Equation 4.32 we will use the eigenvector N corresponding to the minimum eigenvalue if we wish to minimize S.4.5.3 A Script for Computing the Least Squares PlaneWe now have all the mathematical analysis complete. So how do we use it to build soware that implements a least squares plane? Before going any further, let us review what has been accomplished. e input for the least squares plane is simply a collection of Chimera atom objects. e mathemat-ical analysis tells us that we can use the coordinates of all these atoms to build the A matrix, which leads to the matrix Equation 4.32. Aer computing the eigenvalues, we end up with two arrays (each a three-component vector) that constitute a solution of the problem, namely: the centroid C of the atoms and the eigenvector N that determines the direction of a line that is normal to the plane. As discussed earlier, this point in 3D space and the normal vector are enough to implicitly specify a plane. ey will be stored as attributes for a


===== [43/99] chapter-43.html =====

160 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsclass that will allow us to instantiate objects that “behave like” least squares planes. To understand that these attributes, C and N, are sucient for our needs, let us consider the methods that such a class would support:• projectionOnPlane(): Given a point P not on the plane, deter-mine Q, the projection of P onto the plane. is will be the intersec-tion of the plane with a line from P that is normal to the plane.• distanceToPlane(): Given a point P not on the plane, calculate the distance between P and its projection Q on the plane.• angleToPlane(): Given two points P and Q, calculate the angle made by the line through P and Q with the plane.We now show how each of these calculations would use the vectors C and N.projectionOnPlane(): Consider Figure 4.19. We are given the arrays N, C, and P, representing the vectors CN, OC, and OP, respectively. Both OC and OP are dened relative to the frame of reference established by the PDB le, while CN is considered to have an origin that is the centroid C. We need to derive the coordinates of Q (the projection of P onto the plane) represented in Figure 4.19 by the vector OQ (again in the PDB frame of reference). Since we know both C and P we can compute P − C to get an array that is represented in the gure by the vector CP (as an equation: CP= OP − OC). e vector CP essentially represents the point P in a frame of reference that has C as its origin. Now we are able to compute the dot product of CP with CN (the normal to the plane) to get PN, which is the projection of P onto that normal. If we subtract the vector CPN from OP, we get the vector OQ, which represents the required projection (relative to the PDB frame of reference). In other words: PQ = −CPN and adding this to OP (as in Figure 4.19) gives us the needed projection.distanceToPlane(): Again, consider Figure 4.19. We are given the coordinates of P and we wish to nd the distance from P to the plane. is will simply be the length of vector PQ, so this function will call the projectionOnPlane() function to get Q and then calculate the norm of PQ.angleToPlane(): Consider Figure 4.20. We are given the arrays PA and PB representing the vectors OPA and OPB, respectively. If the line segment from PB to PA is extended until it intersects the plane at point V, then our goal is to nd the angle θ between this line and the line from QB to QA, which also goes through point V in the plane. In the gure, it is intended 
Algorithms Dealing with Angles ◾ 161 that QA and QB are the projections onto the plane of PA and PB, respec-tively. We can obtain θ by rst evaluating the cosine of θ, which is the ratio VQ VPBB. Note that the dotted line above QAQB has the same length as QAQB. We can use a similarity of triangles deduction to show that ()θ=cosQQPPABAB (4.35)In summary, this function will use the projectionOnPlane() function to calculate both QA and QB and then calculate ()arccos QQ PPAB AB toget θ.We now have enough mathematical background to implement the LeastSquaresPlane class. However, before doing so, it should be Origin in PDBframe of referenceQPCONPNFIGURE 4.19 Calculating a projection onto the plane.Origin in PDBframe of referenceOVQAQBPBPAθθFIGURE 4.20 Calculating the angle between a line segment and a plane.
162 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsnoted that there are applications that need the generation of a plane object that is simply dened by means of a point and plane normal. For example, in Exercise 8, we need a plane that is to be perpendicular to the inertial axis of a membrane protein. ese considerations give us a won-derful opportunity for the illustration of how Python can elegantly sup-port both strategies for the specication of a plane. We use the Python object-oriented inheritance mechanism. We will implement a base class called Planes with an __init__ method that accepts a point C and a normal N. It will oer the methods just described. We then imple-ment a derived class called LeastSquaresPlane with an __init__ method that accepts a list of Chimera atom objects. is class will be derived from the Planes class and so it will also have the methods just described.Both classes are in the le called planes (available from the book’s web-site) usingfrom StructBio.LeastSquares.planes import Planesfrom StructBio.LeastSquares.planes import LeastSquaresPlaneHere is the script:__import chimera, numpyfrom numpy import array, linalg, zeros, dot, arccos#===================================================================# Planes CLASSclass Planes(object): def __init __(self, c, n): # The next two arrays (3-component vectors) define # a plane in the PDB frame of reference. self.center = c self.normal = n/linalg.norm(n) # -------------------------------------------------------------------- # Given an atom object or an array object this function # returns the coordinates. def getCoords(self, atomORarray): if type(atomORarray) is chimera.Atom: coords = array(atomORarray.coord()) if type(atomORarray) is numpy.ndarray: coords = atomORarray if not(type(atomORarray) is chimera.Atom or type(atomORarray) is numpy.ndarray): print “Bad argument type in getCoords function call.” return None return coords
Algorithms Dealing with Angles ◾ 163 # -------------------------------------------------------------------- # Given an atom object or an array this function gets the # coordinates (or directly uses the array) to define the # coordinates of a point P (coordsP) in the PDB frame of reference. # It then projects these coordinates onto the plane by: # 1) Subtract the center c array to get the “local” coordinates # localP (in a frame of reference that has c as the origin. # 2) Calculate the projection of localP on the normal vector # (s e l f. n o r m a l ). # 3) Subtract this result from coordsP to get the projection # on the plane relative to the PDB frame of reference. def projectionOnPlane(self, atomORarray): # Compute coordinates relative to an origin at the centroid. coordsP = self.getCoords(atomORarray) localP = coordsP - self.center # Step 1 projOnNormal = self.normal*dot(self.normal, localP) # Step 2 return coordsP - projOnNormal # Step 3 # --------------------------------------------------------------------- # Given an atom object or an array object this function computes the # perpendicular distance from that point to the least squares plane. def distanceToPlane(self, atomORarray): return linalg.norm(self.getCoords(atomORarray) - self.projectionOnPlane(atomORarray)) # -------------------------------------------------------------------- # Given two atom objects or array objects this function computes # the angle between the line joining these two points and the # projection of this line in the LS plane. def angleToPlane(self, a _ atomORarray, b _ atomORarray): # Compute the coordinates: a _ coords = self.getCoords(a _ atomORarray) b _ coords = self.getCoords(b _ atomORarray) distBTWNcoords = linalg.norm(a _ coords - b _ coords) a _ coordsProj = self.projectionOnPlane(a _ atomORarray) b _ coordsProj = self.projectionOnPlane(b _ atomORarray) distBTWNprojections = linalg.norm(a _ coordsProj - b _ coordsProj) return arccos(distBTWNprojections/distBTWNcoords)*180/numpy.pi#===================================================================# Least Squares Plane CLASSclass LeastSquaresPlane(Planes): def __init__(self, atoms_L): self.atoms_L = atoms_L self.ce ntroid = self.centroid() # Vectors providing local frame of reference: self.localAxes_L = [] # The normal to the plane will be localAxes_L[0]: self.normalToPlane = None
164 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics # List of atom coordinates relative to centroid: coords _ L = [] for a in self.atoms _ L: co ords _ L.app end(array(a.coord()) - self.centroid) # Use coords _ L to build matrixA: matrixA = array(coords _ L) eigvals, eigvecs = linalg.eig(dot(matrixA.transpose(), matrixA)) # Sort the eigenvalues to get the needed eigenvector: ind = eigvals.argsort() # Important: We have to extract eigenvectors # from the transpose of eigvecs! We consider the # first eigenvector to be the normal to the plane # and (in the coordinate system set up at centroid), # it will be the z-axis. The other two eigenvectors # will be passed back to give us the unit vectors # defining the x-axis and y-axis. # They are kept in self.localAxes_L (just in case # they are needed for some other application). for i in range(3): self.localAxes_L.append(eigvecs.transpose()[ind[i]]) self.normalToPlane = self.localAxes _ L[0] Planes. __init__(self, self.centroid, self.normalToPlane) # -------------------------------------------------------------------- # Function to compute the centroid of the atoms in the list. d e f c e n t r o i d( s e l f ): sum = zeros(3, float) for a in self.atoms _ L: sum += a.coord() return sum/float(len(self.atoms _ L))Reviewing the code for the initialization function, we see that the list of atom objects is established in self.atoms _ L and the centroid is computed. When the eigenvalue problem is solved, we will get a new frame of reference with origin established at the centroid. e axes for the frame of reference will be kept in self.localAxes _ L. For ease of reference we will put the rst axis (index 0) into the variable named self. normalToPlane. We consider this normal to the plane to be the z axis and so the plane itself will have a coordinate system dened by the x and y axes stored in self.localAxes _ L[1] and self.localAxes _ L[2]. ese are kept as class attributes because they may be needed by some other applications that require an orthonormal basis set with origin at the centroid.


===== [44/99] chapter-44.html =====

Algorithms Dealing with Angles ◾ 165 e temporary variable coords _ L stores a list of atomic coordi-nates each one being the PDB coordinates shied so that the origin of their new frame of reference is at the centroid. ese coordinates are assembled into an array referenced as matrixA. is gives us the matrix A needed in Equation 4.32. e script then forms the product AAT and solves the eigenvalue problem. We extract eigenvectors from the trans-pose of eigvecs and store them in self.localAxes _ L as promised earlier.e methods projectionOnPlane, distanceToPlane, and angle-ToPlane follow the implementation details described earlier. Note that, for the sake of convenience, these methods will take arguments that are either simple arrays or Chimera atom objects. e function getCoords checks the Python type of these objects and returns the PDB coordinates for either case. Note that an object instantiated from this class will not produce any visual representation in the Chimera window, but the object can be used in conjunction with additional code to draw planar objects such as disks.4.6 EXERCISESe following exercises will deal with angle calculations and will include problems that incorporate the various classes covered in this chapter. 1. Computing CYS–Fe–CYS angles in 1BRFA frequent task in structural biology is the measurements of bond angles determined by two atoms bonded to a third atom. is involves nding the atoms, getting their coordinates, and then applying Equation 4.2 to compute the bond angle. is “warm-up” exercise involves writing the function that can do this computa-tion. To test the function, your script should fetch the PDB le 1BRF (rubredoxin from Pyrococcus furiosus) and then compute the following bond angles:(CYS 5.A SG) – (FE 54.A FE) – (CYS 8.A SG)(CYS 5.A SG) – (FE 54.A FE) – (CYS38.A SG)(CYS 5.A SG) – (FE 54.A FE) – (CYS41.A SG)(CYS 8.A SG) – (FE 54.A FE) – (CYS38.A SG)(CYS 8.A SG) – (FE 54.A FE) – (CYS41.A SG)(CYS38.A SG) – (FE 54.A FE) – (CYS41.A SG)
166 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsEntries within a set of parentheses identify an atom. e rst entry is the residue type. e second entry is the residue position and residue chain identier separated with a period. e third entry is the atom name. In your script, it will be sucient to use the sec-ond and third entries to uniquely identify an atom. To get the atoms, recall the script used in Exercise 2 of Chapter 2.e relationship between the iron atom and its neighboring CYS residues will be very similar to that shown in Figure 3.1. Compare your results with those published in [BR98] (page 490). 2. Consistency of bond angles in the protein backboneCollecting statistics related to proteins gives us data that are useful for various applications. An example would be checking the results of structure predictions from nuclear magnetic resonance experiments to see if there are any anomalies in bond angles. In particular, it has been observed that repeated bond angle measurements taken from a protein backbone tend to have a small standard deviation. In this exercise, we gather evidence to test this assertion. Using the Chimera menu invocation Tools… Structure Analysis… Angles/Torsions, we can determine the following bond angles (seeFigure 4.21):SER 6 Cα – SER 6 C – LEU 7 N 116.086SER 6 C – LEU 7 N – LEU 7 Cα 121.881Are these observations typical for Cα–C–N and C–N–Cα bond angles? Write a script that gets several hundred observations of each type of bond angle and use this data to calculate both the mean and the standard deviation of the bond angles in the protein backbone. You should also report the minimum and maximum lengths for each type of angle. Note any signicant dierences in these observations if you restrict the amino acids to be within a helix, strand, or loop.SERCaSERCLEUNLEUCaFIGURE 4.21 Angles in the peptide backbone.
Algorithms Dealing with Angles ◾ 167 Here is the output that would be expected when the script pro-cesses the protein 1A4Y:N-CA-C angles:Secondary Mean Standard Max Min SampleStructure: Deviation SizeHelix: 111.51 2.72 120.35 103.97 448Strand: 109.79 2.97 115.39 100.08 176Loop: 111.59 3.62 121.32 98.81 541CA-C-N angles:Secondary Mean Standard Max Min SampleStructure: Deviation SizeHelix: 116.38 0.83 119.85 113.81 448Strand: 116.12 0.83 118.53 112.44 176Loop: 116.16 5.03 123.42 15.93 541C-N-CA angles:Secondary Mean Standard Max Min SampleStructure: Deviation SizeHelix: 121.44 1.07 124.43 118.43 448Strand: 121.45 1.06 124.70 118.19 176Loop: 121.36 4.47 127.62 54.22 541 3. Computing the dihedral angle in a disulde bridgeModify the script for Exercise 3 in Chapter 3 so that it will also com-pute the dihedral angle formed by the four atoms (CB–SG–SG–CB) in a disulde bridge (see the example in Figure 3.10). Computation of a dihe-dral angle should be done using a function called dihedralAngle that accepts four atom objects representing the four consecutive atoms that form the dihedral angle and returns the dihedral angle measured in degrees. In a separate program you can compare your results with those that can be obtained by using the chimera.dihedral() function. 4. Consistency of the phi, psi dihedral angles a. Use the dihedralAngle function from the previous exercise to compute the phi, psi dihedral angles for alpha carbon Cα[i] when given the coordinates of C[i − 1], N[i], Cα [i], C[i], and N[i + 1].As done in the previous exercises, get 1000 observations of each type of dihedral angle and use this data to calculate both the average and the standard deviation. You should also report the minimum and maximum lengths for each type of angle. e observed data spread should be much wider than that computed 
168 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsfor bond angles. What are the signicant dierences in these observations if you restrict the amino acids to be within a helix? Repeat these calculations for beta sheets and loops. b. Repeat the previous question using the phi, psi attributes of a residue object to get dihedral angle values. Note that some residues will not have phi and psi attributes, so your code will have to take this into account when doing further computations involving phi and psi. 5. Ramachandran plots for a specic residueWrite a script that reads a text le with the following format:First line is informative text for the user and is ignored by the script.Second line identies a residue type in the rst three columns.ird and succeeding lines contain PDB IDs in the rst four columns.Sample text le:Proteins used for generating a Ramachandran plot:GLY1CRN1TIM1AONe script should read all the PDB les in the list, and for each pro-tein it should get the phi and psi dihedral angles for all residues that have the type specied by the second line. It should then generate a Ramachandran plot for these residues. e script should provide information about the number of residues encountered. For example:Number of GLY residues found: 828Number of residues within helices: 215Number of residues within strands: 58Number of residues within coils: 555Note that the plot should show a distribution that is very simi-lar to that seen in Figure 4.9. Implementation suggestions: Modify Script 4.03 so that it accepts phi _ L and psi _ L lists as function arguments instead of computing them from a list of residues. Use a modication of Script 2.03 to fetch the PDB les (note the use of chimera.openModels.close() to eliminate protein models aer they have been processed).
Algorithms Dealing with Angles ◾ 169 6. Checking chirality at the alpha carbonAs described in Chapter 1, the CA atom and its four neighbors form a chiral center for all residues except glycine. In most biological systems, this chirality is described as being in the -conguration (see Figure 1.7), but it is possible to nd proteins that have residues with a -conguration. Write a function called chirality Examiner that checks the chirality of a chiral center within a residue. e input for the function will be the CA atom object of a residue and the output will be a single letter code: “L” for -conguration, “D” for -cong-uration, and “N” for not applicable (returned when a chiral center is not present). Test the function on a mainline program that reads a specied PDB le and then prints a list of all residues (identied by type, position, and chain ID) that produce a chiralExaminer result that is either “D” or “N.” Test your program using a mainline that fetches a protein le (PDB ID provided by user input) and then prints a list with entries: residue position, residue type, and chiral code. Test the program using PDB ID “1AN1,” a tryptase inhibitor from leech [DP97]. e chapter discusses the residue at position 115 in chain E. 7. Introducing the Solids class to display a diskis exercise will get you acquainted with the addDisk function of the Solids class. is will be used in Exercise 8. e addDisk function can be used to display a set of disks that can act as visual stand-in for various biological structures (e.g., membrane layers). e function is in the le named solids.py. Use the following import:from StructBio.Scenographics.solids import Solidse class can be instantiated with an empty argument list, for example:diskScene = Solids()If you so desire, a character string acting as a model name can be passed as an instantiation parameter. Aer this, we can bring disks into the scene by adding them to the instance, for example:diskScene.addDisk(center, normal, thickness, radius, rgb)


===== [45/99] chapter-45.html =====

170 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticse signicance of the parameters should be fairly clear. e posi-tion of the disk is specied by an array that denes a 3D point called the center. e orientation of the disk is specied by a three-com-ponent array that denes a vector acting as a normal for the plane of the disk. e argument rgb is a three-component color vector. Finally, a statement such asdiskScene.display()will cause the disks to be shown on the screen. To test the class you should generate a few lines of code that will display 12 disks arranged in a dodecahedral conguration. Your displayed scene should look something like Figure 4.22. Many viruses have an icosahedral coat, but its dual structure, a dodecahedron, has come up in various research works dealing with viruses (see [FS03] and [TJ03]).To write the script, read the Wikipedia article at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Icosahedron. You will see that the 12vertices of an icosahedron are really simple to calculate if you consider them to be the vertices of three rectangular Borromean rings. ese rings have their own interesting mathematical and cultural signicance (see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Borromean_rings).e 12 vertices can be written as three sets of four vertices specied by ()()()±±ϕ±±ϕ ±ϕ ±0, 1, ,1,,0, ,0,1FIGURE 4.22 (See color insert.) Dodecahedral disks (testing the addDisk function in the Solids class).
Algorithms Dealing with Angles ◾ 171 where ()ϕ=+152 is the golden ratio (more cultural and math-ematical excursions can be discovered at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Golden_ratio). e four vertices specied within a set of parentheses are derived by taking all four possible combinations of the plus and minus signs. When working with the addDisk method, each of the 12 triplets can be used to dene both the disk center and the normal to the disk. e line going from the origin to the disk cen-ter will be normal to that disk. You should experiment with a radius value that will get a reasonable set of disks. Colors can be obtained from the Chimera Web site: http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/docs/UsersGuide/colortables.html.You can convert a hexadecimal TK color code, stored in a charac-ter string, to the three component tuple needed by the disk code by importing struct and then usingtuple(array(struct.unpack('BBB', cStr.decode('hex')))/255.0) 8. Movement of helices in mechanosensitive channelsBacterial mechanosensitive channels open in response to mem-brane tension so that small ions and molecules can leave the cell. An elementary description of this functionality can be found in [M92]. Researchers have managed to do x-ray analysis of a mecha-nosensitive channel from Escherichia coli (see references [SB07] and [WB08]).You can get PDB les for this channel in its open conformation (PDB ID = 2VV5) and in its closed conformation (PDB ID = 2OAU). e protein has seven chains each with six helices. Researchers have determined that of these 42 helices, 21 are within the membrane of E. coli. When the channel changes its state from closed to open, these helices move in a manner that is reminiscent of the mechanical movement of a camera iris.e script for this exercise has two objectives: a. Fetch the protein le (done for both 2VV5 and 2OAU) and add various visual components to the display: A disk repre-sents the cytoplasmic side of the cell membrane and a tube, perpendicular to the disk, represents the primary axis of the channel. e disk should be positioned so that the heli-ces within the membrane are situated above the disk as in 
172 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsFigure 4.23. Finally, we want each helix in chain C to have a tubethat denes the position and orientation of its inertial axis. We only need this to be done for the rst three heli-cesbut it is easier to display all of them. Unlike chain A, chain C starts with three distinct helices that will suit our purpose. b. Generate an object instantiated from the Plane class that rep-resents a plane parallel to the disk. Working with the inertial axis of each of the three helices at the beginning of chain C, calculate the angle that the inertial axis makes with the plane. e script should calculate these three angles for both pro-teins and then print out all six angles followed by a list of the FIGURE 4.23 MscS in open conformation (PDB ID 2VV5).
Algorithms Dealing with Angles ◾ 173 dierences in the angles when the protein goes from the closed conformation to the open conformation.Hints and suggestions:• Use the TubesForSSEs class to generate the helix tubes.• Use the InertialAxis class to generate the primary axis of symmetry that goes down the center of the channel.• With the primary axis in place, you can use projections onto the axis to get the top and bottom points for a tube that will be posi-tioned along the primary axis. Another projection (use a residue atom that would be close to the bottom of the membrane) will get a position for the center of the disk.• Use the Solids class to generate a disk perpendicular to the pri-mary axis.• Use the Planes class to get an implicitly dened plane that is parallel to the disk.• Note that an instance of the TubesForSSEs class has the attribute axes and this has the attribute inertialAxes _ L. By using indices 0, 1, and 2, we can get the first three iner-tial axes objects and their attributes: startPoint and end-Point that can define two points to define the position of a helix axis. These points can be used as arguments for the angleToPlane method that is provided within your Planes class object. 9. Least squares plane for a heme ring Part (a):If you use Chimera to view the heme ring of the myoglobin protein 1MBO “on edge,” you will see that most of the atoms are coplanar except for nitrogen “NA,” which seems to be pulled out of the plane, probably due to forces exerted by the chain ending in “O1A” and “O2A.” So, to dene the position and orientation of a plane that is closest to the atoms of the porphyrin ring, we will make the some-what arbitrary decision to go with 12 carbon atoms in the ring, as specied in the following Python “hit list”:hitList = ["CHA","C1A","C4A","CHB","C1B","C4B","CHC","C1C","C4C","CHD","C1D","C4D"]
174 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsIn this exercise, you should use the LeastSquaresPlane class (in the planes.py module) and Surfaces classes to put a 12-sided polygon into the ring. Figure 4.24 shows the intended result. Part (b):Researchers have determined that the bond within the oxygen mol-ecule is tilted so that the two oxygen atoms and the iron atom are not collinear. is deviation from collinearity is essential for the even-tual removal of oxygen from the hemoglobin or myoglobin protein. Let us suppose that we want to measure the angle made by the bond in the O2 molecule with the plane of the heme ring as illustrated by Figure 4.25.e angle α may be determined using the equation ()α= −sin/ghbwhere b is the bond length, h is the distance of O1 to the plane, and g is the distance of O2 to the plane. O1 and O2 are the names of FIGURE 4.24 Polygonal plane within a hemoglobin ring.bghαFIGURE 4.25 Measurements needed to calculate the angle.


===== [46/99] chapter-46.html =====

Algorithms Dealing with Angles ◾ 175 the oxygen atoms in the oxygen ligand molecule. You can also use a cosine formula if you rst compute the distance between the points representing the intersections of these perpendiculars with the plane. In your script you could use the angleToPlane method aer generating the least squares plane object.is part of the exercise involves the following steps:• Modify Part (a) so that the script will calculate the angle between the least squares plane and the O2 molecule (measured in degrees).• Heme rings are found in both hemoglobin and myoglobin. e iron in the heme ring can also interact with carbon mon-oxide and cyanide. In each of the latter two cases, the bond in the molecule also makes an angle with the heme plane, but it tends to be closer to 90°. Use the angleToPlane()method of the LeastSquaresPlane class to ll in the table that follows:e protein 1V8X has a functionality that is dierent from the other proteins in the table. Do some searching on the Internet to nd out what that dierence is. 10. CO orientation above the heme planeRead the work done by Kachalova, Popov, and Bartunik [KP99]. In Figure 1 of their work, they discuss the orientation of the car-bon monoxide ligand relative to a plane that passes through the four nitrogen atoms in the heme ring. Carefully read the work to get the denitions of four angles: ατφφ,, ,andFeCCO that dene the orientation of the CO ligand above the heme plane. Use the angle-ToPlane() method of the LeastSquaresPlane class to evaluate ατand. Generate code to evaluate φφandFeCCO. Compare your results with that of [KP99].Source Molecule PDB ID ligand name AngleCorynebacterium diphtheriaHeme oxygenase 1V8X OXYHuman Oxyhemoglobin 1HHO OXYSperm Whale Oxymyoglobin 1MBO OXYHuman Carbonmonoxyhemoglobin 1BBB CMOMycobacterium tuberculosisHemoglobin with cyanide 1RTE CYN
176 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics 11. Helix movement relative to the heme planeRead the work done by Kachalova, Popov, and Bartunik [KP99]. In Figure 2 of their work, they illustrate the change in heme geometries that are seen in myoglobin bound with and without carbon mon-oxide. is amounts to a change in the position of two helices with respect to the heme plane. Write a script to do computations that evaluate the angle changes in these helices. You will need two PDB les for myoglobin (with and without CO, 1BZR and 1BZP, respec-tively). Compute the inertial axes of the helices that are involved. For each protein and for each of the helices (both E and F), compute the angle of the helix axis relative to the plane of the heme group. eplane should be determined by the four nitrogen atoms of the heme ring. Show how these helix angles change when myoglobin goes from deoxyMb to MbCO.You should note that the acceptance of the CO ligand causes the Fe atom to be driven down slightly below the heme plane. e script should also calculate the amount of the shi in the position of the Fe atom. 12. A modeless dialog to do Ramachandran plotse material in Appendix A covers the implementation of mode-less dialogs. Use the canvas widget as a container for the display of a Ramachandran plot. An Entry widget working with a Button wid-get should be used to fetch the protein le. e function invoked by the Save button should be used to store the plot as an image. Consider Figure 4.26 as a guide for the graphical user interface (GUI) design. 13. A modeless dialog to do Ramachandran plots for residuesUse the canvas widget as a container for the display of a Ramachandran plot for specied residues. A Button widget should be used to fetch a le containing a list of several proteins. e plot should be based on several protein les to get a good statistical cov-erage of the (phi, psi) angle pairs. To avoid overrepresentation of data coming from identical chains, the le should list PDB identiers and for each a letter should indicate the single chain that is to be used. Aer all the protein les have been read and the dihedral angle data extracted, the dialog should allow the user to specify the residue that is to be characterized by the plot. Recall from Figures 4.11 and 4.12 that the residue prior to a proline residue will typically have its dihe-dral angles restricted by the proline side chain. e dialog deals with all 20 residues and such a pre-proline residue.
Algorithms Dealing with Angles ◾ 177 e function invoked by the Save button should be used to store the plot as an image. Consider Figure 4.27 as a guide for the GUI design. 14. A modeless dialog to change torsion angles of side chainsAs described in Section 2.7.5 of Chapter 2, it is possible to get the dihedral (or torsion) angles of a residue by accessing the attri-butes chi1, chi2, and so on. It is also possible to assign values to these attributes and the conformation of the side chain will change accordingly. e objective of this exercise is to implement a GUI that will allow a user to change the torsional angles for a selected residue. Selection of a residue can be done through a Select menu invocation or by using a sequence dialog. It is also convenient to simply select an atom in the display and then use the statementsfrom chimera import selectionatm_L = selection.currentAtoms()res = atm_L[0].residueFIGURE 4.26 A GUI for Ramachandran plots applied to proteins.
178 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticse selection.currentAtoms() function will return a list of selected atoms. Ideally, the list contains only one atom but if the list contains more than one, we can simply work with the rst atom and get the residue containing that atom. e selection of the residue should be done in response to a click of an Accept button, and a Label box can be used to identify the residue as shown in Figure4.28.Once the residue is selected, the script should set the positions of slider widgets in the dialog to indicate the values of the torsion angles. Sliders should be disabled if they correspond to torsion angles that are not present in the residue. A Label widget can be used to indicate the values of the torsion angles. Moving the slider controls should produce conformational changes of the selected FIGURE 4.27 (See color insert.) A GUI for Ramachandran plots applied to residues.
Algorithms Dealing with Angles ◾ 179 residue. Finally, a Reset button should allow the user to recover the torsional angles that were present in the residue when the Accept button was clicked.Note that Chimera already has a dialog to modify torsional angles (Tools… Structure Editing… Adjust Torsions). Nonetheless, doing this exercise is a worthwhile experience for dialog implementa-tion. In particular, the components of the GUI must work together to manage the state settings of the various widgets during the user interactions. Consequently, the complexity of the logic is more signicant than that seen in Exercise 13 (for example, widgets are enabled and disabled depending on activities related to the Accept button). Furthermore, we will be using this dialog as a starting point for a more capable dialog dealing with rotamers (see Chapter 7).REFERENCES[BR98] R. Bau, D. C. Rees, D. M. Kurtz, R. A. Scott, H. Huang, M. W. W. Adams, and M. K. Eidsness. Crystal structure of rubredoxin from Pyrococcus furio-sus at 0.95 Å resolution, and the structures of N-terminal methionine and formylmethionine variants of Pf Rd. Contributions of N-terminal interac-tions to thermostability. Journal of Biological Inorganic Chemistry, 3 (1998), 484–493.[DP97] S. Di Marco and J. P. Priestle. Structure of the complex of leech-derived tryptase inhibitor (LDTI) with trypsin and modeling of the LDTI-tryptase system. Structure, 5 (1997), 1465–1474.[FS03] P. Fender, G. Schoehn, J. Foucaud-Gamen, E. Gout, A. Garcel, E. Drouet, and J. Chroboczek. Adenovirus dodecahedron allows large multimeric protein transduction in human cells. Journal of Virology, 77 (2003), 4960–4964.[HB05] B. K. Ho and R. Brasseur. e Ramachandran plots of glycine and pre-proline. BMC Structural Biology, 5 (2005), http://www.biomedcentral .com/1472-6807/5/14.FIGURE 4.28 A GUI for the side chain control panel.


===== [47/99] chapter-47.html =====

180 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics[KP99] G. S. Kachalova, A. N. Popov, and H. D. Bartunik. A steric mechanism for inhibition of CO binding to heme proteins. Science, 284 (1999), 473–476.[LM93] R. A. Laskowski, M. W. MacArthur, D. S. Moss, and J. M. ornton. PROCHECK: a program to check the stereochemical quality of protein structures. Journal of Applied Crystallography, 26 (1993), 283–291.[M92] B. Martinac. Structural plasticity in MS channels. Nature Structural & Molecular Biology, 12 (2005), 104–105.[MM92] A. L. Morris, M. W. MacArthur, E. G. Hutchinson, and J. M. ornton. Stereochemical quality of protein structure coordinates. Proteins, 12 (1992), 345–364.[MP94] C. Matos, G. A. Petsko, and M. Karplus. Analysis of two-residue turns in proteins. Journal of Molecular Biology, 238 (1994), 733–747.[NK05] M. Novotny and G. J. Kleywegt. A survey of le-handed helices in protein structures. Journal of Molecular Biology, 347 (2005), 231–241.[RR63] G. N. Ramachandran, C. Ramakrishnan, and V. Sasisekharan. Stereochemistry of polypeptide chain congurations. Journal of Molecular Biology, 7 (1963), 95–99.[SB07] S. Steinbacher, R. B. Bass, P. Strop, and D. C. Rees. Structures of the pro-karyotic mechanosensitive channels MscL and MscS. Current Topics in Membranes in Mechanosensitive Ion Channels, Part A (O. P. Hamill, ed), 58 (2007), 1–24.[TJ03] L. Tang, K. N. Johnson, L. A. Ball, T. Lin, M. Yeager, and J. E. Johnson. e structure of Pariacoto virus reveals a dodecahedral cage of duplex RNA. Natural Structural Biology, 8 (2003), 77–83.[WB08] W. Wang, S. S. Black, M. D. Edwards, S. Miller, E. L. Morrison, W. Bartlett, C. Dong, J. H. Naismith, and I. R. Booth. e structure of an open form of an E. coli mechanosensitive channel at 3.45 A resolution. Science, 321 (2008), 1179–1183.


===== [48/99] chapter-48.html =====

181Chapter 5Structure Overlap and Alignment5.1 MOTIVATIONStructure comparison deals with various algorithms that analyze two or more proteins in an eort to describe structural similarities. Why should we want to do this? e primary goal is to understand functionality, but this is a very complicated endeavor. In Chapter 1, we presented various behavioral aspects related to a protein’s structure. On reviewing these points, we see that protein structure must provide for the following “life cycle functionalities”:• Uniqueness: e peptide chains must fold into a particular low-energy conformation that has the desired biological utility. e protein should not have other competitive low-energy conformations that are characterized by biological dysfunction.• Stability: Once the protein is in its folded state, it must retain that folded state even though some changes in conformation may occur due to exibility requirements.• Interaction: e nal conformation must have an interaction capa-bility, for example, a ligand binding site or a surface for protein–protein interactions. is capability may also include the exibility noted in the previous list item.
182 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques • Degradation: In many cases, the structure should be degradable so that the protein is conveniently disassembled, its constituent amino acids used in the construction of other proteins.Unfortunately, each of these functional behaviors is generally dicult to relate to structure. In some cases, the mechanism of a binding site may be thoroughly studied in a drug design project and the interactions of the drug with the binding site are known with high precision. e conforma-tional changes of a protein when it interacts with a ligand are one of the motivations for structural comparisons.However, in most situations the connection between function and structure is much more dicult to assess and we must rely on observation in lieu of theory. In other words, when a new protein is being studied we typically compare its structure with that of similar proteins in an attempt to draw inferences about its behavior based on the known behavior of the other proteins in the same category.But how do we organize this categorization? Since the final struc-ture must satisfy all of the aforementioned requirements, evolution-ary processes will have produced structures that attempt to optimize fitness criteria with multiple objectives. Since a particular protein strives to satisfy multiple objectives, it is very difficult to determine the structural properties that are most important to its functionality. For example, do we focus on the configuration of atom types in a binding site or do we stress the organization of secondary structural elements that lead to the stability of a hydrophobic core? The question has no definitive answer.As an example, consider the overlap of 1MBN and 1JEB, both illustrated in Chapter 1, Figure 1.26. If we focus on this pair of proteins, it seems that the region of highest sequence conservation corresponds to the 16 residues at the very beginning of the protein. is is a helix that does not seem to be directly related to the heme binding site. e region does contain the sixth amino acid that leads to sickle-cell anemia if it mutates to valine in hemoglobin, but this is only a single residue. One may speculate that there seems to be some additional critical functionality that is being preserved by this helix. To investigate this issue more completely, it would be neces-sary to consider other proteins in the globin family.In summary, we do structural comparisons for various reasons: we may wish to study the conformational change that is seen in an interaction 
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 183 between a protein and another molecule. We may also study the geometry of binding sites and seek to understand the chemical mechanism of that interaction. e other issues (uniqueness, stability, and degradation) are somewhat more dicult to assess. We understand that a hydrophobic core is necessary for stability, but understanding the attainment of all three objectives and its relation to the consecutive arrangement of amino acids in a peptide chain is a major challenge. In other words, we do not have algorithms that can examine a primary sequence and then accurately pre-dict whether the peptide would fold to a unique and stable conformation that could be enzymatically degraded at a later time. To understand or predict a protein’s behavior, we must consider its membership in a fam-ily of proteins with similar structure. erefore, we are concerned with the structural dierences between a given protein and other proteins that have an evolutionary relationship with it. In particular, what has been structurally conserved?We may also study the structural plasticity of a family. is topic deals with the degree of structural variability seen in a family. It seems that some families show more acceptance of such diversity than do others. Algorithms that deal with multiple structure alignments are important for these investigations. Experiments such as those reported in [VB96] and [SB06] have demonstrated the eect that amino acid insertions have had on stability and the tendency to maintain local helix formation by propagating the eects of the insertion into a bend or loop. Another inter-esting discussion about structural plasticity and its relation to evolution may be found in [MO78].Finally, it should be mentioned that proteins can assume similar folds even though there is no obvious evolutionary relationship among them. ese analogs may be the result of a limited number of congurations available when packing helices and sheets to form a hydrophobic core (see [OJ03]).Research in structural comparison seems to reect the wide variety of concerns and viewpoints on the topic. To get some perspectives on this, the reader may consult [BO96] written by Brown, Orengo, and Taylor. is paper suggests a systematic nomenclature that helps to organize the diverse topics contained in approximately 50 or so research papers writ-ten on protein structure comparison methodologies prior to 1996. Since then, considerably more papers have been written with a corresponding increase in the range of comparison methods.
184 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques 5.2 INTRODUCTION5.2.1 Specifying the ProblemTo understand the wide range of topics related to structural comparison, we list some of the attributes that characterize a study of the problem:• Level of detail: A comparison study is done at a particular resolution or level of structural detail. Comparison algorithms may deal with the positions of various types of structure:• Individual atoms• e locations of residues (specied by coordinates of the alpha carbon atoms or beta carbon atoms or the center of mass of the side chains)• e position and orientation of secondary structural elements (e.g., treating helices as cylinders)• e similarity of folds at the tertiary structure level• Physicochemical properties: e quantication of similarity may only involve the relative positions of structural entities in three-dimensional (3D) space, or it may also include additional descriptive attributes that are important for some application. For example, an atom may be categorized with a physicochemical label that describes it as being a hydrogen bond donor, being a hydrogen bond acceptor, having a posi-tive charge or a negative charge, or being hydrophobic. Hydrophobicity or hydrophilicity may also be assigned to entire residues. Depending on the objectives of the comparison, a property may be associated with a point in space or it may be spread out over some portion of a surface constructed around the underlying atoms.• Extent of comparison: e comparison may be global, dealing with the entire protein, or more local, being restricted in some fashion. Various types of restriction may be applied to limit the comparison to a protein domain, a contiguous subsequence of amino acids, or the subset of atoms in a binding pocket.• Number of proteins: A comparison study may involve one, two, or several proteins. In the case of a single protein, the study typi-cally compares the change in atom positions when the protein changes its conformation. Good examples of this would be the 
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 185 conformational change associated with an allosteric movement or the shi of side chains in a binding pocket during ligand docking. When two proteins are involved, the objectives of the study usually depend on how dierent the proteins are in sequence composition. A simple case would be the study of conformational change due to the substitution of one or two residues. A more complicated com-parison would deal with two proteins that have dierent lengths and perhaps very little sequence identity when a sequence align-ment is performed. In the latter case, it is typical that the proteins have a homologous relationship and the study is designed to assess the extent of structural similarity that has been conserved in an evolutionary descent. Studies involving many proteins are oen designed to evaluate similarities in proteins that are closely related as established by sequence alignment. Possible objectives include an analysis of all proteins in the group with the intention of char-acterizing atom types in a binding site (looking for similarities) or an analysis of evolutionary divergence (this time looking for dif-ferences). Conversely, studies may establish similarities in proteins due to structural conformations only independent of sequence similarity. If the sequence similarity is then found to be very low, it is reasonable evidence that structural similarity is due to evolu-tionary convergence.ese points should convince the reader that there are many approaches to structural comparison. In fact, an extended treatment of the various methodologies that are used could form the subject matter of an entire book. To set a limit on this extensive material, we continue with the dis-cussion of only a few comparison algorithms.5.3 TECHNIQUES FOR STRUCTURAL COMPARISONSuppose we are given two proteins that we will designate as P and Q. Algorithms for structural comparison of P and Q generally fall into two broad categories: 1. Superposition algorithms: ese algorithms try to maximize some type of overlap of two proteins in 3D space. e overlap may deal with all the residues of the protein or some subset of the residues. If subsets of residues are being considered, then there must be some specication of atom pairs that will participate in the overlap.


===== [49/99] chapter-49.html =====

186 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques 2. Algorithms that compare geometric relationships within a protein: We start by dening a set of relationships between elements in the protein P. For example, we might calculate for each alpha carbon in P a set of distances to all the other alpha carbons in P. Each dis-tance is seen as a relationship between the two atoms. en, we do the same calculations for Q. e comparison algorithm then com-pares the relationships within P with those within Q. ere are many variations on this theme: instead of atoms, we can use fragments or secondary structure components such as helices or strands. Instead of all such elements, concentrate on only those that are nearby or within the same domain. e strategies for comparing the relation-ships can also vary from one algorithm to the next.5.4 SCORING SIMILARITIES AND OPTIMIZING SCORESIn all comparison algorithms, we try to evaluate some successful demon-stration of similarity. All comparison algorithms must clearly specify the following: 1. Score evaluation: Given two proteins P and Q, a comparison algo-rithm may reveal several dierent possibilities, each demonstrating the similarity between P and Q. For example, there may be several ways to overlap two proteins in 3D space. Consequently, it is neces-sary to have some measure of similarity. is evaluation of similarity is usually called a score. 2. Score optimization: Typically, there will be a strategy to optimize this score. For example, the algorithm will derive a best structural overlap, or compute some type of correspondence for the atoms of P and Q, so that the score will be optimized.When we discuss the various comparison algorithms, both of these points are covered.5.5 SUPERPOSITION ALGORITHMS5.5.1 OverviewA frequent concern is whether two proteins have the same or a very simi-lar structure. An assessment of this can be done by attempting to super-impose the two proteins in 3D space. e proteins may have the same residues, or they may be fairly similar (e.g., homologs).
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 187 ere are various situations when such a comparison would be calculated:• e proteins may have the same sequence but dier in conformation. e dierence might be due to a backbone exing of the protein or may be due to a change in conformation when a ligand is present in a binding site.• e proteins may have almost the same sequence. For example, a mutation has caused an amino acid to change. What is the eect on conformation?• e proteins may have more extensive dierences in their sequences, but it is possible that they nonetheless show a lot of similarity in conformation. e question is as follows: How similar are these conformations?• e proteins may have considerable dierences in their sequences, but it is possible that they share similar structure in various regions. We would want to compare these similar regions. Recall that struc-ture is more conserved than sequence.In some situations, a transformation of coordinates is necessary to compare dierent conformations of the same protein because the coordi-nates are derived from protein data bank (PDB) les that assume dierent orientations of the protein. For example, 1IZI, 1MSN, and 1EBW all deal with the same protein, that is, HIV protease. A casual comparison of the coordinates of the rst two atoms in each le gives the following:1IZI:ATOM 1 N PRO A 1 -12.600 38.218 3.719ATOM 2 CA PRO A 1 -12.444 38.367 2.2441MSN:ATOM 1 N PRO A 1 0.421 40.709 18.682ATOM 2 CA PRO A 1 -0.422 39.511 18.9051EBW:ATOM 1 N PRO A 1 29.101 40.309 5.484ATOM 2 CA PRO A 1 30.105 39.343 4.986So, it is clear that the PDB does not put proteins in any standard orientation. is was also obvious if you viewed both conformations of the MscS pro-tein (2OAU and 2VV5) in Exercise 8 of Chapter 4.
188 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques 5.5.2 Characterizing the Superposition AlgorithmIn this algorithm, we consider the structural comparison of two pro-teins that we designate as P and Q. We will not consider any physico-chemical properties, just atomic coordinates. So, at this level of detail it is expected that the input to the algorithm will be 3D coordinates of the atoms involved in the comparison. The algorithm will require us to specify a set called an equivalence. This is a set of matching atom pairs that are to be brought into 3D superposition. Each pair will designate an atom in P and its corresponding atom in Q. The algorithm will then find the translation and rotation operations that minimize the sum of squares of the distances between the atoms in the pairs.In the description of the algorithm, we assume that this equivalence is generated using some technique that is appropriate to the applica-tion that uses the structure overlap algorithm. Various approaches can be listed:• If the proteins have the same sequence, then the equivalence can be generated simply by matching up the corresponding atoms. en, we can extract a subset of these pairs that is appropriate to the needs of the study. For example, we might deal solely with the alpha carbons in the backbone or some part of it.• If the proteins have a dierent sequence, then a sequence alignment between P and Q can identify matching pairs of residues and then the corresponding alpha carbon atoms can be used to dene the equivalence.In some cases, the sequence similarity is so vague that it is quite dif-cult to generate the equivalence set by doing a sequence alignment. In these cases, a dierent algorithm is required, one that attempts to do a structural comparison using coordinate information with little or no help from a sequence alignment.Before going any further, it is necessary to settle on some terminol-ogy. e terms overlap and superposition are used interchangeably and we assume that the computation that performs the superposition has access to a set of atom pairings that are used to guide an optimal overlap. For pro-tein structures (this will not apply to protein sequences), we use the term structural alignment when dealing with an algorithm that strives to nd 
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 189 common structure in two proteins with little or no reliance on the protein sequences involved.5.5.3 Formal Problem DescriptionAlthough dierent choices could be made for the atoms in an equiv-alence set, we assume that the superposition algorithm deals with alpha carbon atoms. We are given two sequences of alpha carbon 3D coordinates: 11PpQqiiPiiQ{} {}==() ()== (5.1)where |P| and |Q| are the number of residues in protein P and protein Q, respectively.We start with a formal description of the equivalence set followed by the notion of an alignment. Some denitions are as follows:Denition 5.1: An equivalence is a set of pairs ,,,,,,11 22(){}()()()() () () () ()αβ αβαβpq pq pqNN (5.2)indicating the correspondence between the amino acids in P and Q.Denition 5.2: An alignment M for P and Q is an equivalence such that 12αα<<αα<<<<ααNN and 12ββ<<ββ<<<<ββNN.We extract the alpha carbons from each list in the alignment as follows: ,,,,,,1212()()()()==() () ()() () ()αα αββ βMP pp pMQ qq qNN (5.3)e structural overlap of the two proteins P and Q will involve modifying the coordinates of atoms to do the following: 1. All the atoms of each protein are moved (translated) so that the cen-troids of M(P) and M(Q) coincide at the origin. 2. An optimal rotation of protein P is then done to get the maximal amount of overlap between M(P) and M(Q).
190 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques What do we mean by maximal overlap? Our measure of success is to minimize the sum of squares of norms that measure the distance between matching alpha carbons. is is minimizing in the least-squares sense: ∑()()=+−() ()αβ=(,)12transformed21EMPMQRpTqiNii (5.4)Our objective is to nd the rotation matrix R and the translation vector T that will minimize E. We consider E to be an evaluation of the similarity score and the purpose of the algorithm is to optimize this score by calcu-lating R and T so that E is minimized. Section 5.5.4 gives a full treatment of the mathematical analysis. If you simply want the nal algorithm, you can fast-forward to Section 5.5.5.5.5.4 Computations to Achieve Maximal OverlapWe start by dening the centroids of the alpha carbons used in the superimposition.Let ∑∑==()()() ()α=β=1111pNpqNqciNciNii (5.5)en let =−=−() ()() () () ()αβxp pyqqicicii (5.6)We now consider x(i) and y(i) i = 1, 2, … , N to be the coordinates of match-ing alpha carbons in proteins P and Q, respectively. For each case, we have essentially translated the entire protein so that its centroid is at the origin.*As seen earlier in Chapter 4, these new coordinates have a property that will be useful when we have to simplify expressions, namely: ∑=()=01xiiN ∑=()=01yiiN (5.7)* Be sure to remember that we should calculate the center of mass; if the atoms in this calculation do not have the same atomic weight.


===== [50/99] chapter-50.html =====

Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 191 So, working with our new coordinate system, we see that we want to nd R and T to minimize E: ∑=+−() ()=1221ERxTyiiiN (5.8)Expanding this, we get the following: ∑∑∑∑()()()()()()()()=+−+−=−+−+=−+− +−+=−+() () () ()() () () ()() () () () () ()() ()====12121212T1TT12TTT12T1ERxTyRxTyRx yTRx yTRx yRxyTT RxyTTRx yTTiiiiiNii iiiNii ii iiiNiiiN (5.9)Note that in the second-last line, the coecients of T sum to 0 because the centroid of each protein is centered at the origin. So, we end up with ∑=−+() ()=12221ERxy TiiiN (5.10)If we wish to get a minimum E, it is clear that we want T = 0 since thiswill zero out the 2T. Note that we could also get this result by computing ∂∂ET and setting this to 0 will also make T = 0. So, nally, we see that we want to nd the rotation matrix R that will minimize ∑=−() ()=1221ERxyiiiN (5.11)We want to nd the matrix R that will minimize E, but it must be subject to the rotation constraint RTR = I. Lagrange multipliers can take care of this. But before we derive a Lagrangian, there is still another simplication that can be made. Since RTR = I, we can write
192 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques ∑∑∑∑∑∑∑()()()()()()()=−=− −=−−=−−+=−−+=+−() () () () () ()() () () ()() () () () () () () ()() () () () () ()() () () ()=======12121212121221T1T1TTTTTT12TTT21221T1ERxy Rx yRxyxR yRxyxRRx xRyyRxyyxxRy yRxyxy yRxiiiNiiiiiNiTTiiiiNiiiiiiiiiNiiiiiiiNiiiNiiiN (5.12)Notice that the rst sum is independent of R. Consequently, we can mini-mize E by maximizing H where ∑=()()γγγ=T1HyRxN (5.13)R is the following 3 × 3 matrix: =111213212223313233Rrrrrrrrrr (5.14)subject to RTR = I, a constraint that we will rewrite as follows: ∑=δ =α≠βα=βγαγβγ=αβ0if1if13rr (5.15)Since α= 1, 2, and 3 and β= 1, 2, and 3, there are nine of these constraints.e Lagrangian will be G = H − F, where ∑=()()γγγ=T1HyRxN and ∑∑∑=λ−δβαγαγβγ=αββ=α=12131313Frr (5.16)When multiple constraints are set up in a Lagrangian, we use a linear combination of all the constraints. e λβα values represent the nine 
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 193 Lagrange multipliers. We have chosen to index them with α and β. is notation is a convenience that will be useful later when representing the equations in matrix form. Note that the constraint does not change when we interchange α and β. is symmetry implies that λ=λβααβ.How does H depend on the components of R? Noting that ()γRx is just a 3D vector, ∑∑∑=()() () ()γββγβ=ββγβ=ββγβ=113213313TRxrx rx rx (5.17)we can fully expand H to get the following equation: ∑∑∑=()()αγαββγβ=α=γ= 13131HyrxN (5.18)We need to take the partial derivatives of G with respect to all the nine components of the R matrix. First working with H, ∑∑∑∑∂∂=∂∂=γ=αγαββγβ=α=γγ=γ1() ()1313()1()HrryrxyxijijNiNj (5.19)e simplication to the nal sum follows from the fact that when taking derivatives only those terms with β = j and α = i will contribute.To simplify our equations, we set ∑∑=⇒=() ()() ()γγγ=γγγ=1T1yx cCyxijNijN (5.20)ere are nine of these cij values, all derived from the input data, and we are storing them in a 3 by 3 matrix called C.e partial derivatives of F are a bit more complicated since the R matrix entries appear in a quadratic fashion: γαγβrr. We have to apply the product rule when taking derivatives. ∑∑∑∑∑∑∂∂=λ∂∂−δ=λ+λ=λβαγαγβγ=αββ=α=βββ=ααα=βββ=121212131313131313Frrrrrrrijijjijiij (5.21)
194 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques In the last line, the rst sum comes from contributions made when α = j and γ= i. e second sum is from contributions made when β = j and γ =i. e nal simplication utilizes the symmetry λ=λββ.jjFinally, since the Lagrangian is G = H − F, ∑∑∂∂=⇒∂∂=∂∂⇒==λ∀() ()γγγ=βββ=0,113GrHrFryx crijijijijijNijij (5.22)We can consider these variables to be entries in arrays R, λ, and C dened as follows: =λ=λλλλλλλλλ=111213212223313233111213212223313233111213212223313233RrrrrrrrrrCccccccccc (5.23)By adopting this notation, we can rewrite this last equation in a very succinct fashion as follows: =λCR (5.24)We know C. How do we solve for λ and then R? We have used the equation RTR = I to do various simplications before we created the Lagrangian, but this constraint has not yet been used as a constraint for the Lagrangian analysis itself. So, note =λ λ=λ λTTTTCC RR (5.25)Since CTC is a square symmetric matrix, we can do an eigen decomposition: λλ==TT2TCC VS V (5.26)
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 195 If we can use this to nd an appropriate λ, then we set =λ−1RC and we are done. What is meant by an appropriate λ? Selection of λ must be made with due attention to two issues that have not yet been addressed: 1. e rotation matrix must not introduce a reection that changes chirality. a. Note that preservation of angles and lengths does not guarantee a nal conformation that has an L-conguration (as discussed in Section 1.4.1 of Chapter 1). 2. Although we wanted to minimize E, there is nothing in the Lagrange strategy that guarantees this. e procedure could also lead to an R that maximizes E. b. e Lagrange strategy only gets critical rotations that produce extreme values of E.To ensure a proper rotation, we insist that the determinant of the rota-tion matrix is +1, that is, det (R) = 1. To ensure that E is minimized by our choice of R, we must look more deeply into the quantity ∑=()()γγγ=T1HyRxN (5.27)to see how its value is determined by the choice of R. In particular, the construction of λ will involve the determination of signs of the square roots of the three entries on the diagonal matrix within VS2VT. A very elegant strategy for the computation of R starts with the singular value decomposition of C. e theory for a singular value decomposition (SVD) tells us that we can write as follows: =⇒=λ λ=TTT2TCUSV CC VS V (5.28)where ()=diag ,, .2122232S sss It is easy to show that λ= σσdiag(, ,11 22Vss σ )33TsV with σ=±=11,2,3ii. Since λ= ,RC we can write as follows: ()()=λ =σσσ=σσσ−−−−diag ,,diag ,,1T111221331T123TRC USVV sssVUV (5.29)


===== [51/99] chapter-51.html =====

196 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques So ()=⇒=σσσdiag ,,T123TCUSV RU V (5.30)Now we put this into our H quantity: ∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑()()()()()== σσσ=σ =σ••=σ••=σ=σ=σ() () () ()() () () ()() () () ()() ()() () () ()() () ()()() () () ()γγγ=γγγ=γγ=γ=γγ=γ=γγ=γ=γγ=γ=γγγ===diag ,,T1T123T1TT131131131TT131TT113T13HyRx yU Vxyuvx yuvxuyxv uyxvuyxv uCvNNkkkkNkkkkNkkkkNkkkkNkkNkkkkkk (5.31)e big dots in Equation 5.31 indicate dot product computations. Note that this derivation makes use of a useful formula: ∑()σσ σ=σ() ()=∈diag ,,,12TT1UVuvlkkkkl (5.32)e SVD of C tells us that =() ()Cv uskkk, and so we get a very concise value for H: ∑∑∑=σ =σ=σ() () () ()== =T13T1313HuCv uusskkkkkkkkkkkk (5.33)Recall that E was minimized when H was maximized, so the best E occurs when σ=+=11,2,3ii. is gives us ()=σσσ =diag ,,123TTRUVUV (5.34)Now that we have the nal elegantly simple result that =TRUV, are we nallydone? Not quite yet. Remember that we stated that we must have det(R) = 1. It is possible that the matrix C has a singular value decomposition that leads to det (UVT) = −1. is is called an improper rotation, and it intro-duces a reection. We can still get a proper rotation by dening R as follows: ()=−diag 1,1, 1TRU V (5.35)
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 197 Why does this work? e determinant of R has changed sign because the determinant of the diagonal matrix has the value −1. Now it is a proper rotation. However, the value of H is s1 + s2 − s3 and so it is not as large as s1+ s2 + s3. So, we have somewhat compromised E to get a proper rotation.Note: to get the maximum value of H and hence the minimum value ofE under these circumstances, we ensure thats3is the smallest of the three values. at is to say, we are assuming s1, s2, and s3 are sorted to be in the descending order.Figure 5.1 shows the results of a structural overlap of 1MBN and 1JEB. Both sets of coordinates were given to the Chimera molecular modeling system, which then displayed a visualization showing the overlap of sec-ondary structures in rounded ribbon form. Only one of the proteins pro-vided the heme structure.5.5.5 SummarySteps for the 3D overlap of proteins P and Q are as follows: 1. Determine the subsequences of alpha carbons to be used in the 3D overlap: ,,,,,,1212()()()()==() () ()() () ()αα αββ βMP pp pMQ qq qNN (5.36) 2. Calculate the centroids p(c) and q(c) using Equation 5.5.FIGURE 5.1 Structure overlap of 1MBN and 1JEB. (Courtesy of Shuo [Alex] Xiang, a former graduate student at the University of Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.)
198 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques 3. Shi the proteins so that the centroids are at the origin (using Equation 5.6). We are then working with x(i) and y(i) coordinate sets. 4. Calculate the C matrix as dened by Equation 5.20, and compute its SVD. is gives C = USVT. If necessary, reorder the singular values so that s1 > s2 > s3. 5. Compute the rotation matrix =TRUV (5.37) 6. Check to see if det (R) = 1. If this determinant is negative, then we must redene the rotation matrix to be ()=−diag 1,1, 1TRU V (5.38) 7. Apply the rotation matrix to the x(i) coordinates.5.5.6 Measuring Overlap5.5.6.1 Calculation of the Root Mean Square DeviationAer the rotation matrix is applied to the x(i) coordinates, we can com-pute the squared distance between each x(i) point and its corresponding y(i) point: =−() () ()22dRxyiii (5.39)Having done this, we can compute the root mean square deviation (RMSD) for that set of corresponding points: ∑()=()=RMSD ,21PQdNiiN (5.40)One should be careful about the interpretation of this calculation. When P and Q represent dierent conformations of the same protein and N is the number of atoms of this protein, RMSD represents the conventional measure of the similarity of P and Q as measured by the degree of overlap. If the RMSD is 0 (or very close to 0), we regard P and Q as being identical. If the RMSD is between 1 and 3 Å, then we consider P and Q to be very similar. If the RMSD is over 3 Å, then we typically consider P and Q to have similarity that is low or not present.
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 199 If P and Q have the same lengths but some dierences in primary sequence, then we cannot compute d(i)2 for atoms in corresponding but dierent residues. is is true because it is impossible to get a correspon-dence between the atoms in these residues. In this case, one may compute the RMSD with respect to the alpha carbons only. is is still reasonable in that we would have an evaluation of the similarity of the backbone con-formations of P and Q.If P and Q have dierent lengths, then the RMSD calculation can still be applied to the atoms in the equivalence set. In this case, one must bear in mind that it is not measuring overlap across the entire extents of P and Q.5.6 A SIMPLE SCRIPT TO DO STRUCTURAL SUPERIMPOSITIONStructural superimposition requires that we translate and rotate one struc-ture so as to get maximal overlap with another structure, the goal being to minimize the distances between particular atom pairs. is is the simple scenario in which we know which atom pairs to use and these pairings do not change as the algorithm progresses.Before discussing scripts that can do structural superimposition, it must be emphasized that Chimera has menu invocations that provide a sophisticated level of structural alignment capabilities. If you are working with only a few protein structures that require a conventional approach to structural alignment, then it is much easier to use a menu invocation and thus avoid the extra work of dealing with a script. So, why bother with a script? Here are some reasons:• e script may be needed within a larger program that needs a struc-tural superimposition capability.• Your application might need to carry out several, perhaps thousands of, structural superimpositions.• Your algorithm is using some alignment strategy that is dierent from that oered by Chimera.Our script to accomplish structural superimposition has been imple-mented as a class called Overlapper. Instantiation of the class creates an Overlapper object that has data structures tracking atomic coordi-nates, centroids, and the rotation matrix involved in the superimposition. 
200 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques When an Overlapper object is instantiated, it is given a Chimera molecule object designated as mol in the __init__ function (e.g., a protein molecule object):class Overlapper(object): def __init__(self, mol): self.molecule = mol self.atomCoords_D = {} # Overlap list for this molecule (molecule P to be moved): self.overlapCoordsP_L = [] # Overlap list for target molecule (P moved to target Q): self.overlapCoordsQ_L = [] self.newOverlapCoordsP_L = [] self.centroidP = zeros(3) # Centroid of overlapCoordsP_L self.centroidQ = zeros(3) # Centroid of overlapCoordsQ_L self.rotationMatrix = zeros((3,3)) for a in self.molecule.atoms: # Saving original coordinates: self.atomCoords_D[a] = a.coord()e moveToOverlap method within the Overlapper class can be used to translate and rotate the molecule so that it achieves optimal overlap with another molecule when moveToOverlap is given a list of atom pairings. e undoMove method allows us to move mol back to its original position in the 3D space. By using both moveToOverlap and undoMove methods, we can cause mol to overlap with any number of target molecules one aer another in a sequential fashion. e following is the code for the moveToOverlap and undoMove methods: def moveToOverlap(self, pairs_L): # Get lists of coordinates: # We assume the first entry of a pair refers to the self molecule and the second entry refers to the target protein. for pair in pairs_L: self.overlapCoordsP_L.append(getCoords(pair[0])) self.overlapCoordsQ_L.append(getCoords(pair[1])) self.centroidP = sum(self.overlapCoordsP_L)/len(pairs_L) self.centroidQ = sum(self.overlapCoordsQ_L)/len(pairs_L) # Compute shifted cverlap coords (centroids at origin): shiftedOverlapCoordsP_L = [] shiftedOverlapCoordsQ_L = []


===== [52/99] chapter-52.html =====

Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 201 for i in range(len(pairs_L)): shiftedOverlapCoordsP_L.append(self.overlapCoordsP_L[i] - self.centroidP) shiftedOverlapCoordsQ_L.append(self.overlapCoordsQ_L[i] - self.centroidQ) self.rotationMatrix = computeRotationMatrix \ (shiftedOverlapCoordsP_L, shiftedOverlapCoordsQ_L) # Apply the transformation to all atoms in the molecule: for a in self.molecule.atoms: newCoords = dot(self.rotationMatrix, array(a.coord())-self.centroidP)+self.centroidQ a.setCoord(Point(newCoords[0], newCoords[1], newCoords[2])) def undoMove(self): for a in self.molecule.atoms: a.setCoord(self.atomCoords_D[a])e operation of undoMove is quite straightforward, but move To Overlap requires some additional explanation. e function get Coords increases the usefulness of moveToOverlap by allowing the atom pairings to be expressed in any one of three dierent ways: an entry in a pair can be a Chimera atom object or its 3D coordinates expressed as a Point object or as a three-component array. Details of its implementation can be found in the Overlapper class (available from the book’s website) accessed viafrom StructBio. StructureOverlap.overlapper import OverlapperOnce all the atom pairings have been used to dene the two lists shiftedOverlapCoordsP _ L and shiftedOverlapCoordsQ _ L, generation of the rotation matrix is accomplished by invoking the func-tion computeRotationMatrix. Subsequent statements apply the rotation matrix to get the translations and rotation of mol to achieve the optimal overlap. Note that our mathematical derivation of the overlap algorithm involved a translation of both molecules so that their centroids were moved to the origin of the 3D space. In the implementation, this is not done because we do not want to shi the atoms in the target protein (just those in mol). Consequently, mol is shied and rotated and then it is translated by a distance that is determined by the centroid of the target molecule.
202 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques Code for computing the rotation matrix is as follows:def computeRotationMatrix(coordsP_L, coordsQ_L): coordsP_A = zeros((3,len(coordsP_L)), float) coordsQ_A = zeros((3,len(coordsQ_L)), float) for ix in range(len (coordsP_L)): coordsP_A[:, ix] = coordsP_L[ix] coordsQ_A[:, ix] = coordsQ_L[ix] c_A = dot(coordsQ_A, coordsP_A.transpose()) u, s, vt = linalg.svd(c_A) # NOTE: we are assuming that s has # singular values in descending order. rotMatrix = dot(u,vt) if linalg.det(rotMatrix) < 0: rotMatrix = dot (u*array([1.0, 1.0, -1.0]), vt) return rotMatrixis is a reasonably straightforward implementation of the steps 4, 5, 6, and 7 of the summary in Section 5.5.5. If the molecules to be overlapped have an obvious set of atom pairings, then it is easy to generate a list of these pairs to produce an optimal overlap (see Exercise 1 at the end of this chapter).5.7 PROTEIN SEQUENCE ALIGNMENTUp to this point, we have been assuming that structural overlap is preceded by some algorithm that determines the pairs of atoms (see Equations 5.3) that are to be structurally overlapped. If the two proteins have the same sequence, then this is a trivial exercise. If they are very dif-ferent, then the pairing can be rather dicult. Although there are various purely structural approaches to this problem, a simple strategy is to start with a local alignment of the primary sequences. We do not cover this in minute detail because the information is readily available from other sources such as [DE98].Our objective is to derive a short (hopefully simple) script that pro-vides a sequence alignment class that can be readily embedded into other scripts that need this type of preprocessing prior to a structural overlap. In eect, we are striving to initiate a structural alignment by starting with a sequence alignment. Such an alignment is really an attempt to assess sequence similarity.
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 203 As an example of similarity, consider the following two amino acid sequences:P = WATERMANMIKE and Q = MERMANETHELTo show the similarity of these two sequences, we can write them as two rows with vertical bars between matching letters.P = WATERMANMIKE- ||||| :|Q = --MERMANETHELese two rows represent a global alignment of the two sequences. As just noted, we want a local alignment, but we rst discuss global alignments because they are simpler to explain.Denition: An optimal global alignment of two sequences P and Q is obtained by writing the two sequences in such a way as to maximize the occurrence of matching pairs of letters, one in P and the other in Q. Gaps (written as dashes) may be introduced into either sequence or at either end of a sequence in such a way as to have both strings of equal length and to facilitate the largest numbers of matches.5.7.1 Partial MatchesAnother consideration in the generation of an alignment is that amino acids may be accepted as a pair even though they do not match identically. is approach takes into account the biochemical properties of the amino acids. For example, D (aspartate) and E (glutamate) are both acidic amino acids and so they are good candidates for a partial match. Other partial matches would be biologically justied: hydrophobic amino acids (W, F, Y, L, I, V, M, A), and basic amino acids (K, R, H). For long sequences, it may be possible to generate many dierent opti-mal alignments, each having the maximal number of exact matches. When partial matches contribute to the score of an optimal alignment, the analysis becomes more complicated because we must decide how much they contribute. For example, should the score increase if the align-ment brings in three partial matches at the expense of foregoing one exact match? To answer such questions, researchers have constructed substitu-tion matrices that essentially dene the score contributions of both exact and partial matches.
204 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques Figure 5.2, adapted from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Class/FieldGuide/BLOSUM62.txt, gives the BLOSUM62 (see [HH92]) version of such a sub-stitution matrix. ere are other BLOSUM matrices with suxes such as 45, 50, 80, and 90. e BLOSUM62 matrix is oen used as the stan-dard matrix when doing ungapped alignments, whereas BLOSUM50 is oen used for gapped alignments. In general, BLOSUM80 works best for sequences that show less divergence, whereas BLOSUM45, at the other end of the application scale, is used for sequences that show more evolu-tionary divergence. e score contribution of an exact match can be found on the main diagonal. ese entries have integer values ranging from 4 to 11 and take into account the relative frequency of occurrence of an amino acid. For example, the score contribution made by an exact match for W (tryptophan) is 11, which is the highest value since tryptophan has the lowest frequency of occurrence. In general, the entries of the substitution matrix are based on issues other than simple frequency of occurrence. More precisely, it describes the frequency of observed changes of charac-ters in related protein segments or blocks that have been conserved in an evolutionary descent.ARNDCQEGHILKMFPSTWYVA4−1−2−20−1−10−2−1−1−1−1−2−110−3−20R−150−2−310−20−3−22−1−3−2−1−1−3−2−3N−2061−30001−3−30−2−3−210−4−2−3D−2−216−302−1−1−3−4−1−3−3−10−1−4−3−3C0−3−3−39−3−4−3−3−1−1−3−1−2−3−1−1−2−2−1Q−1100−352−20−3−210−3−10−1−2−1−2E−1002−425−20−3−31−2−3−10−1−3−2−2G0−20−1−3−2−26−2−4−4−2−3−3−20−2−2−3−3H−201−1−300−28−3−3−1−2−1−2−1−2−22−3L−1−2−3−4−1−2−3−4−324−220−3−2−1−2−1−1I−1−3−3−3−1−3−3−4−342−310−3−2−1−3−13K−120−1−311−2−1−3−25−1−3−10−1−3−2−2M−1−1−2−3−10−2−3−212−150−2−1−1−1−11F−2−3−3−3−2−3−3−3−100−306−4−2−213−1P−1−2−2−1−3−1−1−2−2−3−3−1−2−47−1−1−4−3−2S1−110−1000−1−2−20−1−2−141−3−2−2T0−10−1−1−1−1−2−2−1−1−1−1−2−115−2−20W−3−3−4−4−2−2−3−2−2−3−2−3−11−4−3−2112−3Y−2−2−2−3−2−1−2−32−1−1−2−13−3−2−227−1V0−3−3−3−1−2−2−3−331−21−1−2−20−3−14FIGURE 5.2 e BLOSUM62 substitution matrix.
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 205 5.7. 2 G apsConsider the following two alignments:Alignment #1:M I C H A E L S W A T E R M A N | | | | : | | | | |- E T H - E L M - - - E R M A N0 -3 -1 8 0 5 4 -1 0 0 0 5 5 5 4 6Alignment #2:M I C H A E L S W A T E R M A N | | | | : | | | | |- E T H - E L - - M - E R M A N0 -3 -1 8 0 5 4 0 0 -1 0 5 5 5 4 6e numbers in each column of the alignment are the score contribu-tions given by the BLOSUM62 matrix. e score for the entire alignment is simply the sum of these contributed scores. is means that alignment #1 has a score of 37 while alignment #2 also has a score of 37. However, most alignment programs will oer alignment #1 as the better alignment because alignment #2 initiates a gap four times, whereas the former does so only three times. To support this choice, it is possible for the alignment score to incorporate a term that leads to an extra penalty whenever a new run of gap symbols is started.Let us consider why a gap appears. A gap is a sequence of one or more spaces drawn as dashes in the alignment display. Each space can represent an insertion or a deletion. For example, the space below the rst A repre-sents either of the following: 1. e insertion of an A into the rst string, which would have been MICHELSWATERMAN prior to the insertion 2. e deletion of some letter that was originally between H and E of ETHELMERMANVery oen, we do not have enough evidence to determine which scenario occurred and so either possibility is acceptable and the space is referred to as an indel (insertion or deletion). e key fact is that indels are assumed to be much less likely than substitutions from a biological perspective. Consequently, their initiation and extension lead to the addition of nega-tive contributions (penalties) in the score computation. ese penalties


===== [53/99] chapter-53.html =====

206 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques have been assessed using empirical observations gathered from several examples of homologous proteins that have been previously aligned.5.7.3 SummaryWe are now in a position to summarize the main points of the mathemati-cal model for global sequence alignment.Given two strings representing the residues in two proteins P and Q, an optimal global alignment seeks to demonstrate maximal similarity by writing one string beneath the other so that residues in columns either identically or partially match. e objective of attaining maximal similar-ity must address the following issues:• Gaps (written as dashes) may be introduced into either sequence or at either end of a sequence in such a way as to have both strings of equal length and to facilitate the largest numbers of matches.• Although gaps may be introduced, we attempt to do this in a par-simonious fashion and, so, in the formulation of the problem we reduce the score of an alignment by introducing a gap penalty.5.7.4 Computatione optimal global alignment problem can be solved using dynamic pro-gramming. is solution of the problem was done in 1970 by Needleman and Wunsch (see [NW70]). A modern computer scientist would see this algorithm as an application of dynamic programming, a strategy that was pioneered by Richard Bellman in 1954 (see [Be54]). A review of dynamic programming is provided in Appendix E.In the design of a dynamic programming algorithm, the most impor-tant issue is the specication of a subproblem (see Appendix E). We know that a subproblem should be smaller in some sense and capable of contrib-uting to the solution of a larger problem.It is possible to dene subproblems that have too many degrees of free-dom in their specications. For example, we might state that a subproblem should be the global alignment of two substrings extracted from P and Q, that is, P[i..j] and Q[k..m], where the notation [i..j] represents the string of contiguous characters between and including character positions i and j. is subproblem would be parameterized by four integers, i, j, k, and m. is approach would involve evaluation of all cells in a four-dimensional array, and this would be an extremely costly evaluation for lengthy strings.
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 207 In fact, we need not go to such an extreme when specifying substrings. It is shown in Lemma 5.1 that the selected substrings can be prexes of the given strings.Denition: the ith prex of a string X denoted by Xi is the substring of X consisting of the rst i characters of X, that is, ,,,,12 1=−Xxxxii ,1=−xX xiii Note the use of comma-separated lowercase letters to repre-sent consecutive characters within the prex. With this agreement about notation, we proceed with the specication in Section 5.7.4.1.5.7.4.1 Subproblem Specicatione dynamic programming subproblem will be parameterized by two arguments i and j, and its solution will be the optimal global alignment of the two prexes Pi and Qj.5.7.4.2 Scoring AlignmentsWe score an alignment by adding the scores derived from each column in the alignment. Suppose that aer adding dashes we get an alignment that involves mij columns when we do a global alignment of Pi and Qj. en, the score for this alignment will be given by ∑()()==,1NW ijskckmij (5.41)where ()skc is the score for the kth column in the alignment. We have used the notation NW (i, j) to emphasize that this score is for the global alignment algorithm due to Needleman and Wunsch. Based on the earlier discussion concerning gaps and partial matches in Section 5.7.2, we can dene the column score using ()()=′′−,inacolumn with amatchin acolumnwithadashskBp qdckk (5.42)In this equation, the quantity d represents the penalty that is given for the occurrence of a gap. e gap penalty d is a positive quantity, so the pres-ence of any gap in the alignment will cause this penalty to be subtracted from the total alignment score. We use the notations ′pkand ′qk to indicate the residues of Pi and Qj that appear in the kth column when the global 
208 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques alignment is written out, complete with dashes. e function B (row_ residue, column_residue) is used to extract an entry from the row and column of the substitution matrix that is being used for the alignment. In Section 5.7.1, we used the BLOSUM62 matrix as an example of such a substitution matrix.5.7.4.3 Suitability of the Subproblemere are undoubtedly many ways to dene a subproblem, many of them ill-tted to the needs of a dynamic programming algorithm. However, our specication of a subproblem is appropriate for the dynamic program-ming algorithm. is is demonstrated by proving that there is a relation-ship between the subproblem specied as the optimal global alignment of prexes Pi and Qj and other optimal global alignment subproblems that work on shorter prex strings. is gives us a recursive evaluation lead-ing to the computation of the full solution: the full problem depends on smaller subproblems, each of which depends on even smaller subprob-lems, and so on until eventually we have subproblems so small that they are trivial to solve. We need the following lemma:Lemma 5.1Let Pi and Qj be prexes of the strings P and Q, respectively. Ifwe considerthe optimal global alignment of Pi and Qj, there are three possible cases when describing the appearance of the last column in the alignment: 1. Character pi matches character qj in the optimal global alignment, which can then be drawn as follows: −−,,11PpQqiijj (5.43) Claim: in this case, the matching of characters seen prior to pi and qj is, in fact, the optimal global alignment of Pi – 1 and Qj – 1. 2. Character pi does not participate in any match, that is, the optimal global alignment can be drawn as follows: −−,,1PpQiij (5.44)
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 209 Claim: in this case, the matching of characters seen prior to pi is the optimal global alignment of Pi – 1 and Qj. 3. Character qj does not participate in any match, that is, the optimal global alignment can be drawn as follows: −−,,1PQqijj (5.45)Claim: in this case, the matching of characters seen prior to qj is the optimal global alignment of Pi and Qj – 1.Proof of claim for case (a):Assume that the matching of Pi – 1 and Qj – 1 as seen in case (a) is not the optimal global alignment of Pi – 1 and Qj – 1. en, suppose that we replaced this alignment with the optimal global alignment of Pi – 1 and Qj– 1. is will raise the score associated with the columns prior to the last column. en, by simply appending pi to Pi – 1 and qj to Qj – 1, we would get an alignment with a higher score than that seen in case (a). is is a contradiction because we have already assumed that case (a) represents an optimal global alignment.Proof of claim for case (b):Reasoning along similar lines: suppose that the matching of Pi – 1 and Qj as seen in case (b) is not the optimal global alignment of Pi – 1 and Qj. en, suppose we replaced this alignment with the optimal global alignment of Pi – 1 and Qj. is will raise the score associated with the columns prior to the last column. en, by simply appending pi to Pi – 1 and writing a dash below it we would get an alignment that is characterized as being case (b) but with a higher score. is is a contradiction because we have already assumed that case (b) represents an optimal global alignment.Proof of claim for case (c):e proof is a simple variation of the proof for case (b).Computation of NW (i, j): Lemma 5.1 is a formal discussion that brings out the relationships among subproblems and serves to justify the formula-tion of our subproblem as the optimal global alignment of Pi and Qj. At the moment, the implications these cases provide for the dependencies among the scores associated with the subproblems are more important for us. Each case in Lemma 5.1 denes a possible relationship between NW (i, j) and the score derived from the solution of some smaller alignment problem.
210 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques Case (a):By matching the last characters in each string of residues, the score will be incremented by an amount that is accessed from the substitution matrix: ()() ()=−−+,1,1 ,NW ij NW ij Bpqij (5.46)Case (b):By placing a dash in the bottom row of the alignment, we decrease the score in going from NW (I − 1, j) to NW (i, j): () ()=−−,1,NW ij NW ijd (5.47)Case (c):By placing a dash in the top row of the alignment, we decrease the score in going from NW (i, j − 1) to NW (i, j): () ()=−−,,1NW ij NW ij d (5.48)Considering these possibilities, we see that there are three ways to dene NW (i, j). Since we wish to maximize the alignment score, it makes sense to always choose the option that will maximize NW (i, j). Consequently, we use the following equation for the computation of (),NW ij: ()()()()()=−−+−−−−,max1,1,,1, ,,1NW ijNW ij BpqNW ijdNW ij dij (5.49)We now have enough information about the mathematical model to go through the dynamic programming design steps suggested in Section E.4 of Appendix E. ese steps are summarized as follows: 1. Identication of subproblems: e subproblem will be parameterized by two arguments i and j, and its solution will be the optimal global alignment of the two prexes Pi and Qj.


===== [54/99] chapter-54.html =====

Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 211 2. Specify evaluation of score values: We will use the notation |P| and |Q| to represent the number of residues in proteins P and Q, respec-tively. e NW (i, j) score values will be retained in an array with |P|+ 1 rows and |Q| + 1 columns. ere will be an extra row “0” and an extra column “0” to store initial values required by the recursion. Considering the dependencies of NW (i, j) on other score values in the array, we see that the score stored in cell (i, j) depends on the scores stored in cells (i − 1, j − 1), (i − 1, j), and (i, j − 1). Consequently, it will be sucient to evaluate the array entries in a row-by-row fash-ion. We will need to know the score of the full global alignment: this will be found in the bottom right corner of the array (the intersection of the last row and the last column). 3. Set values for the base case: the entries in row 0 and column 0 will hold scores that correspond to penalties that are introduced because of the insertion of initial dashes that might appear in the alignment before the characters of either the P string or the Q string. As we evaluate along row 0, the penalties increase so that NW (0, j) = −jd. Similarly, for column 0, we have NW (i, 0) = −id. 4. Recover the solution conguration: the traceback operation involves keeping track of the cell that produced the maximum value when NW (i, j) was calculated using Equation 5.49. is can be done using a separate trace-back array having |P| rows and |Q| columns. e entry stored in cell (i, j) of this array would be a code indicating whether the maximum value was taken from (i − 1, j − 1), (i − 1, j), or (i, j − 1). When describing a trace-back operation, one can super-impose the trace-back array over the score array with trace-back dependencies illustrated by means of arrows.5.7.4.4 A Global Alignment ExampleWe will assume a gap penalty of d = −1. e results are displayed in Figure5.3.Working with the trace-back, one gets the following alignment: - M I C H A E L S W A T E R M A N | | | | | | | | | | E T - - H - E L - - - M E R M A N-1 -1 -1 -1 8 -1 5 4 -1 -1 -1 -1 5 5 5 4 6
212 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques 5.8 VARIATIONS IN THE GLOBAL ALIGNMENT ALGORITHMFor many problems solved by dynamic programming, the computed solutions are provably optimal. e pairwise alignment of two protein sequences is a much more complicated problem because of the many parameters that must be properly set before the dynamic program can proceed. is complexity is related to the mathematical model for the treatment of gaps and the handling of partial matches. As described in Section 5.7.1, substitution matrices such as BLOSUM62 are used to specify the score contribution of a partial match. Here are some typical approaches for the computation of penalties arising from gaps:• Linear gap model: the presence of a dash introduces a penalty that is seen in the recursion as a decrease of the score by the value dL. In the simplest model, the dependence is linear and the presence of a gap with g dashes leads to a decrease of gdL.• Ane gap model: the ane gap model uses a penalty formula given by dA + (g − 1) e, where dA is the gap-open penalty and e is the gap extension penalty. Typically, e < dA, and this means that the insertion of a long sequence of dashes into the alignment penalized less than it would be if a linear model was used.EMICHAELSWATERMANTHELMMANER0−1−2−3−4−5−6−7−8−9−10−11−12−13−14−15−16−1−2−3−4−3−40−1−2−3−4−5−6−7−8−9−10−2−2−3−4−4−3−1−10−1−210−1−2−3−4−3−3−4−543210−1−2010−1−2−2−4−4−5−63387654354321−5−2−2−32271211109876654−60−1−2116111110987611109−7−1−2−3006101110981312111010−8−2−3−4−1−159109981218171615−9−3−1−2−2−24899881117232221−10−4−2−1−22379813121116222726−11−5−3−201268712131215212633←←←←↖←←←←←←↖↑←←←↖←←←↖↑↖←←↖←↖↑↑←←↖↑ ←←↖↑←←←←←↖←↖←←↖↑↑ ←←←←←←←←←←↖↑←↖↑↑↑ ←←←←←←↖←↖↑↑↑↖↑↑↑↖←↖↑↑←←←←↖↑↑↖↑↑↖↑↑←↖↖↑←←←↖↑↑↑↑↑↑↖↑↑ ←←←←←↖↖↑↑↑↑↑↖↑↑↑↑ ←←←←↖↑↑↑↑↑↑←↖↑↑↑↖ ←↖↑↑←↖←↖↖↑↑↖↑↑↑↑↑ ←←←←↖↑↖↑↑↑↑↑↑↑↑↑↑↑↑↑↑↑↑↑↑↑↑↑↑↑↑↑↑FIGURE 5.3 Global alignment example.
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 213 Typical values are dL = 8 for the linear case and dA = 12 and e = 2 for the ane case. Although these values get good results in practice, there is no rigorous theory or rule stipulating the optimal values for these param-eters. Furthermore, the choice of substitution matrix may not be obvious. One can nd guidelines for their use (see page 84, [ZB07]), but the choice is oen decided by empirical observation and experience rather than a mathematically rigorous decision process.5.9 PERCENT IDENTITY COMPARISONGiven the amount of choice in the construction of an alignment algorithm, how does one objectively choose the best alignment for a given pair of sequences? Ideally, we want some quantitative assessment that indicates the goodness of an alignment. e simplest approach is to count the number of identical matches in an alignment. en, percent identity can be derived by dividing this count by the length of the aligned region and multiplying by 100. It should be noted that each column in the alignment of two ran-dom proteins would have a 1 out of 20 or 5% chance of producing an iden-tical match. is calculation implicitly assumes that all amino acids occur with the same probability. It is well known that this is not the case. e most frequent amino acids glycine, alanine, and leucine account for roughly one-quarter of all residues, and any one of them typically appears four times more oen than any one of the least frequent amino acids tryptophan, methionine, histidine, and cysteine. Doolittle [D81] notes that when these observed fre-quencies are taken into account, the percent identity for random sequences goes up from 5% to 6%. Consequently, we would expect the alignment of homologous proteins to have a percent identity that is well above 6%, but then we must ask the following: What is the threshold of percent identity above which we will accept the alignment as producing evidence of homology?In 1999, Burkhard Rost reported the results of an experiment that provides this threshold (see [R99]). He analyzed more than a million sequence alignments between protein pairs with known structures. Since the structures were known, he was able to determine whether a pair of proteins had similar or nonsimilar structure. is structure comparison was used to provide a denitive test of homology for the protein pairs. e following points describe some of the main results:• When the percent identity is high, over 40% for long alignments, the sequence alignment will unambiguously distinguish between simi-lar and nonsimilar structures.
214 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques • For alignments showing more than 30% sequence identity, about 90% of the pairs were homologous.• For alignments showing less than 25% sequence identity, less than 10% of the pairs were homologous.e region between 35% and 20% percent identity was designated as the twilight zone. Here, pair homology may exist but cannot be reliably assured without extra evidence. More than 95% of all pairs in the twi-light zone had nonsimilar structure. Sequence percent identity below 20% has been called the midnight zone and typically requires an assessment of structure since the alignment is not reliable.*5.10 LOCAL ALIGNMENTIt is possible that two proteins have evolved from a distant ancestor and the evidence of this is seen as a conserved domain. Suppose that for each protein the portion of the primary sequence belonging to this domain is small in com-parison with the rest of the protein that corresponds to a sequence bearing no relation to the other protein. Under these circumstances, a global align-ment of the proteins may obscure the similarity of the domain because the algorithm is forced to nd an alignment that deals with the entire sequence of each protein. e insertion of gaps necessary to achieve this global align-ment will cause a reduction of the score, and a calculation to evaluate the sig-nicance of the alignment score may be undeservedly low. In this situation, the discovery of homology is best handled by computing a local alignment rather than a global alignment. We want the best alignment between shorter regions of the given proteins. We should think of global alignment as being most applicable for the alignment of two proteins that have roughly the same length and are somewhat similar over their entire lengths.e dynamic programming algorithm that produces such an alignment is the Smith–Waterman algorithm (see [SW81]). e dynamic program for Smith–Waterman uses the same two-dimensional array that we used for the Needleman–Wunsch global alignment algorithm. However, because we only want to align shorter regions of the given pair of proteins, the trace-back path will not necessarily start in the lower right corner of the array and will not necessarily end in the upper le corner of the array. More specically, the trace-back path will start with the highest score and, in general, it will * Recall from Chapter 1, Section 1.4.3.3 that the globin family has sequence identity at around 15%, but structural analysis reveals their homology.
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 215 traverse only part of the array, ending when we encounter a cell with score value 0. Moreover, we will not assign penalties when the given strings P and Q do not produce alignments at the ends of the strings. In other words, dashes at either end are inserted with no penalty. is means that even though the alignment algorithm may use a linear or ane gap model, the initial scores set up in the cells of the rst row and column will be 0 and never negative. Furthermore, during the evaluation of scores in the array we can change any negative score (computed in the same manner as Needleman–Wunsch) by setting such a score to 0. Consequently, the recursion becomes as follows: ()()()()()=−−+−−−−,max1,1,,1, ,,1 ,0SW ijSW ij BpqSW ijdSW ij dij (5.54)We have used the notation SW (i, j) to emphasize that this score is for the local alignment algorithm due to Smith and Waterman. If you compare this with Equation 5.49, you will see that they are the same except that Equation 5.54 has a 0 in the max function argument list so that the cell entry never becomes negative.It is expected that values for partial matches provided by the substitu-tion matrix will have a mix of both positive and negative entries. e idea is that we want to derive local alignments and the score for aligning unre-lated sequence regions should be negative. We do not want a local align-ment to be arbitrarily extended in either direction by partial matches that always contribute a positive increment to the score, which is why negative entries are essential.To provide a small example, we show the results of a local alignment between the strings: “MNAMRETAW” and “SNAMELDEEN.”is time, we have assumed a gap penalty of d = −8. e results are displayed in Figure 5.4.Working with the trace-back, one gets the following alignment:N A M R| | | |N A M ENote that this corresponds to nding the maximum value of 15 and then taking the diagonal path up and to the le until a zero entry is encountered.


===== [55/99] chapter-55.html =====

216 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques 5.11 A SCRIPT TO DO SEQUENCE ALIGNMENT AND THEN STRUCTURAL OVERLAPIn this section, we deal with structural overlaps for which the atom pairings are not immediately obvious but can be determined by means of a local sequence alignment. We start by describing a class called SequenceLocalAlignment and show how it can be used to generate the atom pairings that provide input for the structural overlap class. Here is the script for the class:import chimera, numpyfrom numpy import zerosb62_L = \ [[ 4], [-1, 5], [-2, 0, 6], [-2,-2, 1, 6], [ 0,-3,-3,-3, 9], [-1, 1, 0, 0,-3, 5], [-1, 0, 0, 2,-4, 2, 5], [ 0,-2, 0,-1,-3,-2,-2, 6], [-2, 0, 1,-1,-3, 0, 0,-2, 8], [-1,-3,-3,-3,-1,-3,-3,-4,-3, 4], [-1,-2,-3,-4,-1,-2,-3,-4,-3, 2, 4], [-1, 2, 0,-1,-3, 1, 1,-2,-1,-3,-2, 5], [-1,-1,-2,-3,-1, 0,-2,-3,-2, 1, 2,-1, 5], [-2,-3,-3,-3,-2,-3,-3,-3,-1, 0, 0,-3, 0, 6], [-1,-2,-2,-1,-3,-1,-1,-2,-2,-3,-3,-1,-2,-4, 7], [ 1,-1, 1, 0,-1, 0, 0, 0,-1,-2,-2, 0,-1,-2,-1, 4], [ 0,-1, 0,-1,-1,-1,-1,-2,-2,-1,-1,-1,-1,-2,-1, 1, 5], [-3,-3,-4,-4,-2,-2,-3,-2,-2,-3,-2,-3,-1, 1,-4,-3,-2,11], [-2,-2,-2,-3,-2,-1,-2,-3, 2,-1,-1,-2,-1, 3,-3,-2,-2, 2, 7], [ 0,-3,-3,-3,-1,-2,-2,-3,-3, 3, 1,-2, 1,-1,-2,-2, 0,-3,-1, 4]]MNAMRETAWNSAME LDEEN0060000000001100011000000000000001020004005021570003005071512400020427121130003010911910002015810600000064770060000623FIGURE 5.4 Local alignment example.
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 217 t2ix_D = \ {"ALA": 0,"ARG": 1,"ASN": 2,"ASP": 3,"CYS": 4, "GLN": 5,"GLU": 6,"GLY": 7,"HIS": 8,"ILE": 9, "LEU":10,"LYS":11,"MET":12,"PHE":13,"PRO":14, "SER":15,"THR":16,"TRP":17,"TYR":18,"VAL":19}def b62(resAtype, resBtype): ixPair = (t2ix_D[resAtype], t2ix_D[resBtype]) return b62_L[max(ixPair)][min(ixPair)]#==========================================================# SequencesLocalAlignment CLASSclass SequencesLocalAlignment(object): def __init__(self, resP_L, resQ_L, penalty = 4): # This function computes a local alignment # for two residue lists (not character sequences!). # Results are stored in the alignment_L list. # Gaps are not in the output since we only need # the residues that have been aligned. self.resP_L = resP_L self.resQ_L = resQ_L self.penalty = penalty self.alignment_L = [] # Fill in the score matrix and track the largest element. sw = zeros((len(self.resP_L) + 1, len(self.resQ_L) + 1), int) maxVal = 0; for i in range(1, len(self.resP_L) + 1): for j in range(1, len(self.resQ_L) + 1): sw[i,j] = max(sw[i-1,j-1] + b62(self.resP_L[i-1].type, self.resQ_L[j-1].type), sw[i-1,j] - self.penalty, sw[i,j-1] - self.penalty, 0) if sw[i,j] >= maxVal: maxVal = sw[i,j] maxLoc = [i, j] # Traceback: i = maxLoc[0]; j = maxLoc[1] while sw[i,j] > 0: if sw[i,j] == sw[i-1,j-1] + b62(self.resP_L[i-1].type, self.resQ_L[j-1].type): self.alignment_L.append((resP_L[i-1], resQ_L[j-1])) # Note that indexing is shifted for input array # relative to indexing of score array. i -= 1; j -= 1 if sw[i,j] == sw[i-1,j] - self.penalty: i -= 1 if sw[i,j] == sw[i,j-1] - self.penalty: j -= 1 self.alignment_L.reverse()
218 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques e script can be imported using the following:from StructBio. StructureOverlap.\ sequencesLocalAlignment import SequencesLocalAlignmentWhen the class is instantiated, it is given lists of Chimera residue objects for both proteins. Aer some initialization, the script lls in the score array using Equation 5.54. e b62 function works with the triangular set of lists (b62_L) to provide values from the BLOSUM62 substitution matrix. While lling the array, we compute the maximum entry and subsequently use it for the trace-back. Note that trace-back is done by an evaluation that determines the cell responsible for the entry in the current cell. Aer trace-back is completed, the residue pairings will have been assembled in the alignment_L list. e order of the list is then reversed. is reversal does not aect the residue pairing and is only done for the convenience of the user who might want to list the aligned residues in their sequence order. e aligned residues can be accessed by working with the alignment_L attribute of the instantiated SequencesLocalAlignment object. With a list of residue pairs, the user can easily extract the alpha carbon atoms that are to be paired in the overlap computation. One can also get the residue types if an alignment is to be displayed in printed form.By utilizing local sequence alignment to derive atom pairings, we can facilitate protein overlaps that are more challenging than that seen in Exercise 1. See, for example, Exercise 2 at the end of this chapter.5.12 DEALING WITH WEAKER SEQUENCE SIMILARITYSection 5.5 covered the standard translate and rotate algorithm that can be used when there is a clear and extensive sequence alignment that denes the pairs of atoms that are to be placed into maximal overlap. e problem of similarity evaluation becomes much more of a challenge when a local sequence alignment becomes sketchy, for example, when the two proteins have a distant evolutionary relationship. Since we know that structure is more conserved than sequence, it is reasonable to strive for algorithms that determine structural alignment with little or no help from a prelimi-nary sequence alignment.A local sequence alignment with a low score poses diculties for the structural alignment. e strategy for overcoming these diculties will depend on the reasons for the low score:
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 219 1. Lengthy sequences of mismatches: in some cases, mismatches may reside in loop regions, whereas the hydrophobic core contains resi-dues that show a higher percentage of matches in the sequence align-ment. In such cases, it may be reasonable to simply remove the loop region from consideration and try to maximize the overlap of atoms in the hydrophobic core. 2. Presence of gaps in the alignment: gaps in the sequence alignment pose a dicult problem because they indicate a break in continuity of the structural alignment. ere are various strategies that can be used: a. By breaking up a protein into fragments, we can try to derive separate structural alignments of fragments on either side of the gap. b. We can redene the pairs of atoms that are to be put into maximal overlap.e second approach is at the heart of a clever algorithm devised by Russell and Barton (see [RB92]). eir algorithm, called STAMP (structural alignment of multiple proteins), uses a sequence alignment but only as an initial step. It is one of the several algorithms that establish a structural alignment with little or no reliance on a sequence alignment. Several algo-rithms have been developed to compare geometric relationships within the proteins being compared. e advantage of these intramolecular methods is that they avoid the need for an explicit superposition of the two structures. In all cases, the algorithms essentially compare some of the local structures of a protein P with the local structures of a protein Q. e notion of local structure varies from one algorithm to the next. Some examples of such algorithms are as follows:• DALI: DALI (distance alignment) does an optimal pairwise struc-tural alignment of protein structures based on the similarity of local patterns extracted from distance maps (see [HS93]).• SSAP: SSAP (secondary structure alignment program) produces a structural alignment using double dynamic programming to gener-ate an alignment of local “views” that are common to both proteins (see [TO89]).
220 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques Both algorithms involve the comparison of local structure that deals with individual atoms (DALI working with contact maps and SSAP work-ing with views that are established relative to alpha carbon atoms). is strategy is in contrast with other algorithms that explore the similarity of proteins by dealing with secondary structure elements (SSEs). at is, there is an attempt to derive a set of matching pairs of SSEs in such a way as to maximize the overlap of atom pairs. Several algorithms have used strat-egies that work in this manner (see secondary structure matching [KH04], vector alignment search tool (VAST) [GM96], and DEJAVU [SK04]).In this section, we design and implement a class that uses a similar approach to structural alignment.5.12.1 Structural Alignment by Overlapping Pairs of Secondary Structure ElementsGiven two proteins P and Q, we want to design and implement a structural alignment algorithm that meets the following goals:• e algorithm will not use a sequence alignment of P and Q to get an initial structural overlap. Although a sequence alignment is usually an aid in the determination of atoms that comprise the overlap pairs, we will deliberately avoid this strategy as a challenge to see how far we can get if we totally ignore the primary sequence.• e algorithm should work even if the SSEs (such as helices and strands) of P represent a “rewiring” of the SSEs in Q. is is frequently seen as a circular permutation of the SSEs [DB07]. Note that this com-plication would mitigate the need for a preliminary sequence align-ment. For other types of nonsequential alignments, see [AV07].• e success of the structural alignment will be evaluated using the quality value (QV) function: ()()=+QV1RMSD,align202NPQ RNNPQ (5.55)In Equation 5.55, align2N is the number of residues considered to be in the alignment; NP and NQ are the number of residues in P and Q, respectively; RMSD (P, Q) is the RMSD of P and Q calculated by using the alpha car-bon atoms of the residues in the alignment (see Equation 5.40); and R0 is an empirical parameter (chosen to be 3 Å) that measures the relative signicance


===== [56/99] chapter-56.html =====

Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 221 of RMSD and Nalign (see [KH04]). Note that measurement of overlap is more complicated when the amount of overlap is less than the length of the smaller protein. Since there is no sequence alignment to stipulate the atom pairs that would be used in the calculation of RMSD, we typically choose alpha car-bon atom pairs that are close to one another as determined by the structural alignment. However, when a limited set of alpha carbon atoms in P is in close structural alignment with a corresponding limited set of alpha carbon atoms in Q, it is to be expected that the remainder of the alpha carbon atoms will be farther apart and will tend to increase the squared deviations of the RMSD so that it gives an overly pessimistic high value. We can lower the RMSD by restricting the calculation so that it covers only those atoms that are very close to one another, but then the measure of overlap is only valid for this lim-ited extent of the overlap and does not represent an accurate appraisal of the alignment. By using the QV formula, we get the number of atom pairings to contribute to the assessment of alignment quality. If you inspect the formula, you can see that a low RMSD gives a higher quality of alignment but the QV also strongly depends on the number of atom pairs in the alignment.Our strategy will be to try to nd the best structural alignment by evaluating several candidate alignments, each involving the overlapping of a pair of SSEs in P with a pair of SSEs in Q (similar to the strategy discussed in [SB97]). If we think of the inertial axes of a pair of SSEs in a protein as dening the opposite sides of a quadrilateral, then we are attempting to nd the best overlap involving a quadrilateral in P and a quadrilateral in Q. Figure 5.5 shows a simple example. We have chosen small proteins so that the gures have more clarity.Figure 5.6a and b shows two proteins with inertial axes placed in the secondary structures. Both proteins have been illustrated using a back-bone chain trace so that the axes are easily seen.If protein P has mP inertial axes and protein Q has mQ inertial axes,then we will get 2mP and 2mQ quadrilaterals for proteins P and Q, respectively. Since each quadrilateral has four points, we have enough data to dene the translation and rotation operations that will give us the best (in a least-squares sense) overlap of a quadrilateral in P with a quadrilat-eral in Q. Each overlap can be evaluated to check how well other alpha carbon atoms in P align with alpha carbon atoms in Q. While it would be a daunting task to carry out 22mmPQoverlap operations, in practice
222 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques we can apply various strategies to lter the number of overlaps that are actually attempted. For example, each inertial axis is labeled with its SSE type, and this allows us to avoid the overlap of a beta strand with an alpha helix. In addition, we can perform tests on the lengths of the sides of the quadrilaterals to avoid an attempt to overlap quadrilaterals with sides that have little hope of initiating an alignment.Figure 5.7 shows the overlap of the two quadrilaterals that have been chosen to dene the structural alignment. In Figure 5.8, we see the same alignment in ribbon form. is alignment has an RMSD of 1.06 across 34 alpha carbon pairs. e best QV, as dened by Equation 5.55, is 0.301.Figure 5.9 shows the results when this algorithm is applied to the proteins 1VIH (vigilin from Homo sapiens, length 71) and 1PYT (procarboxypeptidase A from Bos taurus, length 94). e highest QV FIGURE 5.5 Quadrilaterals for 1PYI and 1PYC formed by taking secondary structure elements two at a time.(a)(b)FIGURE 5.6 (a) Protein 1PYI; (b) protein 1PYC.
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 223 FIGURE 5.7 Overlap of the best matching quadrilaterals gives the structural alignment.FIGURE 5.8 Structural alignment of 1PYI and 1PYC shown in ribbonform.FIGURE 5.9 Structural alignment of 1VIH and 1PYT shown in ribbonform.
224 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques is 0.130 over 43 pairs of atoms (RMSD 2.11). is pair of proteins was chosen because SSEs of 1VIH are aligned with SSEs of 1PYT that are not in the same order within the backbone. So, the SSEs of the hydrophobic core in 1VIH are a rewired version of those seen in 1PYT. As reported in [SB98], this similarity of the two structures was not found by DALI [HS93] and VAST [MG95]. e combinatorial extension algorithm discussed in [SB98] nds a structural alignment with an RMSD of 3.2 over 56 atom pairs. By inspecting the alignment, we see that residues Q11 to H34, P51 to K65, and V66 to G72 of 1PYT are in alignment with residues N53 to A75, Y11 to I25, and N31 to K36 of 1VIH, respectively. Figure 5.10 shows the correspondence using dashed lines.is type of structural alignment shows that the correspondence involves a circular permutation of the secondary structures. Although fairly infrequent, this type of structural alignment has been seen several times (see [JL01] and the references therein). As one might expect in these cases, preliminary processing that calculates a monotonic sequence of residues of protein P in local alignment with a monotonic sequence of residues of protein Q will only capture a subset of the alpha carbon pairings, and this can lead to an inferior structure alignment.5.12.2 A Script for Structural Alignment by Overlapping Secondary Structure ElementsIn this section, we discuss the InertialAxisAlignment class and some of the important issues related to its implementation. e class is acces-sible using the following:from StructBio. StructureOverlap.inertialAxisAlignment\ import InertialAxisAlignmente script is fairly short, a bit over two pages, because it makes use of classes that have been developed in earlier sections of this book: Shell, AxesForSSEs, and Overlapper. Instantiation of an InertialAxisAlignment object involves the following parameters:KEDFVGHQVLRITAADEAEVQTVKELEDLEHLQLDFWRGPGQPGSPIDVRVPFPSLQAVKVFLEAHGIRYRIMIEDVQSLLDEEQE...INRMDYVEINIDHKFHRHLIGKSGANINRIKDQYKVSVRIPPDSEKSNLIRIEGDPQGVQQAKRELLELASFIGURE 5.10 Correspondence of residues in the structural alignment of 1PYT and 1VIH.
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 225 protP: the Chimera molecule object (usually a protein chain) dening protein P.protQ: the Chimera molecule object (usually a protein chain) dening protein Q.matchThreshold: when comparing two quadrilaterals, we ignore the match if potentially overlapped sides dier in length by an amount greater that this threshold (default value is 5.0).atomDistThreshold: two alpha carbon atoms are considered to be close enough to contribute to the QV calculation (Equation 5.55) if they are closer than this threshold (default is 3.0).inertialAxisTolerance: this value is used by the AxesForSSEs class and is used to decide whether an SSE should be subdivided to get a better t between axes and SSE alpha carbon atoms (default value is 3.5).axisMinLength: this threshold determines the minimum axis length for an SSE (default value is 3).printingClosestPairs: if set to True, you will get a list of closest pairs printed in the Python shell window (default value is False).printProgressiveQ: if set to True, you will get a three-column table printed in the Python shell window. e rst column is the number of alpha carbon pairs in alignment, whereas the second and third columns contain the corresponding RMSD and QV values (default value is False).is initialization function for the InertialAxisAlignment class starts by generating a set of inertial axes for each of the protein molecule objects. By using four nested loops, it considers all possible matches of quadrilaterals in P with quadrilaterals in Q. As described earlier, ltering strategies are used to eliminate incompatible quadrilateral pairs from further consideration. When compatible quadrilaterals are found, the Overlapper class is used to perform a structural alignment using the coordinates of the alpha atoms in the quadrilaterals to dene the neces-sary translation and rotation transformations. For each such overlap, the script assesses the success of the overlap by evaluating the extent to which alpha carbon atoms in P are brought into close proximity with alpha carbon atoms of Q. e overlap with the highest QV evaluation is used


===== [57/99] chapter-57.html =====

226 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques to dene the best structural alignment. One additional overlap operation isperformed, this time based on all the alpha carbon atoms that form close pairs.Despite the avoidance of any prior sequence alignment, the algorithm provides a very reasonable structural alignment and works fairly quickly when the number of SSEs is low. e algorithm can take considerably lon-ger when, for example, P and Q are both beta barrels comprising many structurally similar beta strands. In this case, there is a signicant com-binatorial increase in the number of quadrilaterals to be compared and the execution time may increase to several minutes. On the other hand, one might argue that a beta barrel is obviously similar to another beta barrel with the same number of strands and a structural alignment need not be applied to verify this. e value of the algorithm is mainly for the demonstration of similar structure that is not immediately obvious, and a sequence analysis does not provide a clear correspondence when trying to derive alpha carbon pairings. ere is also the possibility that the script can be used as a starting point for other algorithms dealing with struc-tural alignment, for example, loosening our restriction on the avoidance of sequence information and prioritizing the overlap of SSEs that have some reasonable level of sequence similarity. Testing of this class can be found in Script 5_09 InertialAxisAlignmentWithTubes.py on the book’s website.5.13 EXERCISESe following exercises will make use of the new classes presented in this chapter: 1. Using the Overlapper class to superimpose two ligandse PDB contains structure les for human oxyhemoglobin (1HHO) and carbonmonoxy hemoglobin (1LJW). For both proteins, use chain A only (delete chain B). In this exercise, you are to use the Overlapper class to do translation and rotation operations that will overlap the heme rings of the two proteins. Use the four nitrogenatoms of the heme ring to get four atom pairings that will denetheoverlap. Now we can compare the structural overlap for other atoms in the heme binding site. In particular, how much over-lap do we see for the NE2 atoms of the proximal and distal histidine residues? Refer to Figure 1.25 for a review of these histidine residues. Print out the following values:
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 227 a. e RMSD value for the overlapped nitrogen atoms b. Consider the proximal histidine at position 87. What is the dis-tance between the NE2 atom in this residue in 1HHO and the NE2 atom in this residue in 1LIW? c. Repeat the calculation in part (b) but use the distal histidine at position 58. 2. Using the Overlapper class to superimpose secondary structures in two proteinsThis exercise will use the following PDB files: 1HHP is one chain of HIV protease without a ligand, and 1EBY is HIV pro-tease in complex with the BEA369 inhibitor. The inhibitor has the residue type “BEB.” When the protease binds to the inhibitor, there is a shift of the “flaps,” which are brought down toward the binding cavity of the protease. The goal of this exercise is to get a visualization and measurement of the conformational changes seen in the flaps when the inhibitor is taken in by the protease. To get an accurate appraisal of flap movement, you are to overlap the two proteins by using atom pairs that come from secondary structures that are reasonably distant from the binding site, for example, the beta strands spanning positions 62 to 73 inclusive and the helices spanning positions 87 to 93 inclusive. The resi-due at position 49 is a glycine that is near the furthest extent of the flap structure. After the overlap is accomplished, your script should measure the distance traversed by the alpha carbon of GLY 49 when inhibitor binding takes place. Figure5.11 shows the expected display. 3. Overlap to show the conformational change of helices in a mechano-sensitive channelReview Exercise 8 of Chapter 4. For this exercise, we want to per-form an overlap that exhibits the conformational change of heli-ces within the mechanosensitive channel from Escherichia coli. As before, we will use 2VV5 (open conformation) and 2OAU (closed conformation). You should go through the following steps: a. Fetch the two PDB les. b. Following the same procedure as in Chapter 4, Exercise 8, put in a main axis and a disk as visual components. is is done with 
228 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques respect to the protein 2VV5. e disk will represent the bottom of the membrane. c. For clarity, eliminate all chains except for the A chains. d. Generate an Overlapper object that is instantiated for the pro-tein 2OAU. e. Build a list of alpha carbon pairs from residues at positions 183 to 278 inclusive. ese positions avoid the helices that are subject to the conformational change. f. Perform the overlap by moving 2OAU to superimpose over 2VV5. g. To provide a visual aid to assess the conformational change put helix tubes into all the helices.e nal display should look like the scene in Figure 5.12. In this gure, the closed conformation is shown in light gray and the open conformation is shown as dark gray. 4. C-loop movement in the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR)Motivation: nAChRs are ligand-gated ion channels [GC01] that can be found embedded in the postsynaptic membrane of a neuro-muscular junction. ey are drug targets for several neurological FIGURE 5.11 Overlap showing ap change in HIV protease.
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 229 disorders including myasthenia gravis.* nAChRs can also be found in the postsynaptic membranes of neural synapses.Architecture of the nicotinic receptor: To get an approximation of the structure of a nAChR, you can use Chimera to fetch 2BG9 (illus-trated in Figure 5.13). is is a rened model that is based on electron microscopy. It gives us a reasonable representation of the membrane protein: you can see 5 helices that protrude into the cytosolic environ-ment, and above that there is a group of 20 helices that are situated within the membrane. e part of the structure above this (mostly, beta strands and coils) rises from the membrane to protrude into the synapse. Since the receptor is a membrane protein, we do not yet have a highly accurate representation of its structure as would be available from an x-ray analysis. However, it has been discovered that certain snails have acetylcholine receptors that oat freely within their synap-tic junctions. ese nicotinic acetylcholine binding proteins (nACh-BPs) are structurally similar to the synaptic portion of nAChRs. Such a structure is shown in Figure 5.14. ese proteins can be crystallized and subjected to x-ray analysis. As evidenced by les in the PDB, they * http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Myasthenia_gravis.FIGURE 5.12 Overlap to show changes in helices of a mechanosensitive channel.
230 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques FIGURE 5.13 Side view of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor.FIGURE 5.14 Side view of the nicotinic acetylcholine binding protein.


===== [58/99] chapter-58.html =====

Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 231 have been extensively cocrystallized with a variety of ligands. Although it might seem strange that research on human nicotinic receptors can start with the investigation of proteins from a snail, the structure has been highly conserved over eons of time and it has been estimated that the receptor has been in life forms for at least 1,000,000,000 years.From Figures 5.15 and 5.16, it is clear that the structure has a pentameric organization. In these gures, each of the ve chains has been given a slightly dierent shade of color to help distinguish the various chains. Figure 5.16 is also a top view, and it shows ve nico-tine molecules (in sphere representation) held within the ve binding sites. Note the slight change in conformation due to the presence of the ligands. Each binding site is actually a crevice that is formed when one chain partially overlaps the adjacent chain, as seen in the side view of Figure 5.17.In our computational analysis, it will be convenient to deal with only one binding site. In each of the data les used in this exercise, all chains have been removed except for two adjacent chains that sur-round a single binding site. In Figure 5.17, we are looking at such a binding site from a perspective that is the same as that of Figure 5.14.FIGURE 5.15 Nicotinic acetylcholine binding protein in the apo state.
232 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques FIGURE 5.16 Nicotinic acetylcholine binding protein with nicotine ligands.FIGURE 5.17 (See color insert.) e nicotinic acetylcholine binding protein binding site.
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 233 To proceed with our discussion, some terminology has to be intro-duced: as mentioned earlier, the binding site is located between two subunits, each one being a chain of the protein. e chain that is some-what in front of the binding site is called the principal component of the binding site. In Figure 5.17, the principal component is colored cornower blue and a short segment of it is colored green. e green-colored substructure is called the C-loop of the principal component. e movement of the C-loop during ligand binding has been studied with considerable interest since it has been hypothesized that this shi in the C-loop leads to an allosteric change in the conformation of the full receptor (as seen in Figure5.13) in support of its functionality as a gated ion channel. If you carefully observe the C-loop, you will see that it is a beta strand that ends near the bottom of Figure 5.17. For the nAChBP, this is the usual termination of the chain. In the nAChR protein, this chain continues down into the membrane as a helix. It is believed that when the C-loop is pulled down by a ligand it produces a twisting motion in this helix and this causes the pore to open [CW06].e other side of the binding site is called the complementary component, and it is colored tan in Figure 5.17. We now discuss important residues in the binding site.e following les in PDB format have been provided for this exercise:File Name Name of Ligand Primary Citation for the Original PDB File:2Y7Y_EA.pdb Apo state (no ligand) [UA09]2BYQ_AE.pdb Epibatidine [HS05]2BYR_AE.pdb Methyllycaconitine [HS05]2BYS_AE.pdb Lobeline [HS05]2PGZ_AB.pdb Cocaine [HT07]2WNC_AE.pdb Tropisetron [HS09]3C79_AE.pdb Imidacloprid [TH08]3PMZ_ED.pdb D-tubocurarine (curare) [TH10]e ligands fall into various categories: drugs (lobeline, cocaine, and tropisetron), insecticides (imidacloprid), and toxins 
234 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques (methyllycaconitine, epibatidine, and D-tubocurarine). All ligand names can be found in Wikipedia if you wish to get more infor-mation, for example, epibatidine comes from the endangered Ecuadorian frog Epipedobates tricolor and D-tubocurarine (used by South American indigenous people to make poisoned arrows) comes from the bark of Chondrodendron tomentosum. All data les are for the nAChBPs found in the synapses of Aplysia californica, a marine sea slug. Because it has only a few thousand large, easily identied neurons, it is oen used for research in neurobiological experiments.If you access the PDBsum (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pdbsum/) entries for each protein, you can inspect the ligPlot diagram for each of the ligands. Using this information, we can construct a list of the residues that interact with the ligand in the binding site. Doing this produces the following list of all residues that interact with these ligands:holoPrincipalResidues_L = [ "THR 91", "TYR 93", "SER 94", "VAL 108", "LYS 143", "PHE 144", "GLY 145", "SER 146", "TRP 147", "VAL 148", "TYR 149", "GLN 186", "TYR 188", "SER 189", "CYS 190", "CYS 191", "TYR 195", "ASP 197"]holoComplementResidues_L = [ "THR 36", "GLN 38", "TYR 55", "GLN 57", "ARG 79", "VAL 108", "MET 116", "ILE 118", "ASP 164", "SER 166", "SER 167"]Notice that the residues appear in two categories. e rst batch appears in the principal component, and the second batch appears in the complementary component. ese position numbers are valid for all the PDB les corresponding to proteins with ligands (holo-state proteins). Unfortunately, the le for the apo-state protein (2Y7Y_EA.pdb) has the positions shied somewhat, and so the prin-cipal and complementary residues are as follows:apo_PrincipalResidues_L = [ "THR 89", "TYR 91", "SER 92", "VAL 106", "LYS 141", "PHE 142", "GLY 143", "SER 144", "TRP 145", "VAL 146", "TYR 147", "GLN 184", "TYR 186", "SER 187", 
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 235 "CYS 188", "CYS 189", "TYR 193", "ASP 195"]apo_ComplementResidues_L = [ "THR 34", "GLN 36", "TYR53", "GLN 55", "ARG77", "VAL 106","MET114", "ILE 116","ASP 162", "SER 164","SER 165"](Feel free to copy these lists into your script … )Using the sux on the PDB le names: the data les have been extracted from PDB les with the full pentameric structure of each nAChBP, as in Figure 5.15. Unfortunately, (again) research-ers have not used a consistent approach for the labeling of the chains in the pentameric structure. Looking at the structure from a top view, some researchers have labeled the chains A, B, C, D, and E in a clockwise fashion, whereas others have done this in a counterclockwise fashion. is can cause confusion when consid-ering the principal and complementary chains for a binding site. Furthermore, some les do not have ligands in each of the ve pos-sible binding sites.To avoid the work of inspecting each and every data le, you can instead use the following rules: the rst letter of the sux species the chain identication of the chain acting as the principal com-ponent, whereas the second letter species the chain identica-tion of the chain acting as the complementary component. So, for example, when your program works with the 2PGZ_AB.pdb le, chain A is the principal component and chain B is the complemen-tary component. ese chains will dene the single binding site that, in this case, holds a molecule of cocaine (the residue type is “COC”). Note that any residue (consider, e.g., THR 91) will appear in both chains since all chains have the same primary sequence. However, for this particular binding site we only pay attention to a THR 91 residue if it is in the principal component (as specied in our holoPrincipalResidues_L list seen earlier). So, for this le we would use the THR 91 residue in chain A and ignore the THR 91 residue in chain B. Note that each chain plays two roles. For example, the chain acting as the complementary subunit for a binding site will also act as the principal subunit for the next binding site.


===== [59/99] chapter-59.html =====

236 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques We can nally state the requirements of the exercise: write a script that reads in the le 2Y7Y_EA.pdb (apo state) and then works through the following list:pdbFiles_L = [("2BYR_AE", "methyllycaconitine"), ("3PMZ_ED", "d-tubocurarine"), ("2WNC_AE", "tropisetron"), ("3C79_AE", "imidacloprid"), ("2PGZ_AB", "cocaine"), ("2BYQ_AE", "epibatidine"), ("2BYS_AE", "lobeline")]For each of these proteins, your script should print the name of the ligand in the Python shell window and then show the apo-state pro-tein overlapped with the holo-state protein. e alpha carbon atoms in the residues of the residue lists should dene the overlap trans-formations, for example, the alpha carbon of THR 91 in the princi-pal component of the holoprotein and the alpha carbon of THR 89 in the principal component of 2Y7Y_EA acting as one of the pairs that species the overlap. In other words, the residue lists given in the previous pages are really dening an alignment of residues, one set of residues in 2Y7Y_EA and the other in the holo-state protein. Figure 5.18 shows the results for the overlap between 2PGZ_AB and the apo-state protein 2Y7Y_EA.Aer the overlap is done, we can make the holoprotein disappear by executing a statement such asrunCommand("sel #" + str(modelNumber) + "; ~display sel; ~ribbon sel; ~sel")In this statement, modelNumber identies the model number asso-ciated with the Chimera molecular object when you open the le. Since you are fetching 2Y7Y rst, it will have model number 0 and then all subsequent holoproteins will have model numbers 1, 2, …, 7. You can allow the user to initiate the overlap with the next holopro-tein by asking for user response, for example,raw_input ("Hit Enter to continue.")Note that aer all the proteins in the list are brought into overlap, they can be selectively brought back into the scene by executing a statement such as
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 237 runCommand("sel #" + str(modelNumber) + "; ~display sel; ribbon sel; ~sel")Aer this is done, the script can be modied to do some calculations on the C-loop. In Figure 5.18, note how the C-loop has been bent toward the cocaine molecule due to the binding of the ligand. For this part of the exercise, we want to measure this shi by calculat-ing the average displacement of all the alpha carbon atoms in the residues of the C-loop. For a holo-state protein, we will dene the C-loop to be all the residues between TYR 188 and ILE 196 (both of these residues also included). For the apo-state protein, we will dene the C-loop to be all the residues between TYR 186 and ILE 194 (both of these residues also included). Be sure you understand what is meant by displacement. It is the shi in position of the atom due to the binding of the ligand. Here is an example: aer we have gener-ated the overlapped versions of the two proteins, we can calculate the displacement of the rst alpha carbon in the C-loop by measuring the distance between the alpha carbon of TYR 186 in the principal component of the apoprotein and the alpha carbon of TYR 188 in the principal component of the holoprotein.FIGURE 5.18 (See color insert.) Overlapping the binding sites of 2Y7Y (white) and 2PGZ (magenta).
238 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques Your script should print a table with two columns: the rst col-umn will be a list containing the names of the ligands, and the sec-ond column will be a list of the corresponding average displacements of the alpha carbon atoms in the C-loop. 5. Testing the SequencesLocalAlignment classUse the SequencesLocalAlignment class to generate a local sequence alignment of two proteins (linear gap model). e script should generate a list of pairs of residues that are in the alignment. You can avoid the mention of those residues that are not paired with any residue from the other protein. In other words, you can ignore the specication of gap locations in the alignment. Test the script using 1MBN and 1JEB. You should also test on 3CS9 and 2HYY, noting that residues in the sequence but missing structural coordinates (3CS9: GLY 224.A to TYR 232.A and GLU 275.A to MET 278.A; 2HYY: VAL 228.A to LYS 234.A, GLU 275.A, and GLU 499.A to SER 599.A) are skipped because they are of no value to the structural alignment. 6. Sequence and structural similarity:Write a script that imports the userSpecification Of Chains function from the usefulFunctions module. is function should be used to bring in n user-specied chains. e rst chain will be a target structure, and the remaining n − 1 “query” chains are to be overlapped with the target chain. e SequencesLocalAlignment class should be used to obtain a local sequence alignment between the target and each of the n− 1 query chains. Print out the maximum score value from each dynamic programming score matrix to provide a comparative measure of similarity between the target protein and a query protein. Each sequence alignment should be used to generate alpha carbon pairings that determine the overlap operation. When all the overlaps have been accomplished, the script should repeatedly use a runCommand statement such asrunCommand("sel #" + str(prot].id) + "; ~display sel; ~ribbon sel; ~sel")to hide all the query chains. Aer this, userunCommand("sel #" + str(prot.id) + "; ~display sel; ribbon sel; ~sel")
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 239 to selectively bring single query chains back into the display or sim-ply provide a user interaction that will cycle through all the query chains for each depression of the “Enter” key.To test the script, consider the following questions: a. Is the myoglobin of pig more similar to that of horse or human? Work with the following protein sequences: i. 1PMB: porcine myoglobin (use chain A) ii. 1WLA: equine myoglobin iii. 2MM1: human myoglobin In this case, chain A of 1PMB will act as the target, whereas 1WLA and 2MM1 act as the query proteins. e compari-son should address both sequence similarity and structural similarity. b. Another interesting comparison of structural similarity is to compare the human prion protein with the prion protein from various other mammals (mouse, cattle, and sheep): i. 1QM2: H. sapiens ii. 1AG2: Mus musculus iii. 1DX0: B. taurus iv. 1UW3: Ovis aries c. Consider the following two proteins: i. Chain B of 1VRU: HIV-1 reverse transcriptase ii. Chain B of 1QAI: Moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptaseEach protein functions as a reverse transcriptase, but the proteins are from dierent retroviruses. Perform a pairwise sequence local alignment for these proteins. Is there any evi-dence of signicant sequence similarity? What is the percent identity for the longest overlap? Is it in the twilight zone as dened by Rost (see [Ro99])? Use a local sequence alignment to derive alpha carbon pairings that determine a structural overlap.
240 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques 7. Visualizing domain movementsRead the papers by Brylinski and Skolnick [BS08] and Browner and others [BF92]. ese papers deal with proteins that undergo a signicant change in conformation when going from the apo to the holo form. In many cases, there is signicant hinge bending, shear motion, or even partial unfolding on ligand binding. is is oen apparent as a change in the relative position of one domain with respect to another in the protein. e goal of this exercise will be to add scenographic elements to the Chimera display to show the extent of this domain movement. e script should go through the following steps: a. Execute the following import statements:from StructBio. LeastSquares.inertialAxes\ import InertialAxesfrom StructBio. Scenographics.ellipsoid\ import Ellipsoidfrom StructBio. Scenographics.solids\ import Solidsfrom StructBio. StructureOverlap.overlapper\ import Overlapper b. Fetch both the holo and apo forms of the protein. c. For each protein, use Table 1 of [BS08] (pages 368 and 369) to determine which chain to use and the positions of residues that dene each domain. d. Use the Overlapper class to move the apoprotein so that there is an overlap of domain 1 in the apoprotein with domain 1 in the holoprotein. e. Work with the InertialAxes class to get inertial axes for the following sets of atoms: i. Domain 1 in the apo form combined with domain 1 in the holo form. ii. Domain 2 in the apo form. iii. Domain 2 in the holo form. f. Use spindles from the Solids class to display a visualization of the inertial axes.


===== [60/99] chapter-60.html =====

Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 241 g. To accomplish the next step, use the min_maxProjection function in the InertialAxes class to get the lengths of all the axes. h. Use the Ellipsoid class to place three ellipsoids into the dis-play. ere should be an ellipsoid for each set of inertial axes, as described in step e. Each ellipsoid should have its own color. Work with the displayMesh function to display the ellipsoi-dal mesh in the Chimera window.You should end up with a display that is similar to that shown in Figure5.19. 8. Visualizing domain movementsBuild a graphical user interface (GUI) for the application described in Exercise 7. As before, the user will specify the apo- and holo-proteins along with designations for the chains and domains. e interface should allow the user to envelop the ellipsoids with a transparent surface or mesh or both (color to be specied as well). See Figure5.20 for an example of such an interface. Note the last frame and the reporting of domain 2 movement by calculating FIGURE 5.19 (See color insert.) Domain movement for guanylate kinase (1EX6B and 1EX7A).
242 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques RMSD and domain bending. is interface makes all the controls simultaneously visible and so it is easy to build such a GUI, but it is rather demanding for screen space. A more sophisticated version can be constructed to use tabs or some strategy that incorporates modal dialogs that would be instantiated from this modeless dialog.REFERENCES[AV07] A. Abyzov and V. A. Ilyin. A comprehensive analysis of non- sequential alignments between all protein structures. BMC Structural Biology, 7 (2007),78.[Be54] R. Bellman. e theory of dynamic programming. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 60 (1954), 503–516.[BO96] N. P. Brown, C. A. Orengo, and W. R. Taylor. A protein structure compari-son methodology. Computers and Chemistry, 20 (1996), 359–380.[BF92] M. F. Browner, E. B. Fauman, and R. J. Fletterick. Tracking conformational states in allosteric transitions of phosphorylase. Biochemistry, 31 (1992), 11297–11304.[BS08] M. Brylinski and J. Skolnick. What is the relationship between the global structures of apo and holo proteins? Proteins, 70 (2008), 363–377.[CW06] X. Cheng, H. Wang, B. Grant, S. M. Sine, and J. A. McCammon. Targeted molecular dynamics study of C-loop closure and channel gating in nicotinic receptors. PLOS Computational Biology, 2 (2006), 1173–1184.FIGURE 5.20 Suggested modeless dialog for domain movement visualization.
Structure Overlap and Alignment ◾ 243 [Do81] R. F. Doolittle. Similar amino acid sequences: chance or common ances-try? Science, 214 (1981), 149–159.[DB07] J. Dundas, T. Binkowski, B. DasGupta and J. Liang. Topology independent protein structural alignment. BMC Bioinformatics, 8 (2007), 388. See also: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 4645 (2007), 171–182.[DE98] R. Durbin, S. Eddy, A. Krogh, and G. Mitchison. Biological sequence analy-sis, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1998.[GM96] J.-F. Gibrat, T. Madej, and S. H. Bryant. Surprising similarities in structure comparison. Current Opinion in Structural Biology, 6 (1996), 377–385.[GC01] T. Grutter and J.-P. Changeux. Nicotinic receptors in wonderland. Trends in biochemical sciences, 26 (2001), 459–463.[HS05] S. B. Hansen, G. Sulzenbacher, T. Huxford, P. Marchot, P. Taylor, and Y.Bourne. Structures of Aplysia AChBP complexes with nicotinic agonists and antagonists reveal distinctive binding interfaces and conformations. EMBO Journal, 24 (2005), 3635–3646.[HT07] S. B. Hansen and P. Taylor. Galanthamine and non-competitive inhibitor binding to ACh-binding protein: evidence for a binding site on non-alpha-subunit interfaces of heteromeric neuronal nicotinic receptors. Journal of Molecular Biology, 369 (2007), 895–901.[HH92] S. Heniko and J. Heniko. Amino acid substitution matrices from pro-tein blocks. Proceedings of National Academy of Science USA, 89 (1992), 10915–10919.[HS09] R. E. Hibbs, G. Sulzenbacher, J. Shi, T. T. Talley, S. Conrod, W. R. Kem, P.Taylor, P. Marchot, and Y. Bourne. Structural determinants for interac-tion of partial agonists with acetylcholine binding protein and neuro-nal alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. EMBO Journal, 28 (2009), 3040–3051.[HS93] L. Holm and C. Sander. Protein structure comparison by alignment of dis-tance matrices. Journal of Molecular Biology, 233 (1993), 123–138.[JL01] J. Jung and B. Lee. Circularly permuted proteins in the protein structure database. Protein Science, 10 (2001), 1881–1886.[KH04] E. Krissinel and K. Henrick. Secondary-structure matching (SSM), a new tool for fast protein structure alignment in three dimensions. Acta Crystallographica, D60 (2004), 2256–2268.[MG95] T. Madej, J. F. Gibrat, and S. H. Bryant. reading a database of protein cores. Proteins, 23, (1995), 356–369.[MO78] S. Meier and S. Özbek. A biological cosmos of parallel universes: does protein structural plasticity facilitate evolution? BioEssays, 29 (2007), 1095–1104.[NW70] S. B. Needleman and C. D. Wunsch. A general method applicable to the search for similarities in the amino acid sequence of two proteins. Journal of Molecular Biology, 48 (1970), 443–453.[OJ03] C. A. Orengo, D. T. Jones, and J. M. ornton. Bioinformatics: genes, pro-teins and computers, BIOS Scientic Publishers, Oxford, UK, 2003.[Ro99] B. Rost. Twilight zone of protein sequence alignments. Protein Engineering, 12 (1999), 85–94.
244 ◾ Computational and Visualization Techniques [RB92] R. B. Russell and G. J. Barton. Multiple protein sequence alignment from tertiary structure comparison: assignment of global and residue condence levels. Proteins, 14 (1992), 309–323.[SB06] M. Sagermann, W. A. Baase, and B. W. Matthews. Sequential reorganiza-tion of β-sheet topology by insertion of a single strand. Protein Science, 15 (2006), 1085–1092.[SB97] A. P. Singh and D. L. Brutlag. Hierarchical protein structure superposi-tion using both secondary structure and atomic representations. Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology ISMB-97, Halkidiki, Greece, (1997), 284–293.[SK04] M. L. Sierk and G. J. Kleywegt. Déjà vu all over again: nding and analyz-ing protein structure similarities. Structure, 12 (2004), 2103–2111.[SB98] I. N. Shindyalov, and P. E. Bourne. Protein structure alignment by incremen-tal combinatorial extension (CE) of the optimal path. Protein Engineering, 11 (1998), 739–747.[SW81] T. F. Smith and M. S. Waterman. Identication of common molecular subsequences. Journal of Molecular Biology, 147 (1981), 195–197.[TH08] T. T. Talley, M. Harel, R. E. Hibbs, Z. Radic, M. Tomizawa, J. E. Casida, and P. Taylor. Atomic interactions of neonicotinoid agonists with AChBP: molecular recognition of the distinctive electronegative pharmacophore. Proceedings of National Academy of Science USA, 105 (2008), 7606–7611.[TH10] T. T. Talley, M. Harel, J. G. Yamauchi, Z. Radic, S. Hansen, T. Huxford, and P. W. Taylor. e curare alkaloids: analyzing the poses of complexes with the acetylcholine binding protein in relation to structure and binding energies. To appear.[TO89] W. R. Taylor and C. A. Orengo. Protein structure alignment. Journal of Molecular Biology, 208 (1989), 1–22.[UA09] C. Ulens, A. Akdemir, A. Jongejan, R. Van Elk, S. Bertrand, A. Perrakis, R. Leurs, A. B. Smit, T. K. Sixma, D. Bertrand, and I. J. De Esch. Use of ace-tylcholine binding protein in the search for novel alpha7 nicotinic receptor ligands. In silico docking, pharmacological screening, and x-ray analysis. Journal of Medical Chemistry, 52 (2009), 2372–2383.[VB96] I. R. Vetter, W. A. Baase, D. W. Heinz, J. P. Xiong, S. Snow, and B.W.Matthews. Protein structural plasticity exemplied by insertion and deletion mutants in T4 lysozyme. Protein Science, 5 (1996), 2399–2415.[ZB07] M. Zvelebil and J. Baum. Understanding Bioinformatics. Garland Science, Oxford, UK, 2007.


===== [61/99] chapter-61.html =====

245Chapter 6Potential Energy Functions6.1 MOTIVATIONe central problem of molecular dynamics is to determine the relative motion of all atoms in a set of molecules. It is essentially the n-body prob-lem that Newton pondered when dealing with a collection of planetary bodies but it is much more formidable in its complexity. is extra com-plexity is caused by the following issues: 1. Complexity in modeling forces: Although the classical mechanics model can be used to describe both planetary motion and molecular motion, the latter involves a much more complicated description of the forces between two bodies. Moreover, forces between two atoms can be both attractive and repulsive (described by Equation 6.10). 2. Number of interacting bodies: e system contains not just a few interact-ing bodies but perhaps hundreds or even thousands of bodies (atoms). 3. Proximity of interacting bodies: For a planetary system, one can derive a very reasonable approximation by modeling the motion of a planet using a two-body system, namely the planet and the sun with its very large gravitational eect. e gravitational inuence of other planets can be neglected. For a biological system, several atoms may be in close proximity and consequently it is not as easy to eliminate their inuence in the calculations.
246 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticse problem may be stated as follows: How can we best represent the forces that act on an atom within a molecular ensemble?6.1.1 Empirical Observationsere are many observables that can be extracted from a molecular sys-tem. is includes the empirical assessments of the various force con-stants that are used in the force-eld formulas described in Section 6.1.2. As noted in [M98], data may be collected from the gas phase using electron diraction, microwave, infrared, and Raman techniques to name just a few. We can also use the results of x-ray analysis. In the case of a ligand bound to a protein, an x-ray analysis of the cocrystal-lized molecules can be used to derive the three-dimensional coordinates of all atoms in the molecules. In particular, we can determine the dis-tance between the various atoms and these distances can be used in the mathematical model that calculates the potential energy of the atomic ensemble.6.1.2 Mathematical ModelingOur most accurate description of an atomic ensemble is via quantum mechanics but this does not facilitate a tractable computational strategy. Instead, our molecular mechanical analysis will consider the atoms to be a collection of masses interacting with each other through various forces. In fact, we will assume that the total energy of the system is minimized when the atoms assume a stable position that is characterized by the mini-mization of =++++totalbondangle dihedral vdwcoulombEEEE EE (6.1)Other formulas may be developed using more or fewer terms, depend-ing on the needs of the application. As we will see later, there are several useful models that can be used in the modeling of the energy function.In general, the terms on the right-hand side of the equation fall into two categories: 1. Bonded atoms: ese are energy terms related to atoms that share a covalent bond. 2. Nonbonded atoms: ese are energy terms related to atoms that are not bonded but are close enough to interact.
Potential Energy Functions ◾ 247 6.1.2.1 Energy Terms for Bonded AtomsEbond is composed of all the various bond-stretch terms. Each is described by a simple quadratic function: ()−2Krrb (6.2)where r is the distance between two bonded atoms. is formula is derived from Hooke’s law and it models the potential energy as if the two bonded atoms were connected by a spring. If the bond is not strained it will have an equilibrium length of r. If the bond is stretched or compressed, the deviation from r measured as −rr will increase the potential energy in a quadratic manner. e bond stretch force constant Kb has been determined by empiri-cal observations and it will take on various values depending on the atom types specied for the two atoms that are involved. For example, as reported by [CC95],* =r 1.507 Å and Kb = 317 kcal/(mol Å2) when the bond is C–C, whereas =1.273r Å and Kb = 570 kcal/(mol Å2) when the bond is C=N.Because Ebond will be the sum of all such quadratic contributions, we can write ∑()=−()∈bond2,EKrrijbijijij B (6.3)where:Kijb is the bond stretch force constant that would be used when atom (i) is bonded to atom (j)rij is the distance between atom (i) and atom (j)rij is the distance between atom (i) and atom (j) at equilibriumB is the set of pairs: ij atom ij{}() ()()atom,| is bonded toEangle is the sum of all bond angle bending terms and each is modeled as a quadratic spring function with an angle-bending force constant Ka: )(θ−θ2Ka (6.4)where θ is the bond angle formed by three atoms and θ the value of the unstrained or equilibrium angle. Like Kb, the value of the force constant will depend on the type of atoms involved. For example, again reported by [CC95], θ= =°112.41.96radian with Ka = 63 kcal/(mol radian2) when the * Table 14 of this article presents well over 200 of the many parameters that can be used in this calculation.
248 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsangle is formed by C–C–C, while θ= =121.92.13radian° and Ka = 50 kcal/(mol radian2) when the angle is formed by C–N–C.Since Eangle is the sum of all such quadratic contributions, we can write ∑()=θ−θ()∈angle2,,EKijkaijkijkijkA (6.5)where:Kijka is the force constant used for the bond angle formed when atom (i) and atom (k) are bonded to atom (j)ijkθ is the bond angle made when atom (i) and atom (k) are bonded to atom (j)ijkθ is the bond angle made when θijk is at equilibriumA is the set of triplets: {}))(()()(atom iatomk atom jijk,, |and arebondedtoEdihedral involves the contributions made by the dihedral angle terms. is is a bit more complicated and is modeled as 21cosKnd()+φ−γ (6.6)where φ is the dihedral angle formed by a chain of four consecutive bonded atoms, n is the periodicity of the dihedral angle (see [CC95]), and γ is the phase oset. For example, Kd2=14.50kcal/mol, = 2n, and γ=°180 when the dihedral angle is formed by the four consecutive atoms X–C–CA–X, where X is any atom, C is a carbonyl sp2 carbon, and CA is an aromatic sp2 carbon. As before, we sum over all contributions: 21cosdihedral,,,EKnijkldijkl Dijkl ijkl ijkl∑()=+φ−γ()∈ (6.7)whereKijkld is the force constant used for the dihedral angle formed by the four consecutive atoms indexed by i, j, k, and lnijkl is the periodicity of this dihedral angleφijkl is the dihedral angle formed by the consecutive atoms indexed by i, j, k, and lγijkl is the phase oset for this dihedral angleD is the set of quadruplets that specify all the dihedral angles, namely, {}(),,,|,,,and arethe indicesoffourconsecutive bonded atomsijkl ijkl
Potential Energy Functions ◾ 249 6.1.2.2 Energy Terms for Nonbonded AtomsEvdw is due to the attractive/repulsive forces that are characterized as van der Waals interactions. e van der Waals interaction between two atoms is given by the 12-6 potential: −12 6ArBr (6.8)where r is the distance between the two atoms. We assume that the atoms are in dierent molecules or if they are in the same molecule, then they are separated by at least three bonds. From the formula, it is clear that for very small r, the r−12 term contributes a large increase in the potential energy but it has very little impact for larger values of r, where the poten-tial is negative but very close to zero. Values for constants A and B also depend on the atom types of the two interacting atoms. e derivation of their values is somewhat involved and we will omit these details that can be found in [CC95, Table 14 footnote]. Adding up all contributions we get vdw12 6EArBrijijijijijjF∑∑=−[]<∈ (6.9)where Aij and Bij are the Lennard–Jones 12-6 parameters (see [CC95]) for atom(i) interacting with atom(j) rij the distance between atom(i) and atom(j) F the full set of all indices for the atoms, and []<ij means that indexi is less than index j and also that atom(i) and atom(j) are either in sepa-rate molecules or if in the same molecule they are separated by at least threebonds.Ecoulomb is due to the electrostatic forces that exist between two charged atoms. As before, these nonbonded interactions are only calculated for atoms that are separated by at least three bonds. For two atoms indexed by i and j, this is characterized by the formula: =εKqqrcijij (6.10)where ε is the dielectric constant and variables qi and qj the atomic charges of the interacting atoms that are separated by a distance of rij. is formula can be derived from Coulomb’s law that expresses the electrostatic force as


===== [62/99] chapter-62.html =====

250 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics ∝2Fqqrijij (6.11)e force is positive (indicating repulsion) if the two atoms have the same charge, otherwise it is negative and produces an attractive interac-tion. e Kc constant is a conversion factor needed to obtain energies in units of kcal/mol. Using the electrostatic charge unit (esu) to dene a unit of charge as in [S02, p. 254], we can derive the value of the conversion factor as = 332Kc (kcal/mol)(Å/esu2). Partial charge values for various atoms in both amino acids and nucleotides are reported in [CC95] based on [CCB95]. For now, we will assume that ε=1. Other values of ε will be discussed near the end of Section 6.1.3. Adding up all contributions, we get ∑∑=ε[]<∈coulombEKqqrcijij ijijjF (6.12)whereKc is 332 (kcal/mol)(Å/esu2)qi, qj are the partial charges for atom (i) and atom (j), respectivelyrij is the distance between atom (i) and atom (j)εij is the dielectric constant for the atom (i) and atom (j) environment (assumed to be 1 for now)F is the full set of all indices for the atoms[]<ij means that index i is less than index j and also that atom (i) and atom (j) are either in separate molecules or if in the same molecule they are separated by at least three bonds6.1.2.3 Total Potential EnergyCombining all terms just dened into one grand total we get ∑∑∑∑∑∑∑()()()=++++=−+θ−θ++φ−γ+−+ε[][]() ()()∈∈∈<∈<∈21costotalbondangle dihedral vdwcoulomb,22..,,,12 6EEEE EEKr rKKnArBrKqqrijbij ijij BijkaijkijkijkAijkldijkl Dijkl ijkl ijklijijijijcijij ijijjFijjF (6.13)As mentioned earlier, this empirical energy calculation depends on many parameters and it is typical that the program performing 
Potential Energy Functions ◾ 251 the calculation will have rather extensive tables to provide values for θφγ,, ,, ,,,,,andKrKKnABijbijkaijkijkldijkl ijkl ijkl ij ijijk, all of which depend on the atom types assigned to the atoms involved. ere are several versions of these tables. e tables included in [CC95] can give the reader a general idea about the information that is required. ere are several parameter sets that are now available for various applications. ey have names such as AMBER, CHARMM, GROMOS, MMFF, and OPLS.6.1.3 Computational IssuesAlthough somewhat daunting, the empirical force eld just described would seem to be a rather straightforward calculation. e program would do all the appropriate table lookups, make the necessary substitu-tions, and do the indicated calculations. Unfortunately, there are some issues that complicate the situation: 1. Repetitive energy calculations: ere are various applications, such as molecular dynamics, for which it is necessary to repeatedly do this computation across several, perhaps billions of time steps. Each small change in the conformation or position of a molecule requires a new evaluation of the potential energy. 2. Many atoms in the molecule ensemble: A large number of atoms in a molecular ensemble will greatly increase computation time espe-cially for the double sums associated with Evdw and Ecoulomb. Note that if we do the computation as indicated, then the number of computa-tions for these terms increases as the square of the number of atoms in the system.Because of these issues, computational chemists have proposed several strategies designed to reduce the computational load. Before proceeding with a description of typical strategies, it should be noted that the given formula for Etotal is itself a simplied version of other more complicated formulas that strive for higher accuracy. For example, some “Class II force elds,” such as MMFF, use () () ()−+ −+ −234234KrrKrr Krrbbb (6.14)instead of ()−22Krrb with a similar enhancement for .2()θ−θKa It is also possible to replace 21cosKnd()+φ−γ with dK1cos1()−φ+KKdd1cos21cos32.23()()−φ+−φ
252 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsIn an eort to simplify Etotal even further, some research studies will assume that bond lengths and bond angles are constant. In these applica-tions, the change in potential energy will be due to changes in molecular positions or conformational changes in molecules that produce variations in dihedral angles. Consequently, the modied energy calculations will be due to Edihedral, Evdw, and Ecoulomb only.However, neglecting Ebond and Eangle will not signicantly reduce compu-tation time. Using the notation of asymptotic analysis, the number of bonds and the number of bond angles are both )(Θ n, where n is the number of atoms. e most important time savings are related to computational strat-egies that try to reduce the calculation times of Evdw and Ecoulomb since both are )(Θ2n. is is usually done by using a spherical cut-o strategy for Evdw and Ecoulomb. When the distance rij between two atoms exceeds a particular threshold, say 10 Å, then their interaction contribution to Evdw or Ecoulomb is considered to be zero. e approach works quite well for Evdw because the 12-6 Lennard–Jones potential approaches zero very rapidly and can be safely neglected when rij is over 9 or 10 Å. e handling of Ecoulomb requires more caution. To understand the computational trouble stemming from the Ecoulomb calculation, consider a particular atom A near the center of a large globular protein. For the sake of argument, we can consider the other atoms that interact with A to reside in concentric spherical shells of thick-ness 1 Å. Although the Coulomb potential falls o as the inverse of the distance, the average number of charged atoms per shell increases with the volume of the shell, a quantity that is proportional to r2. Consequently, even though the potential of each interacting atom decreases as you get farther from A, the number of these charges goes up. As noted in [SS92], the cumulative sum over the shells does not converge to a nal value in a monotonic manner. Instead, as the radius of the shells grows, the elec-trostatic contributions oscillate in sign. It should be stressed that even though the number of atoms in a shell increases, their net resultant is usu-ally reduced, on average, due to cancellation eects. Consider, for example, atom A situated between two atoms of same charge but on opposite sides within the same shell. With these issues in mind, the electrostatic poten-tial is typically regarded as a slowly decaying potential and the strategies for reducing computation time are at times somewhat controversial. So, it is not surprising to see the 1992 paper entitled “Cuto size does strongly inuence molecular dynamics results on solvated polypeptides” [SS92] fol-lowed by the 2005 paper entitled “Cuto size need not strongly inuence molecular dynamics results for solvated polypeptides” [BA05].
Potential Energy Functions ◾ 253 From a computational perspective, the value of the dielectric constant ε also requires more discussion. It is a dimensionless factor that has the value 1 when the interacting atoms are in a vacuum. When the interacting atoms are in a polarizable medium such as water, the Coulombic force is reduced because the intervening water molecules have a screening eect that weakens the electrostatic force between the two atoms. is reduction is usually modeled by increasing the value of ε to 80 when the solvent is water.* e value of 80 for the dielectric constant should be used when the space between the two charges is so large that it admits many water mol-ecules. As this space decreases, for example, in the simulation of a ligand binding to a cle in a protein, it is reasonable to expect that two charges would eventually have vacuum between them and so, at that time, 1.ε=But when and how should this change take place? Researchers typically adopt one of two methodologies for the modeling of electrostatic charge in a solvent: 1. Explicit solvent: e molecular ensemble explicitly includes all the water molecules. In this case we simply use ε=1 but the calculation must include all the atoms and the extra water molecules will lead to much longer computation times. 2. Implicit solvent: is approach is also referred to as continuum model-ing. e idea is to remove the water molecules, thus reducing the atom count, and this leads to a decrease in computation time. However, the dielectric eect of the water molecules is retained by replacing ε with a dielectric function (also called a screening function).As mentioned earlier, a coarse version of the dielectric function would be ε=80, but this is inappropriate for very small rij values. A more realistic screening function has a sigmoid shape. is approach has been used by Hingerty et al. [HR85] and the sigmoid function is given as 78 772.5122.52.52rreerr()()ε=−− (6.15)A plot of the sigmoid dielectric function is given in Figure 6.1.* Some research articles use 78 instead of 80.
254 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics6.2 SOME SIMPLE SCRIPTS TO DO ENERGY CALCULATIONSSection 6.1 makes it clear that energy calculations are complicated and time consuming. In particular, there are several issues that relate to the trade-os between execution time and accuracy of the computations. When a high level of accuracy is needed, one should consider the use of a force-eld program such as Amber [PC03] (http://ambermd.org/). Metaphorically, this is like “ying business class” and one should be pre-pared to pay license fees along with the time investment necessary to develop the expertise to properly use the Amber codes. If you can manage with a less accurate energy calculation, then there are other approaches that are both fast and simple. In the following subsections, we cover some strategies that have appeared in the research literature.6.2.1 Linear Repulsive Energy TermsIn some situations, it is suitable to use a steric pseudo-energy func-tion that is just a simple linear repulsive energy term. This approach is used by Canutescu et al. [CS03], in a research study that deals with prediction of protein side-chain conformations. The function can be used for atom pairs with one atom in a side chain and the other atom in the protein backbone or in a different side chain. The definition is as follows: ()()=−<≤≤<1057.273 100.82540.8254ErrRrRRrRRrijijij ijij (6.16)90807060504030201001357911 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29FIGURE 6.1 e dielectric function used by Hingerty et al.


===== [63/99] chapter-63.html =====

Potential Energy Functions ◾ 255 where r is the interatomic distance and Rij is the sum of the hard-sphere radii for atoms i and j. Typically, Cβ is treated as a backbone atom. e energy is capped at a value of 10.0 kcal/mole. ey used the following radii: carbon, 1.6 Å; oxygen, 1.3 Å; nitrogen, 1.3 Å; and sulfur, 1.7 Å. A more detailed set of radii are used in the related paper by Bower et al. [BC97] (see Table 5, p. 1278). As explained in Figure 8 of [BC97], this piecewise linear function is intended to be a rough approximation of the standard Lennard–Jones potential. In particular, it is intended for atom pairs where the atoms are separated by three or more bonds. Piecewise linear energy functions can be accessed viafrom StructBio.EnergyFunctions.LinearEnergyFunctions\ import atomPairEnergyfrom StructBio.EnergyFunctions.LinearEnergyFunctions\ import residuePairEnergy6.2.2 An Energy Function Based on the Lennard–Jones FormulaWe now discuss a force-eld calculation that incorporates a Lennard–Jones formula with parameters that are based on the research done by Cornell etal. [CC95]. It is a more accurate energy evaluation than that described in Section 6.2.1, but it is still somewhat incomplete because it ignores Ebond, Eangle, Edihedral, and Ecoulomb in Equation 6.1. Consequently, it would be inap-propriate for applications such as molecular dynamics simulations, but could be used for side-chain interaction energies (Chapter 7) when one wishes to have an energy function that is somewhat more sophisticated than mere collision detection (see [K05]). e LJ _ evaluation class can be accessed using:from StructBio.EnergyFunctions.LJ import LJ_evaluationA method within this class called atomPairEnergy(a,b) can be used to evaluate the Lennard–Jones energy for two atoms a and b.We now describe the computations done within the script for the atomPairEnergy function. Let us assume that we are evaluating Evdw dened in Equation 6.9 and we need to calculate the value of −12 6ArBrijijijij (6.17)for two atoms indexed by i and j. According to the footnotes for Table 14 in [CC95], the numerators are dened using
256 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics )(=ε12ARij ij ij (6.18)and )(=ε26BRij ij ij (6.19)where ε= εεij ij (6.20)and =+RRRij ij (6.21)e Ri value represents the van der Waals radius of atom i in Å and have been recorded in the data structure radiusMap _ D. e εi value represents the van der Waals well depth for atom i in kilocalorie per mole. ese values are stored in the epsMap_D data structure. Both sets of values were taken from the nal entries in Table 14 of [CC95]. Because the atom names used in [CC95] are somewhat dierent from the atom labels used by Chimera, it was necessary to dene a map that would convert the latter to the former. is is done by means of the dictionary elementNameMap _ D.6.2.3 Computing Energy Using Amber Parameters in ChimeraChimera allows the user to do an energy minimization for molecular structures. is can be invoked by using the menu item: Tools… Structure Editing… Minimize Structure. is will initiate a steepest descent minimiza-tion to eliminate steric clashes followed by a conjugate gradient minimiza-tion to reach a local energy minimum (not necessarily the global energy minimum).To evaluate the energy of a molecule, one can do a “zero-step minimi-zation.” is will calculate the initial energy of the system and will not alter the positions of any atoms in the structure. Minimization routines are provided by the Molecular Modeling Toolkit (MMTK) [H00], which is included with the Chimera download. e code uses Amber param-eters (http://ambermd.org/) for standard residues. For nonstandard resi-dues, the code uses Amber’s Antechamber module [WW06], which is also included with Chimera.
Potential Energy Functions ◾ 257 e function evaluateAmberEnergy can be found in the le Am berForceField.py (Chapter 6 scripts), which provides a simple example. It fetches a protein in Protein Data Bank (PDB) format and per-forms an energy calculation. e script is as follows:import chimerafrom MMMD import basedef evaluateAmberEnergy(molecules_L, excludedResidues = set()): def run(minimizer): minimizer.run() minimizer = base.Minimizer(molecules_L, nsteps = 0, cgsteps = 0, nogui = True, addhyd = True, callback = run, exclres = excludedResidues, cache = False, prep = True) return minimizer._mi.universe.energy()#====================================================# Mainline:pdbID = raw_input(“Type 4 character PDB ID: \n”)prot = chimera.openModels.open(pdbID, type=“PDB”)[0]energyAmber = evaluateAmberEnergy([prot])print energyAmberHere are some notes to clarify the parameter settings for the base.Minimizer call:• molecules _ L is a list of molecule objects. Note that the call to evaluateAmberEnergy uses [prot] and not simply prot.• e settings for both nsteps and cgsteps should be 0. Note that we set nsteps = 0 because we only want the initial energy evaluation.• nogui set to True will suppress the appearance of tool dialogs that might otherwise appear.• addhyd set to True will add hydrogen atoms to the molecules. is is necessary for an accurate assessment of the energy.• callback = run will run the minimizer as a nal step in the instantiation of the Minimizer object.• exclres = excludedResidues species a set of excluded residues. In the given script, the default value for this is an empty 
258 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsset, which would specify that no residues will be excluded from the energy calculation. It is established as an argument in the call to evaluateAmberEnergy in case the user wishes to exclude resi-dues from the energy evaluation.• cache = False will speed up the calculation because it prevents the caching of parameters such as partial charges. Since we are not allowing the calculations to progress over several steps of minimiza-tion, caching is not required.• prep = True will initiate a call to Dock Prep. is will delete water molecules, repair truncated side chains, add in the hydrogen atoms, and assign partial charges. For more details you may consult the Dock Prep documentation on the Chimera website: http://www .cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/docs/ContributedSoftware/dockprep/ dockprep.html.e energy calculation provided by evaluateAmberEnergy will bemuch more realistic than those provided by the two functions described in Sections 6.2.1 and 6.2.2. Evaluation is fairly fast but occa-sionally you may experience lengthy execution times, especially when the scene contains nonstandard residues (e.g., 1HIV). It should be noted that the order of hydrogen atom addition is dependent on the use of a Python dictionary (essentially a hash table) within Chimera and so the order of hydrogen atom placement is not completely determinis-tic. Consequently, you might run this script repeatedly and get slightly dierent results. For example, three successive runs, each applied to the protein 1CRN, gave energy evaluations of −3471.23, −3470.99, and −3467.21.6.3 EXERCISES6.3.1 Comparing Lennard–Jones and Piecewise Linear Energy FunctionsDoing this exercise will give you some practice in the implementation of a modeless dialog that contains a Tkinter canvas with a plot. Using matplotlib will give you more experience in the generation of plots. Recall that Section A.7 of Appendix A gives some guidelines for the embedding of a plot into a modeless dialog.
Potential Energy Functions ◾ 259 Consider the following table that gives estimates of radii for various atom types:Entries for the middle column are taken from Table 5 in [BC97]. e rightmost column has van der Waals radii taken from Table 14 in [CC95].Given two atom types, we can calculate Rij in Equation 6.16 as the sum of two radii taken from the middle column. We can then plot the piece-wise linear energy function E(r) dened by Equation 6.16. In a similar manner, we can use two radii taken from the last column to compute the Rij value dened by Equation 6.21 and subsequently plot the Lennard–Jones energy function )(=−12 6ErArBrij ij (6.22)which is simply Equation 6.17 with an atom separation distance of r. As noted in Section 6.2.2, the LJ _ evaluation class contains the diction-aries that can be used to calculate both Aij and Bij.e goal of this exercise is to write a script that displays a graphical user interface with two columns of radio buttons allowing a user to select two atom types. Aer both atom types are chosen, the dialog should display a plot of the two energy functions as shown in Figure 6.2.e plot should display the functions using the format shown in Figure8 of [BC97]. More precisely, we want to use the ratio r/r0 as the x axis for the plot as shown in Figure 6.2. e value of r0 is the sum of the radii used in the Lennard–Jones calculation (see earlier note about Equation 6.21). Here is a suggested approach: 1. Dene a list of ratios using: ratio_L = arange(0.1, 2.01, 0.01) 2. e r values for the atomic separation distances can be taken from a list that is computed as: r_L = ratio_L * r0LJ where r0LJ Atom Type Clash Radius LJ RadiusBackbone N 1.1 1.82Backbone CA 1.3 1.91Backbone C 1.3 1.91Backbone O 1.1 1.66ASP, ASN OD1 0.7 1.66LYS NZ 0.4 1.88ARG CZ 0.8 1.91ARG NH2 0.4 1.82


===== [64/99] chapter-64.html =====

260 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsis the r0 value corresponding to the sum of the radii used in the Lennard–Jones calculation (same as r0 in the previous paragraph). 3. To generate the plot, these r values are used as the values of the independent variable for both energy functions.REFERENCES[BA05] D. A. C. Beck, R. S. Armen, and V. Daggett. Cuto size need not strongly inuence molecular dynamics results for solvated polypeptides. Biochemistry, 44 (2005), 609–616.[BC97] M. J. Bower, F. E. Cohen, and R. L. Dunbrack Jr. Prediction of pro-tein side-chain rotamers from a backbone-dependent rotamer library: a new homology modeling tool. Journal of Molecular Biology, 267 (1997), 1268–1282.[CC95] W. D. Cornell, P. Cieplak, C. I. Bayly, I. R. Gould, K. M. Merz Jr., D. M. Ferguson, D. C. Spellmeyer, T. F. Fox, J. W. Caldwell, and P. A. Kollman. A second generation force eld for the simulation of proteins, nucleic acids, and organic molecules. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 117 (1995), 5179–5197.[CCB95] P. Cieplak, W. D. Cornell, C. I. Balyl, and P. A. Kollman. Application of the multimolecule and multiconformation RESP methodology to bio-polymers: derivation for DNA, RNA and proteins. Journal of Computational Chemistry, 16 (1995), 1357–1377.[CS03] A. C. Canutescu, A. A. Shelenkov, and R. L. Dunbrack Jr. A graph-theory algorithm for rapid protein side-chain prediction. Protein Science, 12 (2003), 2001–2014.FIGURE 6.2 e user interface for Exercise 6.1.
Potential Energy Functions ◾ 261 [H00] K. Hinsen. e molecular modeling toolkit: a new approach to molecular simulations. Journal of Computational Chemistry, 21 (2000), 79–85.[HR85] B. E. Hingerty, R. H. Ritchie, T. L. Ferrell, and J. E. Turner. Dielectric eects in biopolymers: the theory of ionic saturation revisited. Biopolymers, 24 (1985), 427–439.[K05] C. L. Kingsford. Computational approaches to problems in protein struc-ture and function. PhD thesis, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, 2005, AAI3188669.[M98] A. D. MacKerell Jr. Protein force elds. In: Encyclopedia of Computational Chemistry. P. v. R. Schleyer, N. L. Allinger, T. Clark, J. Gasteiger, P. A. Kollman, H. F. Schaefer III, and P. R. Schreiner (editors). John Wiley, Chichester, UK, 1998.[P03] J. W. Ponder and D. A. Case. Force elds for protein simulations. Advances in Protein Chemistry, 66 (2003), 27–85.[S02] T. Schlick. Molecular Modeling and Simulation: An Interdisciplinary Guide. Springer-Verlag, New York, 2002.[SS92] H. Schreiber and O. Steinhauser. Cuto size does strongly inuence molec-ular dynamics results on solvated polypeptides. Biochemistry, 31 (1992), 5856–5860.[WW06] J. Wang, W. Wang, P. A. Kollman, and D. A. Case. Automatic atom type and bond type perception in molecular mechanical calculations. Journal of Molecular Graphics and Modelling, 25 (2006), 247–260.
This page intentionally left blankThis page intentionally left blank


===== [65/99] chapter-65.html =====

263Chapter 7Rotamers and Side‑Chain Conformation7.1 MOTIVATIONe dicult and recalcitrant problem of protein structure prediction is oen considered to be the “Holy Grail” of structural bioinformatics. e problem can be stated in simple terms: Given the primary sequence of a protein, predict the tertiary conformation that achieves a global energy minimum. ere are several approaches to the problem. For an overview of the various techniques, the reader may consult Tramontano [T05]. Some of the more successful strategies rely on a fold recognition step. is starts by comparing the given primary sequence with protein sequences in the Protein Data Bank (PDB). e idea is to nd one or more protein folds that can act as possible structural templates for the given protein with unknown structure. Various tactics can be used to select the most promising fold followed by techniques for structural modications. If all goes well, the researcher will get an accurate evaluation of the three- dimensional (3D) coordinates of the backbone atoms. e nal step is to determine the positions of atoms in the side chains. is is oen referred to as the side-chain packing problem (see [DT05] and the references therein). Side-chain packing is important for other applications such as ligand docking, protein design, and studies dealing with protein allostery.
264 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics7.2 SIDE‑CHAIN PACKING: COMPUTATIONAL ISSUESe problem is known to be NP-hard [A97]. Consequently, the algo-rithms for side-chain packing are typically heuristic in nature and do not guarantee a conformation that will achieve a global energy minimum for the entire protein.Let us restate the problem in terms of the inputs and expected output of an algorithm that attempts to solve the problem. Since the 3D con-formation of the backbone is known, we would have the coordinates of all the alpha carbon atoms, each acting as a point of attachment for a particular side chain. A reasonable approximation is that both the bond lengths and geminal distances within a side chain can be assessed by simply copying these values from side-chain structures previously determined by x-ray analysis. With these assumptions in play, deriv-ing the conformation of a side chain reduces to the determination of the dihedral angles* within the side chain. In summary, the algorithm should determine the settings of the dihedral angles so that the side-chain atoms have 3D positions that will (ideally) yield a global energy minimum.e number of dihedral angles ranges from 0 to 5 inclusive. Arginine is the only side chain with more than four dihedral angles. is is illustrated in Figure 7.1, which shows the positions of all ve dihedral angles and their labels: ,,,,and1 234 5χχχχ χ. Chimera allows one to access dihedral angles of a residue, but only the rst four are available. In a Python script, these would be referenced as res.chi1, res.chi2, res.chi3, and res.chi4 for a given residue object res. Since the chi1 dihedral angle is dened by four atoms (usually N, CA, CB, and CG), it is to be expected that glycine and alanine do not have dihedral angles. Table 7.1 species the atoms used for dihedral angle denitions.If the minimum energy of a protein is dependent on a particular set-ting of all the dihedral angles, then it should be clear that the domain of investigation is a space with a very large dimension. Consider a small protein such as 1CRN with 46 residues in its primary sequence: TTCCPSIVARSNFNVCRLPGTPEAICATYTGCIIIPGATCPGDYAN. ere are 65 dihedral angles that would have to be determined. An exhaustive search, for example, trying out all possible angle settings in 6° increments would require 6065 = 3.8*10115 evaluations that would not * We will use the terms dihedral and torsional interchangeably.
Rotamers and Side‑Chain Conformation ◾ 265 be possible. Some type of gradient descent algorithm working with the energy function is another reasonable attack, but the energy surface is a very rough landscape and there is no guarantee that the global energy minimum will be found.7. 3 ROTA MER IC I T YEven though our assumptions about predetermined bond lengths and bond angles have somewhat simplied the problem, we will use a further approximation in an eort to reduce the computational load. is approximation is a discretization of side-chain conformations that capitalize on the phenomenon of rotamericity: it has been observed that a side chain will typically have a tendency to adopt a conformation that is close to a member of small set of possible conformations. Each such conformation is referred to as a rotamer.Various studies [BC97], [DK93], and [SD11a] have produced libraries that store the rotamer sets for each of the amino acids (see also [D02]). e number of rotamers in a set will depend on the number of dihedral angles in the side chain. e more complicated side chains have rotamer sets with as many as 81 members. A library entry will specify both the NH1CZNECDCGCBχ1χ2χ3χ4χ5CACONNH2FIGURE 7.1 Side-chain dihedral angles for arginine.
266 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsTABLE 7.1 Atoms Dening the Dihedral Angles in Side Chainsχ1χ2χ3χ4χ5ARG N-CA-CB-CG CA-CB-CG-CD CB-CG-CD-NE CG-CD-NE-CZ CD-NE-CZ-NH1ASN N-CA-CB-CG CA-CB-CG-OD1ASP N-CA-CB-CG CA-CB-CG-OD1CYS N-CA-CB-SGGLN N-CA-CB-CG CA-CB-CG-CD CB-CG-CD-OE1GLU N-CA-CB-CG CA-CB-CG-CD CB-CG-CD-OE1HIS N-CA-CB-CG CA-CB-CG-ND1ILE N-CA-CB-CG1 CA-CB-CG1-CD1LEU N-CA-CB-CG CA-CB-CG-CD1LYS N-CA-CB-CG CA-CB-CG-CD CB-CG-CD-CE CG-CD-CE-NZMET N-CA-CB-CG CA-CB-CG-SD CB-CG-SD-CEPHE N-CA-CB-CG CA-CB-CG-CD1PRO N-CA-CB-CG CA-CB-CG-CDSER N-CA-CB-OGTHR N-CA-CB-OG1TRP N-CA-CB-CG CA-CB-CG-CD1TYR N-CA-CB-CG CA-CB-CG-CD1VAL N-CA-CB-CG1
Rotamers and Side‑Chain Conformation ◾ 267 conformation and the frequency of its occurrence, usually expressed as a probability of occurrence.e notion of rotamericity rests on the evidence that the side-chain dihedral angles occur in tight clusters around certain values. Typically, the dihedral angle space is subdivided into bins and a statistical analysis is applied to determine the average conformation in each bin. ere is a computational trade-o involved in this discretization. If the statistical binning uses a larger number of rotamers, we will get a higher level of accuracy for the nal calculated conformation but there will be a much higher computational cost that grows in a combinatorial fashion with the sizes of the rotamer sets.Rotamer libraries may be backbone independent or backbone depen-dent. In the latter case, choice of a rotamer set will be guided by taking the local backbone conformation into account. Otherwise, no backbone information is used and the rotamer set is chosen only by the specication of the side-chain type.7.4 ACCESSING ROTAMERS USING A PYTHON SCRIPTChimera allows one to access a rotamer library provided by the Dunbrack Lab* [SD11b]. Let us start with a simple script that will fetch a protein file and subsequently print out, for each residue, its position in its chain, the residue type, the number of rotamers available for this side chain, and whether the rotamers are backbone dependent (Script 7.01 in the file: Script 7_01 Rotamer counts for each side-chain position.py). For example, the first 10 lines for 1CRN would beResidue Type Rotamer Backboneposition count dependent 1 THR 3 False 2 THR 3 True 3 CYS 3 True 4 CYS 3 True 5 PRO 2 True 6 SER 3 True 7 ILE 9 True 8 VAL 3 True 9 ALA 0 10 ARG 81 True* Chimera only oers the older Dunbrack library due to licensing restrictions on the new one.


===== [66/99] chapter-66.html =====

268 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsNote that the rotamer count for alanine is zero (as expected), and since there are no rotamers for this residue there is no indication as to whether they are backbone dependent. e script is as follows:import chimera, Rotamersfrom Rotamers import getRotamerstargetPath = raw_input(“Type 4 character PDB ID: \n”)prot = chimera.openModels.open(targetPath, type=“PDB”)[0]print “Residue Type Rotamer Backbone”print “position count dependent”for res in prot.residues: if res.type in (“ARG”,”ASN”,”ASP”,”CYS”,”GLN”,”GLU”, “HIS”,”ILE”,”LEU”,”LYS”,”MET”,”PHE”, “PRO”,”SER”,”THR”,”TRP”,”TYR”,”VAL”): (bbd_flag, rot_L) = getRotamers(res) print “ %3d “ % res.id.position, res.type, \ “ %2d “ % len(rot_L), bbd_flag if res.type in (“GLY”, “ALA”): print “ %3d “ % res.id.position, res.type, \ “ 0 “Let us examine the most relevant lines. e rst line imports the Rotamers module and the next line imports, from that module, the func-tion that is needed to bring in the rotamers. Note that the script will only attempt to get rotamers if the side chain is a standard residue and not gly-cine or alanine. A list of rotamers is accessed by means of the statement:(bbd_flag, rot_L) = getRotamers(res)Note that the return value of the getRotamers function is a tuple. e rst entry is a Boolean value indicating whether the rotamers are back-bone dependent, and the second entry is a list of molecule objects repre-senting the rotamers.Now suppose we want to see the various conformations of the rotamers for a particular residue site. e script in the le named Script 7_02 Iterating through rotamers.py will ask the user to specify a PDB ID and then to select a residue from the display:import chimera, Rotamersfrom chimera import runCommand, selectionfrom Rotamers import getRotamers, useRotamer, NoResidueRotamersError# -----------------------------------------------------------------def userSelectsResidue(focus = False):
Rotamers and Side‑Chain Conformation ◾ 269 print “Select an atom or a standard residue in the display.” raw_input(“Then bring the cursor back to this line and hit Enter.”) atm_L = selection.currentAtoms() if len(atm_L) == 0: return None res = atm_L[0].residue if focus: runCommand(“sel :” + str(res.id.position) + “.” + res.id.chainId + “ za<8.0; focus sel; ~sel”) return res#==================================================================# Mainline:targetPath = raw_input(“Type 4 character PDB ID: \n”)prot = chimera.openModels.open(targetPath, type=“PDB”)[0]runCommand(“set bg_color white; ~ribbon; repr stick; show”)selR = userSelectsResidue(focus = True)# Use first residue if user does not do a select:if not selR: selR = prot.residues[0] resStr = “:” + str(selR.id.position) + “.” + selR.id.chainIdrunCommand(“repr bs ” + resStr)print “Use the Enter key to step through the rotamers.”print “Type any character then Enter to terminate the script.\n”print selR.type, “residue ” + resStr + “ selected.”print “Rotamer Rotamer ”print “index: probability:”try: rot_L = getRotamers(selR)[1] numRots = len(rot_L) nullChar = “” rotIx = 0 while nullChar == “”: useRotamer(selR, [rot_L[rotIx]]) printLine = “%2d %7.5f” % (rotIx, rot_L[rotIx]. rotamerProb) nullChar = raw_input(printLine) rotIx += 1 rotIx = rotIx%numRots if rotIx == 0: print “”except NoResidueRotamersError: print selR.id.position, selR.type, “No rotamers”e script introduces more rotamer code and a small function that may be useful for other applications as well. e mainline part of the script 
270 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsfetches the PDB le specied by the user. e display is set up to show all the atoms in a stick representation. Relevant notes:• By way of the userSelectsResidue function, the script issues a request for the user to select a residue in the display. e user can do this by selecting a residue from the sequence window, by selecting a resi-due via the Select menu, or by simply selecting an atom. To avoid any complicated interaction with a user who fails to select a single residue, the function simply extracts the rst atom from the set of selected atoms and works with the residue that contains this atom. Note that the user will be interacting with both the shell window and the display window. To reduce any confusion that this might entail, the script provides some advice about cursor placement so that the appropriate window is active for further user interaction. If the function is called with focus set to True, the display changes so that the selected residue is centered in the display. Additional rotations of the molecule can be performed to get a better view of the residue site with the understanding that we must subsequently make the shell window active to resume user interaction.• To make the rotamer clearly discernible from other nearby residues, the script changes the display representation of the selected residue to be bs (ball and stick).• As in the previous script, we use getRotamers to fetch a list of rotamers for the site of the selected residue. Note that getRotamers is imported from the Rotamers module.• e getRotamers call and subsequent processing of the fetched rotamers appear in try: except: clauses. is allows a graceful handling of exceptions when rotamers do not exist for some particu-lar side chain. is might happen for residues other than GLY and ALA, for example, the CSO residue at position 67 in 1HIV. Note that NoResidueRotamersError is also imported from the Rotamers module.• e while loop runs until the user types an arbitrary character before depressing the Enter key. e body of the loop uses rotIx (incre-mented modulo the number of rotamers) as an index for the list of rotamers fetched via getRotamers. Each iteration of the while loop will set up a dierent rotamer by means of the useRotamer function (also imported from the Rotamers module). e rst argument of 
Rotamers and Side‑Chain Conformation ◾ 271 this function species the residue that will be replaced by a rotamer and the second argument species which rotamer should be used. e second argument has to be a list of rotamers, so even though rotIx is designating a single rotamer, that rotamer is passed to the function within list brackets. Notice that using rotamers for a selected cysteine side-chain will not maintain a disulde bridge if one exists.• As the loop progresses, note how the conformation of the rotamer changes in the display. e Shell window will give you the rotamer index and the probability associated with this rotamer. e list returned by getRotamers is such that rotamers appear in order of decreasing probability. A cautionary note: Running the script with large proteins requires longer processing times for each iteration of the while loop.7.5 ROTAMERS AND DIHEDRAL ANGLESAs one might expect, the useRotamer function will modify the dihe-dral angles of a residue. e changes are usually small. e following lines of output are typical results if you run Script 7_03 Rotamers and torsion angles.py:Using rotamer having index 0 probability 0.195628002286chi angles for rotamer before useRotamer call:chi1: -70.600chi2: 174.900chi3: -3.900chi angles for rotamer after useRotamer call:chi1: -69.749chi2: 175.018chi3: -3.900is output was seen when residue 23 was selected in 1CRN.7.6 A SINGLE SIDE CHAIN AND ENERGY CONSIDERATIONSBefore any further discussion of the side-chain packing problem, it would be worthwhile to get a feel for the complexity of the problem. If you run the script in the le Script 7_04 Side chain control panel.py, you will get a blank version of the dialog shown in Figure 7.2. Either before or just aer launching the script, you should fetch a protein for the Chimera display. Put the Chimera arrow cursor over an atom, hold down your Ctrl key, and do a le mouse click. Going back to the Side Chain Control Panel dialog, click on the Accept button and you should see a string identifying the chosen residue in the associated label eld. In Figure 7.2, residue 41 in chain A of 1EX7 was 
272 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsselected in this manner. You can also use the menu invocation Favorites… Sequence to get a sequence dialog that will allow you to select a residue. Avoid the Animation frame until aer trying out the other widgets.Once the residue is selected, 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 of the slider widgets will be enabled. ere will be one slider activated for each dihedral angle in the chosen residue. If you move the sliders, you should notice that the dihe-dral angles of the chosen residue in the Chimera display will change in accordance with the settings of the sliders. e chosen angle can be read from the label widget to the right of the scale. If at any time you wish to go back to the PDB original values, click on the Reset button. Notice that the last frame of the dialog shows the Lennard–Jones energy value. If you wish to replace the side chain with a rotamer from the Dunbrack library, then use the spin box in the frame just above the Reset button. Again, you can go back to the original angle settings by clicking on Reset.Clicking on one of the Animation buttons will produce a series of changes in the display. The dihedral angles specified on the button willassign all possible settings between −180° and +180° in incre-ments of 3° and 6°, respectively. Since the energy evaluation for each setting is fairly costly, the time for the total animation may be quite extended depending on the power of your computer. If you wish to use a coarser set of increments, you can change the global constants CHI_A_DEG_INCR, CHI_B_DEG_INCR that can be found near the beginning of the script. As you can see from the labels on the anima-tion buttons, you have three choices, each choice working with two FIGURE 7.2 Side Chain Control Panel.


===== [67/99] chapter-67.html =====

Rotamers and Side‑Chain Conformation ◾ 273 consecutive dihedral angles of the chosen residue. If a button is not enabled, then it is because that residue does not have the dihedral angle shown on the button label.While the animation progresses, the energy values associated with that resi-due will be computed as the sum of all pairwise atom interactions between this residue and its neighbors. is energy will be displayed in the Lennard–Jones energy value label in the bottom frame and simultaneously it will be displayed in the strip chart in the right side of the dialog. Information about scripts that can display strip charts can be found in Section D.9 of Appendix D.As the graph displaying the energy values is played out in the strip chart, you may notice that the curve has several local minima. It should be reasonably clear that the energy landscape is quite rough even though the curve represents the energy corresponding to the setting of only two consecutive dihedral angles. A truer and more biologically sound appraisal of the situation would lead you to understand that the energy “surface” is really rough and moreover is actually a space that is not just two but several hundred dimensions for most proteins. Searching for a global energy minimum in this high-dimensional space is computation-ally intractable and the combinatorial explosion of local minima speaks to the NP-hardness of the side-chain packing problem.Since the energy values were computed by going through all dihedral angle pairs each member of the pair taken from a discrete set of angles, we can consider each pair to dene a point in the Euclidean plane with the associated energy values dening a surface hovering over this plane. edata for this surface can be obtained by clicking on the Save button of the Side Chain Control Panel dialog aer the strip chart recording is nished. Surface data will be saved to the directory containing the script for the dialog. e data are saved as a “pickled” version of a surface plot bundle. ese terms are explained in Section D.11 of Appendix D. If you run the script in the le Script D_14 Chimera surface plot with GUI.py, the pickled surface data can be displayed in the Chimera window. To do this, go through the following steps:• Clear the Chimera display by using the menu invocation File… Close Session.• Launch Script D_14 Chimera surface plot with GUI.py.• Click on the Fetch button and use the le open dialog to nd and fetch the pickled surface plot bundle saved by the Side Chain Control Panel.
274 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsYou should get a display that looks something like that in Figure 7.3.z y −140.0 −180.0−40.0−90.010.060.0110.0−100.0−60.0−20.020.060.0100.0140.0180.0180.0140.0100.060.020.0−20.0−60.0−100.0−140.0−180.0x FIGURE 7.3 (See color insert.) A simple energy surface varying two dihedral angles.NOTES:• e energy values have been multiplied by 10 so that there is more surface detail in the regions holding local minima.• e maximum energy value that is displayed tops out at 10 (seen in the display as 100).• When the surface is rst displayed, the maximum energy values have a transparent rendering. is was done to show the utility of using multiple transparency settings for one surface.• To get a colored version of the surface (as shown in Figure 7.3), you can use the buttons in the Surface Color Selection frame.• Typically, the high plateau in the gure will represent angle settings that have introduced a steric clash.
Rotamers and Side‑Chain Conformation ◾ 275 7.7 SIDE‑CHAIN PACKING AND DEAD‑END ELIMINATIONIdeally, the side-chain packing problem is solved by nding the conforma-tions of all the side chains as they would appear in the minimum energy conformation of the molecule. Since the problem is intractable one expects that attempts to derive an approximate solution will depend on the usage of various heuristics that give reasonable low-energy conformations while not guaranteeing the achievement of a global energy minimum.A popular heuristic is to consider the “solution” to be an optimal selec-tion of rotamers. We select one rotamer from each rotamer set correspond-ing to a residue position and we try to ensure that the selected rotamers give a nal structural conformation that minimize the total potential energy of the protein. Here is a more detailed description of the problem:• We assume the protein backbone is xed in the 3D space.• Each protein residue (apart from glycine and alanine) will have a set of rotamers that can be accessed from a rotamer library. e residue at position k will have a rotamer set, call it Sk containing nk members. Each rotamer is represented by the symbol rki, where k denotes the residue position and i denotes the index of this rotamer within the rotamer set Sk. Hence: {}= ,, ,12Srrrkkkknk• e solution depends on making an optimal choice from each Sk. More precisely, nd an optimal set of integers {},, ,12cc ck such that ≤≤1 cnkk for all k and the energy of the protein is minimized when rotamer rkck is used for the residue at position k.At the very least, selection of rotamers will be done so as to avoid steric clashes that cause the energy level to spike into very high values, so we must avoid choices that involve conicts between neighboring rotamers. In addition to this we can make the following observation: A rotamer can be eliminated from the set Sk if it can be shown that there is another member of that same set that always gives a lower energy value independent of the rotamer choices for the nearby or neighboring residue sites. ere are various approaches to nd and eliminate such rotamers; all strategies striving to reduce the size of the rotamer sets associated with each residue site. ese strategies are generally referred to as DEE (dead-end elimination) strategies [DM92].We now consider the approach described by Goldstein in [G94].
276 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics7.7.1 Goldstein’s DEE: Basic StrategyTo avoid any misunderstandings that might occur later, we rearm that side-chain atoms of a rotamer are all the atoms in the residue except for the backbone atoms (N, Cα, C, O). In Figure 7.4, these atoms, for rotam-ers rki and rmj, are shown in the two ellipses in the upper part of the gure. e ellipses in the lower part of the gure enclose backbone atoms cor-responding to each rotamer.We now introduce two functions that will be used in our energy calcu-lations. e function )(selfErki will be used to denote the rotamer rki energy contribution that is independent of the rotamer choices made at any other residue site. Expressed as an equation: () () ()()()()=+=+logself frameintrinsicframe*Er ErErErcprprkikikikikkki (7.1)e term )(frameErki represents the sum of the energies due to the pairwise interactions between all side-chain atoms of rotamer rki and all the backbone atoms of the other nearby residues. In Figure 7.4, the dashed line indicates the contribution that would be provided by the side-chain atoms and the backbone atoms corresponding to a single reside. e term )(intrinsicErki is the rki intrinsic energy, which is due to all the pairwise interactions between atoms belonging exclusively to rki. Since some of these atom pairs corre-spond to bonded atoms, the energy computation is complicated and typi-cally approximated by using the logarithmic approximation specied in Equation 7.1. In Equation 7.1, the term )(prki represents the probability of the occurrence of this rotamer, whereas )(*prk represents the probability r Epairjmr ikr jmr , ikFIGURE 7.4 Energy computations for a rotamer.
Rotamers and Side‑Chain Conformation ◾ 277 of the most frequent rotamer for the residue at position k. In Chimera, the most probable rotamer has an index of 0 and so we would simply let ))((=*0pr prkk. e value of ck provides the appropriate weighting coecient so that the energy computed via the logarithm is properly commensurate with the other energy terms. We use the value of 10 for all ck as suggested in Kingsford’s thesis [K05]. e second function that we need is (),pairErrkimj, dened as the sum of all energy contributions made by atom pairs such that one atom is in the side chain of rki and the other atom is in the side chain of rmj. is is indicated in Figure 7.4 by means of the solid arrow.We will refer to rotamers at the same residue site as sibling rotamers. e energy contribution made by a rotamer will be its intrinsic energy plus the sum of all its interaction energies with nearby rotamers situated at other residue sites that are nearby in 3D space. If the “best” energy contribution of rmi is larger than the “worst” energy contribution of a sibling rmj, then rotamer rmi can be eliminated because its sibling will always be better at reducing the total energy independent of the conformations of nearby side chains. Equation 7.2 is a mathematical expression for the previous state-ment. We can remove rmi from further consideration if we can nd a sibling rmj such that the following inequality is true: ∑∑{} {})) ))(( ((+>+))((∈∈min, max,self pair self pairErErrErErrmipkNmmikpmjpkNmmjkp (7.2)where {})(min,pairErrpmikp is the minimum (i.e., best) energy possible between rotamer rmi of the side-chain site at residue[m] and any rotamer rkp of the side-chain site at residue[k]. In other words, we extract the minimum interaction energy as p ranges across all the siblings for residue[k]. A similar denition holds for the max function term. We use the notation )(∈kNm to mean that k is an integer in the set of integers designated as N(m). Here N (m) is the set of indices of residues that are nearby residue[m]. For our purposes, a nearby resi-due will have its alpha carbon within 10 Å of the alpha carbon of residue[m].e test is applied at each residue site and rotamers are eliminated whenever possible. Care should be exercised in the organization of the computations so that you do not repeat various energy calculations. As the algorithm progresses and rotamers are removed, the neighbor sets will change and so a rotamer that is not removed on the rst pass through all the residues sites might eventually be eliminated by a future pass. e algorithm is nished when a full pass through all the residue sites is done without any elimination of rotamers.


===== [68/99] chapter-68.html =====

278 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics7.7.2 Goldstein’s DEE: A More Efcient StrategyInspection of Equation 7.2 leads to the following observation: the value of p producing the minimum on the le-hand side of the inequality is not necessarily the value of p producing the maximum on the right-hand side of the inequality. Consequently, the elimination criterion is overly stringent and somewhat inecient because of the need for the extraction of both a minimum and maximum value. A better test is the following: ∑{}))))((((−+ −>)(∈min,,0self self pair pairEr Er ErrErrmimjpkNmmikpmjkp (7.3)where the variables have the same signicance as in Equation 7.2. Asbefore, we can remove rmi from further consideration if we can nd a sibling rmj such that Equation 7.3 is true.7.7. 3 Sid e ‑ Chain Pa ck ingAer the completion of dead-end elimination, you will be le with a reduced set of rotamers at each site and the side-chain packing algorithm is ready for the next phase. One can nd in the literature a wide range of algorithms to get a nal solution. Covering these is beyond the scope of this text, but if you need to follow this research further, then you can access these papers and the references therein: [BC13], [KS09], and [X05]. e introduction contained in [KS09] is particularly noteworthy since it outlines various dif-culties associated with the problem and provides several references related to various heuristics that have been used to solve the problem.7.8 E XERCI SE S7.8.1 Dead‑End EliminationWrite a script that performs the following steps: 1. Fetch a protein le from the PDB. 2. For each residue in the protein, determine its neighboring residues. We will consider two residues to be neighbors if their beta carbon atoms have a separation that is less than or equal to 22 Å. is is easily done by using the Shell class imported from Str uctBio. Utilities.shellNeighbors.
Rotamers and Side‑Chain Conformation ◾ 279 3. Working with a rotamer library (e.g., the Dunbrack library) deter-mine the rotamer sets for each protein residue site. While doing this you should calculate the self-energy for each rotamer. 4. For each rotamer, use the linear repulsive energy function (described in Section 6.2.1 of Chapter 6) to calculate the energy interactions between this rotamer and all the rotamers for neighboring residues. We will say that two rotamers are interacting if they are derived from neighboring residues. 5. Use the Goldstein dead-end elimination algorithm to reduce the number of rotamer members in each set. 6. Generate a list that gives the energy for each pair of interacting rota-mers. Hopefully, aer dead-end elimination, this list will be a small subset of the interaction pairs generated in Step 4. 7. For each residue in the original protein determine whether it is “close” to some remaining member in its rotamer set. Two confor-mations of a side chain will be considered as close if their Chi 1 dihe-dral angles dier by 40° or less and, if so, then their Chi 2 angles must also dier by 40° or less. 8. Calculate the percentage of residues that pass this evaluation.It is interesting to take the results of the last step and compare them with the corresponding results of algorithms that start with dead-end elimination and then do side-chain packing as a subsequent procedure.REFERENCES[A97] T. Akutsu. NP-hardness results for protein side-chain packing. Genome Informatics, 8 (1997), 180–186.[DT05] K. C. Dukka Bahadur, E. Tomita, J. Suzuki, and T. Akutsu. Protein side-chain packing problem: a maximum edge-weight clique algorithmic approach. Journal of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, 3 (2005), 103–126.[BC97] M. J. Bower, F. E. Cohen, and R. L. Dunbrack, Jr. Prediction of protein side-chain rotamers from a backbone-dependent rotamer library: a new homol-ogy modeling tool. Journal of Molecular Biology, 267 (1997), 1268–1282.[BC13] F. J. Burkowski, Y.-L. Cheung, and H. Wolkowicz. Ecient use of semi-denite programming for selection of rotamers in protein conformations. INFORMS Journal on Computing (2014).
280 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics[DK93] R. L. Dunbrack, Jr. and M. Karplus. Backbone-dependent rotamer library for proteins: application to side-chain prediction. Journal of Molecular Biology, 230 (1993), 543–574.[DM92] J. Desmet, M. de Maeyer, B. Hazes, and I. Lasters. e dead-end elimi-nation theorem and its use in protein side-chain positioning. Nature, 356 (1992), 539–542.[D02] R. L. Dunbrack, Jr. Rotamer libraries in the 21st century. Current Opinion in Structural Biology, 12 (2002), 431–440.[G94] R. F. Goldstein. Ecient rotamer elimination applied to protein side-chains and related spin 7 glasses. Biophysical Journal, 66 (1994), 1335–1340.[K05] C. L. Kingsford. Computational approaches to problems in protein structure and function. PhD thesis, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA, 2005.[KS09] G. G. Krivov, M. V. Shapovalov, and R. L. Dunbrack, Jr. Improved predic-tion of protein side-chain conformations with SCWRL4. Proteins, 77 (2009), 778–795.[SD11a] A. D. Scouras and V. Daggett. e dynameomics rotamer library: amino acid side chain conformations and dynamics from comprehensive molecular dynamics simulations in water. Protein Science, 20 (2011), 341–352.[SD11b] M. S. Shapovalov and R. L. Dunbrack, Jr. A smoothed backbone- dependent rotamer library for proteins derived from adaptive kernel density estimates and regressions. Structure, 19 (2011), 844–858.[T05] A. Tramontano. e Ten Most Wanted Solutions in Protein Bioinformatics. Chapman & Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, FL, 2005.[X05] J. Xu. Rapid Protein Side-Chain Packing via Tree Decomposition. RECOMB, Boston, MA, 2005.


===== [69/99] chapter-69.html =====

281Chapter 8Residue Networks8.1 MOTIVATIONRecently, the investigation of interactions between neighboring residues has been a “hot topic” in protein structure research. In these studies, the notion of “neighboring” is usually determined by some type of distance criterion. For example, two residues Ra and Rb may be designated as con-tact neighbors if some atom in Ra is within a short distance threshold of another atom in Rb. A simpler criterion might require that the alpha car-bon atoms in Ra and Rb be within some distance threshold.A residue network is a graph theory representation of these interac-tions. In these graphs, a node corresponds to a residue in the protein. Typically, the requirements of the study will dictate that the node will correspond to some particular subset of the atoms in the residue. is could be all the residue atoms or perhaps some subset of the residue atoms, for example, the side-chain atoms (excluding the backbone atoms) or just the single alpha carbon. Edges in the graph will exist between two nodes when the corresponding residues are reckoned to be neighbors. Labels on nodes typically designate the residue type and chain position. Labels on edges may specify an edge weight that has some particular relevance to the research study.Several research papers have dealt with residue networks. As a start-ing point you may consult the following: Krishnan et al. [KZ08] intro-duce residue networks as an extension of contact maps. ey discuss the signicance of paths in the graphs derived from residue networks. 
282 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural BioinformaticsIn [DK11], the authors describe soware for analyzing and visualizing residue networks. A more recent paper by Csermely et al. [CS12] is a good starting point—the title provides a comprehensive description of the content: “Disordered proteins and network disorder in network descriptions of protein structure, dynamics and function: Hypothesis and a comprehensive review.” Another review paper [BK07] presents a topological analysis of protein structures using networks with an emphasis on the small-world characterization of these networks. More advanced applications and analysis of residue networks can be found in [BS05] (residue networks used in the study of protein oligomerization) and [MF09] (Residue Interaction graphs).Modeling tools arising from the study of residue networks can be applied to the analysis of protein allostery. is topic will be discussed at the end of this chapter.8.2 THREE‑DIMENSIONAL (3D) VISUALIZATION OF RESIDUE NETWORKSVisualization of these networks can be shown by means of a “at” two-dimensional (2D) graph drawing. While this is oen the basis for a gure that is submitted for publication, the properties of the graph are usually dicult to discern because a typical protein has a large number of residues leading to a corresponding large number of nodes. In turn this produces a huge number of graph edges that will be crisscrossing to such an extent that local features of the graph are obliterated.An objective of this section is to demonstrate that this confusion can be somewhat reduced by drawing the graph as a 3D structure that is superimposed on the 3D structure of the protein. is has an immediate advantage: the density of nodes and edges is reduced because the graph is not attened onto a 2D plane. More signicantly, by placing the graph nodes near their corresponding residues, the viewer can recognize the sig-nicance of the node and its relationship to the overall structure of the protein.e exercises at the end of this chapter act as a starting point for these visualizations. Nodes are represented by spheres, and edges are represented by spindles. e reader should consult Appendix B, which describes a Python class containing functions that can provide these 3D elements. Exercises 1, 2, and 3 pose problems that are to be done using these representations.
Residue Networks ◾ 283 8.3 ALLOSTERY AND CONTACT REARRANGEMENT NETWORKSRecall that allosteric regulation is a control mechanism in which an eec-tor molecule binds at one site of a protein and this event induces a confor-mational change that alters the binding behavior at another binding site called the substrate site. It is reasonable to assume that there is some sort of communication between the two sites, but the phenomenon is not yet fully understood. ere are several models that attempt to characterize this communication. For example, the paper by Daily et al. [DU08] pres-ents a technique for elucidating the communication path between eector and substrate site by quantifying the changes in contacts between neigh-boring residues. While their approach does not explain the exact physical causes of the communication, it does help to reveal its presence. To review their work we start with the following denitions:Given two residues Ri and Rj in the same protein, we will say that they are in contact if we can nd an atom in Ri and another atom in Rj such that the distance between these two atoms is less than some threshold value d (we will work with d = 5 Å). Given two residues Ri and Rj that are in con-tact, we could inspect each atom in Ri to determine if that atom is within a distance d from an atom in Rj. If the distance test is satised, then both atoms are placed into a set called the contact interface Cij. Naturally, if Ri and Rj are not in contact, then Cij is an empty set.Each allosteric analysis will involve a protein that has two dierent con-formational states: the inactive (I) state and the active (A) state. Each state corresponds to an entry in the Protein Data Bank (PDB). For example, phosphofructokinase can be in the I state (PDB ID 6PFK) or in the A state (PDB ID 4PFK).We will use the notation CijI to represent the contact interface Cij when the protein is in the I state and CijA to represent the contact interface Cij when the protein is in the A state. For example, the top diagram in Figure8.1 shows all the atoms in CijI within the enclosure dened by the dotted line. e dotted line enclosure of the lower diagram shows all the atoms in CijA. Let us consider some changes that may or may not occur in Cij when the protein makes a state transition, for example, it goes from the I state to the A state. First, let us consider the possibility that the two residues Ri and Rj are in contact and =CCijAijI. is would mean that the contact interface does not change in the transition; in other words, the two residues are in contact but their contact with each other is not aected 
284 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsby the allosteric change in conformation. Note that, in this case, we have ∩= =CCCCijAijIijAijI.Note that the dashed line in each diagram contains the intersection ∩CCijAijI and, of course, it is the same for both diagrams.Now consider the set dierence: ()−∩CCCijIijAijI. is set contains those atoms in the contact interface of the I state that do not stay in the contact interface when there is a transition from I to A. Similarly, ()−∩CCCijAijAijI is the set that contains those atoms in the contact interface of the A state that do not stay in the contact interface when there is a transition from A to I. Note that both of these sets are empty when ∩= =CCCCijAijIijAijI. In Figure 8.1, the set ()−∩CCCijIijAijI contains the single atom CB of the TYR side chain and the set )(−∩CCCijAijAijI contains the two atoms CD1 and CE1 of the TYR side chain.In the strategy used by Daily et al., the number of atoms in these dier-ence sets indicates the amount of loss or gain in a contact interface during a transition. More signicantly, this count can quantify the rearrangement of contacts in the contact interface during a transition. ey use these considerations to dene the rearrangement factor RF(i, j) as follows:,max,.{}()()()=−∩ −∩+RF ijCCCC CCNNijIijAijIijAijAijIijInactive stateActive stateFIGURE 8.1 Atom sets in the contact rearrangement interfaces.
Residue Networks ◾ 285 Notice the normalization computation done via division by Ni + Nj, which is the sum of the number of atoms in Ri and Rj, respectively.Daily et al. use the RF(i, j) values to dene a graph called the contact rearrangement network (CRN). In this graph, the nodes correspond to the residues of the protein. Two nodes labeled Ri and Rj are connected by an edge if their rearrangement factor RF(i, j) is above some threshold T (they use T=0.3). e CRN is considered to be a small-world network, and fur-ther calculations are performed to evaluate various small-world network parameters.e nal exercises in this chapter deal with scripts to make these calcu-lations leading to the generation of a network graph.8.4 EXERCISESe following exercises will take you through various examples that involve the construction of residue networks and their display in the Chimera window:8.4.1 Spheres Representing ResiduesWrite a script that computes the “center” of a side chain by computing the centroid of all atoms in the side chain excluding backbone atoms CA, C, N, and O. e script should treat glycine as a special case with the cen-ter taken to be the coordinates of the CA atom. Eventually, we will want to pass this center to various other scripts that work with atom coordi-nates, for example, methods in the Shell class. Consequently, you should implement a class called ResidueCenter that has scripts to implement two methods with denition headers as follows:def __init__(self, resObj):def coord(self):is means that ResidueCenter will be an object with a method to return its coordinates. We can then pass it to any other function that deals with atoms, as long as that function only uses the coord() method for the object. In this sense, the center will act as a virtual atom.Use the addSphere functions in the Solids class to put a small sphere (radius = 1.0) at each center. e sphere should be colored according to its Kyte–Doolittle hydrophobicity value. Soware for this book has a function to generate this color. Use the import statement:from StructBio.Utilities.miscFunctions import residue KDhColor


===== [70/99] chapter-70.html =====

286 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsto get the function from the StructBio package. If you move the struc-tures, so that you are looking along the axis of a helix, you can usually see the amphiphilicity [EW82] of the helix as a tendency for hydrophobic resi-dues to be on the side of the helix that is closer to the center of the protein (see Figure 8.2).Test your script on the following PDB les: the winged helix protein 1SMT, the beta barrel 2POR, and insulin 1ZNJ.8.4.2 Spheres and Spindles for Residue Networkse visualization generated by the previous exercise gives the viewer a real-istic assessment of the distribution of hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues within the protein. However, the visual representation still has a somewhat jumbled appearance because it is dicult to assess when two spheres corre-spond to nearby residues. is can be improved somewhat by drawing a link between the spheres corresponding to neighboring residues. Even though the scene has more visual elements, there is a better portrayal of the neigh-borhood structure and so more information is conveyed to the viewer.*Extend the capabilities of the previous script by linking spheres that represent neighboring residues. We will consider two residues to be neigh-bors if their centers have a separation that is less than or equal to a value set by the parameter resDistThreshold.is is an excellent opportunity to use the Shell class with virtual atom objects instead of atom objects.* is type of visualization will be seen again when we deal with residue networks (see Exercise 3).FIGURE 8.2 (See color insert.) Amphiphilicity.
Residue Networks ◾ 287 Use the Solids class given in Appendix B to place spheres at the resi-due centers (as done in the previous exercise) and then link the spheres corresponding to neighboring residues by putting a spindle between these spheres. As in Exercise 1, spheres should be colored according to their Kyte–Doolittle hydrophobicity values. e color of a spindle may be derived by taking the RGB tuples for each sphere and calculating the average. e scene should have an appearance similar to that shown in Figure 8.3.Note that the spindles can be categorized into three groupings that are characterized by the hydrophobicity attributes of the spheres being linked. 1. HP: hydrophobic-hydrophilic 2. HH: hydrophobic-hydrophobic 3. PP: hydrophilic-hydrophilicIf the various categories of spheres and spindles are associated with separate objects instantiated from the Solids class, then you can use the Model Panel to selectively display hydrophobic or hydrophilic networks. Spheres are shown only if they are at the ends of spindles that are being displayed. For example, Figure 8.4 shows spindles linking spheres corre-sponding to hydrophobic residues (resDistThreshold = 8).If you refer to Figure 1.32, you can recall that the hexameric struc-ture of 1ZNJ is really a trimer of dimers. Each of the three dimers has a FIGURE 8.3 (See color insert.) Network of neighboring residues (1ZNJ).
288 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticshydrophobic core as shown in Figure 8.4. Figure 8.4 shows how the three cores combine to surround an innermost core that is hydrophilic but not shown. Figure 8.5 illustrates this hydrophilic network clearly showing a hydrophilic cage-like structure that contains the zinc atoms (one of which can be seen at the exact center of the structure).Work with the porin protein 2POR to get another compelling visualiza-tion. You should see a “hydrophobic girdle” around this beta barrel with various hydrophilic residues on the inside of the pore as might be expected FIGURE 8.4 Network of hydrophobic residues (1ZNJ).FIGURE 8.5 Network of hydrophilic residues with zinc atoms (1ZNJ).
Residue Networks ◾ 289 for a bacterial outer membrane protein. e antifreeze protein 2PNE is another interesting case.8.4.3 Spheres and Spindles for Residue Networks: Graphical User Interface (GUI) ImplementationThe previous script requires various specifications and Model Panel interactions with the user. These would be handled better with a suitable GUI. Study the material in Appendix A so that you can gen-erate two dialogs to be used by the program. Execution begins with a modal dialog that contains two widgets: an entry box that allows the user to specify the PDB ID of the protein that is to be fetched and a scale widget to define the value of distThreshold. After the protein is fetched and data structures established, the script should launch a modeless dialog that allows the user to specify the various types of spindles to be displayed. Since the dialog is modeless, the dialog should allow the user to change this specification at will, each new choice causing the display to be updated.Figures 8.6 and 8.7 give the appearance of the two dialogs.FIGURE 8.6 Dialog window to select the Protein Data Bank (PDB) le and set distThreshold.FIGURE 8.7 Dialog window to select visual elements.
290 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics8.4.4 Graphs for Residue Networks: GUI Implementatione previous exercise can be handled with greater ease by working with the graph classes that can be imported by using:from StructBio.Graphs.graph import Graph, Node, EdgeGet familiar with the contents of Appendix C, if you have not already done so, and modify the previous script so that the graph classes are used. Showing and hiding the various links can now be done by calling func-tions that work with subgraphs.8.4.5 Contact Rearrangement Networks: Evaluating RF(i, j)ese nal exercises deal with CRNs. e overall problem has been bro-ken down into a series of smaller steps to make the development easier. We start with the evaluation of the RF(i, j) function. To test the exer-cises, we will work with the inactive and active states of the following six proteins:Inactive Active1HH4 1MH11XTQ 1XTS1XTU 1XTT1CD5 1HOT1WPL 1IS71KAO 2RAPIn all cases, when multiple chains are involved, you should work with Chain A only. Any other chains should be deleted.Start withfrom StructBio.Utilities.miscFunctions \ import userSpe ci fi cation OfChainsfrom StructBio.StructureOverlap.sequencesLocalAlignment \ import SequencesLocalAlignmentand then have the script go through the following steps: 1. e script should work with two chains, typically, but not necessar-ily, from two dierent proteins. User determination of the chains can be done with a GUI implementation or by working with the


===== [71/99] chapter-71.html =====

Residue Networks ◾ 291 function userSpecificationOfChains. ese two protein chains will represent the structural information for the inactive and active states. 2. For each protein, extract a list of standard residues with the require-ment that corresponding entries from the lists must be the same resi-due types. One might think that this is easily accomplished because each protein le represents a dierent state of the same protein. Ideally, both les have the same number of residues and the same set of position numbers to specify the locations of residues in a chain. Unfortunately, this ideal situation might not hold because the inac-tive and active versions of the protein may have been deposited in the PDB by two dierent research laboratories. In fact, it is possible that some parts of a protein chain may simply be missing in one le while being completely intact in the other le! To get around this situation, you should read both les and then do a sequence alignment to get corresponding pairs of residues that have all their structural informa-tion present. Use a simple alignment that relies on identical match-ing. In other words, do not use matching scores such as BLOSUM 62. Consider working with the function SequencesLocalAlignment. 3. Calculate RF(i, j) for all pairs of residues that are in contact. You should not calculate or store values of RF(i, j) when Ri and Rj are not in contact. Since the RF(i, j) values are not to be stored in a 2D array, you will likely use a dictionary or list of tuples each containing values such as: i, j, RF(i, j) for RF(i, j) ≥ T. Note that i and j are the indices for the lists created in the previous step. ey may or may not correspond to the position numbers of a residue in its chain and they may or may not correspond to the indices of a residue in the Chimera residue lists for the proteins (because of the sequence alignment and extraction of corresponding residues done in the previous step).Implementation notes:• Use the parameter settings stipulated in Section 8.3 (d = 5.0, T = 0.3).• e script should execute in time O(n), where n is the number of resi-dues in the protein. So when evaluating residue contact, you should not use a loop within a loop with each loop ranging over all possible residues. Use the Shell class.
292 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformatics• In the calculation of ()−∩CCCijIijAijI, it is natural to use the Set class in Python but you have to be careful. If CijI and CijA contain atom objects, then the intersection will always be empty because Chimera will have dierent atom objects for the two proteins. So the sets should contain integers, each integer representing a tracking identier that uniquely species an atom within a particular resi-due of the list created in Step 2. For example, atom “CA” in the resi-due at some particular index i, for example, i = 22 would be given a unique tracking identier but it would be valid for both the inactive and active residue lists. Of course, similar considerations hold for ()−∩CCCijAijAijI.To complete this exercise, you should have your program compute the RF(i, j) values that are equal to or greater than T and then print them out. Since the RF(i, j) function is symmetric with respect to i and j, you should only print out the RF(i, j) values for which i < j. For example, here are ve lines from the 1HH4 and 1MH1 case:37 PHE 58 THR 0.83338 ASP 57 ASP 0.75037 PHE 59 ALA 0.75036 VAL 57 ASP 0.84621 ILE 37 PHE 0.684Residues are specied by position in the chain of the protein followed by residue type. is output is of limited use, but you can use it to test progress thus far. e main purpose of this exercise is to serve as a pre-amble for the next exercise.8.4.6 Displaying the Residue Network for Rearranged ContactsNote that the list of RF(i, j) values computed in the previous exercise con-tains enough information for you to build a graph, where each node ni corresponds to a residue Ri and there is an edge between node ni and node nj if RF(i, j) ≥ T. In the paper by Daily et al., this graph is considered to be a small-world network and various graph-related operations can be per-formed to assess the properties of the network.** For example, you could extract the subgraph that is induced by all the nodes having degree larger than some given threshold or you could use a depth-rst search to derive all the connected components of the graph.
Residue Networks ◾ 293 Use the Graph, Node, and Edge classes to place a residue network into the display. Start with the import statements:from StructBio.StructureOverlap.overlapper \ import Overlapperfrom StructBio.Utilities.shellNeighbors \ import Shellfrom StructBio.Utilities.miscFunctions \ import userSpecificationOfChains, colorByNamefrom StructBio.Utilities.miscFunctions \ import residueKDhColor, residueFletterickColorfrom StructBio.StructureOverlap.sequencesLocalAlignment \ import SequencesLocalAlignmentfrom StructBio.Graphs.graph \ import Graph, Node, Edgeand do the same three steps as in the previous exercise followed by 4. Work with the Overlapper class to derive an overlap of the inac-tive and active versions of the protein. e sequence alignment done in the previous exercise can be used to get lists of the correspond-ing alpha carbon atoms that will dene the overlap. Since a transi-tion between the inactive and active states is oen accompanied by an extensive conformational change, the overlap may show a poor structural alignment across its entire length. It is better to have a tight structural alignment over a smaller range of residues with the rest of the chains then showing a more extensive movement relative to the tighter overlapped regions. Consequently, it is recommended that the initial overlap operation be followed by a scan that selects a set of alpha carbon pairs that have the shortest interatomic dis-tance (e.g., the rst third of the pairs aer sorting the pairs to get ascending order by interatomic distance). Use these pairs to redo the overlap. 5. Use the list of RF(i, j) values computed in the previous exercise to build a graph, where each node ni corresponds to a residue Ri and there is an edge between node ni and node nj if RF(i, j) ≥ T. Work with the Graph, Node, and Edge classes to construct nodes and edges for the display. Each chain should have its own graph. e nodes should be spheres that are centered over the alpha carbon atoms of the residues in a chain. To provide more visual informa-tion, the radius of a sphere can be made proportional to the number of atoms in the corresponding residue. e color of the sphere can 
294 ◾ Computational Techniques for Structural Bioinformaticsbe determined by using the residueFletterickColor function, which will give it a unique color for each residue type. e spindles that act as links between nodes can be given a radius that is pro-portional to the RF(i, j) value corresponding to that edge. Color the spindle light green if the corresponding contact interface is going to gain atoms in the transition to the other state and color it deep pink if the corresponding contact interface is going to lose atoms in the transition to the other state. 6. ere will be several nodes in the graphs that have either no edges or are members of connected components that are too small to be of interest. is nal step should decompose each graph into a set of connected components each with a size that is at least 3.e Model Panel can be used to selectively determine the visual ele-ments to be shown in the scene. You may wish to streamline this user interaction by designing a GUI that is more appropriate for this appli-cation. Depending on the amount of structural movement in a transi-tion, one graph may look better than the other. Figure 8.8 shows a graph visualization for proteins 1XTU and 1XTT (inactive and active forms of the protein uracil phosphoribosyltransferase). With close inspection, you FIGURE 8.8 (See color insert.) Graph visualization of a contact rearrangement network (1XTU and 1XTT).
Residue Networks ◾ 295 should be able to see the various spindles that have been drawn between nodes that correspond to residues that undergo contact rearrangement in a transition. Note that these residues tend to be close to the ligands and, in fact, represent a reasonable path of rearrangement between the two bind-ing sites helping to elucidate the allosteric phenomenon.REFERENCES[BK07] C. Böde, I. A. Kovács, M. S. Szalay, R. Palotai, T. Korcsmáros, and P.Csermely. Network analysis of protein dynamics. FEBS Letters, 581 (2007), 2776–2782.[BS05] K. V. Brinda, A. Surolia, and S. Vishveshwara. Insights into the quater-nary association of proteins through structure graphs: a case study of lectins. Biochemical Journal, 391 (2005), 1–15.[CS12] P. Csermely, K. S. Sandhu, E. Hazai, Z. Hoksza, H. J. M. Kiss, F. Miozzo, D.V. Veres, F. Piazza, and R. Nussinov. Disordered proteins and network dis-order in network descriptions of protein structure, dynamics and function: hypothesis and a comprehensive review. Current Protein and Peptide Science, 13 (2012), 19–33.[DU08] M. D. Daily, T. J. Upadhyaya, and J. J. Gray. Contact rearrangements form coupled networks from local motions in allosteric proteins. Proteins, 71 (2008), 455–466.[DK11] N. T. Doncheva, K. Klein, F. S. Domingues, and M. Albrecht. Analyzing and visualizing residue networks of protein structures. Trends in Biochemical Science, 36 (2011), 179–182.[EW82] D. Eisenberg, R. M. Weiss, and T. C. Terwilliger. e helical hydropho-bic moment: a measure of the amphiphilicity of a helix. Nature, 299 (1982), 371–374.[KZ08] A. Krishnan, J. P. Zbilut, M. Tomita, and A. Giuliani. Proteins as networks: usefulness of graph theory in protein science. Current Protein and Peptide Science, 9 (2008), 28–38.[MF09] T. Milenković, I. Filippis, M. Lappe, N. Pržulj. Optimized Null Model for Protein Structure Networks. PLoS ONE, 4, (2009) DOI: 10.1371/journal .pone.0005967


===== [72/99] chapter-72.html =====

This page intentionally left blankThis page intentionally left blank


===== [73/99] chapter-73.html =====

297Appendix ASimple DialogsA.1 MOTIVATIONIn the initial chapters, most of the exercise scripts require interaction with a user. For the most part, this has been accomplished by the user typing text into the Python Shell and then getting results back in the same window when the script executes a print statement. At times, interaction with the user has been done with the help of a dialog window provided by the tkFileDialog module as shown in Script 2.2 and Script 2.3.e purpose of this appendix is to introduce the reader to scripting techniques that will give her program the ability to launch dialog windows that provide a graphical user interface (GUI). ere are two possible scenarios (depending on how the GUI is designed): 1. A Python script is opened from the Python Shell and subsequently run. While this application is running, it may launch a dialog window that acts as a GUI for the user. Typically, such a GUI gives the user a richer interactive experience than simply interacting with the Python Shell and it can also be used to eliminate any unfortu-nate or confusing input coming from the user. 2. If the GUI dialogs (typically more than one) provide a complete inter-action with the user, then execution of the script can be initiated by the File… Open… menu of the Chimera window. In this case, the Python Shell can be avoided if the script does not execute any print statements, all output from the script being displayed in the main Chimera window or in some dialog window.
298 ◾ Appendix AIn the subsequent sections, we consider the construction of some simple dialogs (implemented via Tkinter) that may be used to improve the more frequent user interactions that would otherwise be done by means of the Python Shell. It is not meant to be a complete lesson covering GUI design principles, and it certainly does not give a complete treatment of Tkinter. More extensive coverage of Tkinter can be found in various Internet sites or you could read Grayson’s book [G05].A.2 MODAL AND MODELESS DIALOGSere are two types of user interface dialogs: modal and modeless. A modal dialog typically requires user input and ideally, execution in the main win-dow will not continue until that interaction has been completed. If the dia-log window has been launched and the user does not wish to proceed with the interrogation, then a Cancel button is usually provided so that an appro-priate resumption of execution can proceed without the information. A modeless dialog window allows the user to interact with both the dialog and the main Chimera window without rst having to close or cancel the dialog.e logic behind a modal dialog is normally simpler than that used for a modeless dialog: the modal dialog is displayed, the information is obtained from the user, the dialog is closed, and execution proceeds with the script that had launched the dialog. By contrast, all permitted interactions with a modeless dialog must have a meaningful relationship with the current state of the executing script associated with the main window. In an eort to properly manage this interaction, the modeless dialog will oen use strategies that prohibit certain dialog activities that are not appropriate for the current state of the program’s execution. is can be done by disabling (graying out) various controls (also called widgets) in the dialog window.A.3 BASIC DESIGN GUIDELINESDialogs can be classied into various categories according to their functionality:• Dialogs launched by the user:• Property dialogs use nouns in various titles so that the user can understand the signicance of the information being displayed (e.g., “File size on disk:”).• Function dialogs have titles involving a verb that describes the command that the user can invoke (e.g., “Select” or “Apply”).
Appendix A ◾ 299• Dialogs launched by the application:• Process dialogs give information about current status (e.g., time remaining in a lengthy le transfer or space remaining on a disk drive).• Bulletin dialogs provide transitory status or may provide information and then block further processing until the user acknowledges that information (an example that you have probably seen already when installing new soware would be the “Accept” button to indicate acceptance of the terms in a license agreement appearing in a text box widget).In all cases, the dialog will contain control and status widgets that should be accompanied by text that informs the user about the signi-cance of the widget or group of widgets. e text may be a title that is in a Label widget located near a group of other widgets (e.g., a title explaining the signicance of a group of buttons each having additional text on each button to explain what that particular button does).e layout of widgets within a dialog should present a clear visual hierarchy typically dened by means of nested groupings. A grouping may be implicit or it may be visually explicit. For example, function-ally related buttons may be grouped within a parent frame that provides a visual indication of this grouping (e.g., the Frame and LabelFrame widgets are visually represented by showing a raised border that sur-rounds the buttons in a group).A.4 A MODELESS DIALOG WITH SEVERAL WIDGETSWe will start by discussing the widgets of the dialog window illustrated in Figure A.1. To see the script for this dialog along with a short mainline script that launches the dialog, nd the le: Script A_01 WidgetBuffet.py in the Appendix A scripts.e goal of this Appendix is to see how Python script snippets can be used to produce the various widgets in the modeless dialog of Figure A.1. Since the purpose of this dialog is simply to show a selec-tion of widgets, the layout design of the dialog does not adhere to any particular guidelines derived from HCI (human–computer interaction) principles. Nonetheless, it does illustrate how we can achieve logical and visual nesting of widgets through the use of frame widgets (function calls tk.LabelFrame and tk.Frame).
300 ◾ Appendix AAer studying the script and understanding how it works, you should be able to copy and modify relevant parts of the Script A_01 WidgetBuffet script so that your own program can work with a simple GUI. e script contains most of the widgets that you might need in a GUI. Menu widgets are not covered because they are somewhat more complicated to design and implement.e script for this dialog, contained in Script A_01 WidgetBuffet, covers about three pages and may be somewhat daunting for the program-mer who is not familiar with Tkinter. However, it is quite modular in its con-struction and easily understandable if you approach it one section at a time.e script can be separated into four parts: 1. A preamble (imports modules, provides the class denition header, and initiates the ll of the dialog window). 2. Denitions for the widgets (organized on a frame-by-frame basis).FIGURE A.1 e widget buet modeless dialog.
Appendix A ◾ 301 3. Denitions for the callback functions (invoked when a widget is activated). 4. e statements for the mainline program.We will rst describe the preamble and then discuss the various wid-gets and their corresponding callback functions.A.4.1 Preamble Statementse script starts with the following statements:import chimera, Tkinter as tkfrom chimera.baseDialog import ModelessDialogclass WidgetBuffet(ModelessDialog): buttons = ("Apply", "Close") help = False # Leave this out to get a Help button. title = "Window title goes here" def fillInUI(self, parent): # Text to be displayed in the dialog window: topText = tk.Label(parent, text = " Text at top of dialog", font = ("Helvetica", 11, "normal")) topText.grid(row = 0, column = 0, columnspan = 2, pady = 4, sticky = tk.W)e rst statement imports both chimera and Tkinter. Note that a Tkinter prex will be designated by using tk. e next statement brings in the ModelessDialog class and the next statement denes the WidgetBuffet class that indicates inheritance from the ModelessDialog class. e next three statements specify the buttons that will appear (or not appear) at the bottom of the dialog and the title that will be placed in the window pane. Note that the help button does not appear because of the help = False statement.e initialization function fillInUI sets up the widgets in the dialog. e rst widget is an optional Label that provides some text to describe the purpose of the dialog. e arguments for the Label instantiation are reasonably self-explanatory. e statement aer that uses the grid manager to specify the location of the Label widget within the dialog window. We next consider Tkinter strategies for placement of the other widgets.


===== [74/99] chapter-74.html =====

302 ◾ Appendix AA.4.2 Widget PlacementTkinter has three approaches for the layout of widgets: 1. e Pack Manager is the easiest one to use, but it is somewhat limited in its capabilities. 2. e Grid Manager is more exible than the pack manager and pro-vides a versatile mechanism for widget layout. It requires more direc-tives from the programmer. You are not allowed to have the Grid Manager and the Pack Manager working together within one dialog. 3. e Place Manager is the most capable but requires more work to get everything set up just right. For simple dialogs it is implementation overkill and is not recommended.Considering the previous points, we will work with the Grid Manager. e Grid Manager considers a layout to be organized as a two-dimensional array of cells organized in rows and columns. You do not have to specify the number of rows and columns; this will be determined by the Grid Manager. A single cell is considered to be in a particular row and column. e width of a cell will be determined by the width of the column in which it lies, and the height of a cell will be determined by the height of the row in which it lies.eheight of a row will be equal to the height of the widget (in that row) with the larg-est height. e width of a column will be equal to the width of the widget (in that column) with the largest width. As discussed below, these rules are modied if the widget spans more than one column or more than one row. Specication of column span is done using the columnspan keyword.Normally, a cell will contain a single widget (e.g., a button, checkbox, scroll bar, etc.). In this appendix, we encourage the option of having a cell* contain a single frame widget instantiated by using tk.Frame or tk.LabelFrame. Each frame essentially establishes a lower level grid system with cells containing other widgets. is provides a nesting hierarchy for all the widgets and their placement in the dialog is fairly easy to reorga-nize if necessary. Figure A.2 shows the grid system that is being used for the dialog illustrated in Figure A.1. e high-level grid system is delin-eated using heavy dashed lines, while the various low-level grid systems are delineated using narrower dashed lines that are superimposed over the ridges that visually delineate a frame.* We start with one frame occupying a single cell, but as we will see later, it is possible for a frame to span two or more adjacent cells.
Appendix A ◾ 303With some careful inspection you can verify that the high-level grid system has 12 cells organized in an array with 6 rows and 2 columns. ese cells are used to organize nine “high-level” widgets as follows: 1. e Label widget referenced as topText in the script sets up a text string at the top of the dialog. e statement to do this relies on the Grid Manager and reads as follows: topText.grid(row = 0, column = 0, columnspan = 2, pady = 4, sticky = tk.W) e row and column settings indicate that the label occupies all of row 0. It starts in column 0 and spans two columns (not really nec-essary for this short string of text but advisable if the text string is made longer). ere is some vertical padding so that the text is not cramped by the edges of the cell and the “sticky” parameter species that the widget should hug the “West” side of the cell.Column 0Row 0Row 1Row 2Row 3Row 4Row 5Column 1FIGURE A.2 Grid systems for the dialog of Figure A.1.
304 ◾ Appendix A 2. e next signicant widget is a LabelFrame that contains a title label and two check buttons. In the high-level grid system, it occu-pies the cell in row 1 and column 0. 3. e third widget is a LabelFrame that contains a title label and two press buttons. In the high-level grid, it occupies the cell in row 1 and column 1. 4. e next LabelFrame contains a title label and eight radio buttons. In the high-level grid, it occupies both cells in row 2 because it starts in column 0 and spans two columns. 5. e h widget is a LabelFrame that contains a title label, a list box, and a scroll bar. In the high-level grid, it occupies the cell in row 3, column 0. 6. e sixth widget is a Frame that contains a Canvas widget. In the high-level grid, it occupies the cell in row 3, column 1. 7. e seventh widget is a LabelFrame that contains a title label, a Scale widget, and a button. High-level grid coordinates are row 4, column 0. 8. e eighth widget is a LabelFrame that contains a title label and an Entry box. High-level grid coordinates are row 4, column 1. 9. e last widget is a LabelFrame that contains a Text widget. In the high-level grid, it occupies both cells in row 5 because it starts in column 0 and spans two columns.A.4.3 Widgets in the WidgetBuffet DialogWe can now discuss the script snippets that produce the various widgets appearing in the eight frames.A.4.3.1 The Checkbutton Classe Checkbutton class can be used to generate check boxes in a GUI. Consider the following script:# Setting up two check boxes:# Checking the box will change the value# of the IntVar and will initiate the execution# of the function specified by the command option.checkBoxFrame = tk.LabelFrame(parent, text = "Title for Checkboxes",
Appendix A ◾ 305 bd = 2, relief = tk.RIDGE)checkBoxFrame.grid(row = 1, column = 0, padx = 4, pady = 4, sticky = tk.W)self.checkedBoxA = tk.IntVar()cbA = tk.Checkbutton(checkBoxFrame, text = "Checkbox A ", variable = self.checkedBoxA, command = self.boxAfunc, indicatoron = 1)cbA.grid(row = 0, column = 0, pady = 6, sticky = tk.E)cbA.select() # This button initialized with a check mark.self.checkedBoxB = tk.IntVar()cbB = tk.Checkbutton(checkBoxFrame, text = "Checkbox B ", variable = self.checkedBoxB, command = self.boxBfunc, indicatoron = 1)cbB.grid(row = 1, column = 0, pady = 6, sticky = tk.E)e script starts with the instantiation of the LabelFrame widget. Note that its utilization of the high-level grid will be stipulated by using the parent parameter. e border dening the visual extent of the frame is established by the option: relief = tk.RIDGE. It should be mentioned that this option has no visual eect if you leave out the option bd = 2, which species the width of this border. e subsequent statements instan-tiate the two check boxes, all within this frame. Note that they make use of the Grid Manager, but the grid system is relative to the frame (stipulated by the checkBoxFrame parameter in each instantiation). e cell coordi-nates for these two widgets are relative to this frame (see the narrow dashed lines within cell (1,0) of the high-level grid) in Figure A.2. For example, the rst Checkbutton widget is in row 0, column 0 of this lower level grid. If you were to replace the checkBoxFrame parameter with parent, then the label widget would overwrite the text at the top of the dialog.Each Checkbutton instantiation statement contains an option that species the callback function for that button. For example, a mouse click in checkbox A will initiate execution of the callback function boxAfunc:# Callback functions needed for check boxes:def boxAfunc(self): line = "Box A checked. Value = %1d" % self.checkedBoxA.get() self.textWidget.insert(tk.END, line + "\n") self.textWidget.yview(tk.END)Normally, the statements in this function would perform an action related to this check box. In this dialog, the action is simply to have a text message displayed in the text box (referenced as self.textWidget) at the bottom of the dialog. Note that the indicator value (0 or 1) associated with 
306 ◾ Appendix Athe checkbox is available to the callback function by means of the self.checkedBoxA.get() call. e g et() function is a method associated with self.checkedBoxA, which is designated as an IntVar() and used by the variable option in the Checkbutton instantiation statement. As a nal observation, we see that the statement c b A.s ele ct() initializes checkbox A to be in its selected state.A.4.3.2 Normal Buttonse script:# Setting up two buttons (one disabled for now):buttonsFrame = tk.LabelFrame(parent, text = "Title for buttons", bd = 2, relief = tk.RIDGE)buttonsFrame.grid(row = 1, column = 1, padx = 4, pady = 4, sticky = tk.E)self.btnA = tk.Button(buttonsFrame, text = " Button A name ", command = lambda: self.btnFunc("A"))self.btnA.grid(row = 0, column = 0, padx = 4, pady = 4)self.btnB = tk.Button(buttonsFrame, text = " Button B name ", command = lambda: self.btnFunc("B"), state = tk.DISABLED)self.btnB.grid(row = 1, column = 0, padx = 4, pady = 4)sets up two buttons in the frame residing in the cell at location (1, 1). If you understood the script for the checkboxes, then this script should be no trou-ble. Each button press initiates the execution of the callback function self.btnFunc. To make this script a bit more interesting, we are using the same callback function for both buttons. To identify the button that was pushed, we pass a parameter to the callback function by using a lambda expression. Using a lambda expression is necessary if this command option is to work properly aer a mouse click on the button. Note that specifying the option as: command = self.btnFunc("A") will cause the self.btnFunc callback to be called during the instantiation of the button and this is not what we want to do! We want it to be called when the button is depressed using the mouse. To add more interest to this script, the option state = tk.DISABLED has been used in the instantiation for Button B. Consequently, when the dialog is launched, this button is initially in a “grayed-out” disabled state. To give Button A “something to do,” we have included the statement self.bt n B.configure(state = tk.NORMAL) in its callback function and this will put Button B into its normal (not disabled) state.


===== [75/99] chapter-75.html =====

Appendix A ◾ 307A.4.3.3 A Group of Radio Buttonse script:# Set up radio buttons as specified by a list:rButtonsFrame = tk.LabelFrame(parent, text = “Title for radio buttons”, bd = 2, relief = tk.RIDGE)rButtonsFrame.grid(row = 2, column = 0, columnspan = 2, padx = 4, pady =4, sticky = tk.W + tk.E)# Use tk.IntVar() here for integer result values.self.rBtnResult = tk.StringVar() radioBtn_L = [("Name A", "Result A", 0, 0), (“Name B”, “Result B”, 0, 1), (“Name C”, “Result C”, 0, 2), ("Name D", "Result D", 0, 3), ("Name E", "Result E", 1, 0), ("Name F", "Result F", 1, 1), ("Name G", "Result G", 1, 2), ("Name H", "Result H", 1, 3)] self.rBtnResult.set("Result A") # This button starts off selected.for text, rslt, rw, cl in radioBtn_L: rBtn = tk.Radiobutton(rButtonsFrame, text = text, variable = self.rBtnResult, value = rslt, command = self.rBtnfunc) rBtn.grid(row = rw, column = cl, padx = 4, sticky = tk.W)sets up a Label widget and eight radio buttons within the frame referenced as rButtonsFrame. Having learned about the command and variable options in the previous sections, this script should be easy to understand. e names of buttons and their associated result values have been specied in the radioBtn _ L list. Tuples in the list also contain the low-level grid coordinates for each button. Note that the frame for the button has a column span of two cells and so the frame is correspondingly bigger than the previ-ous frames. e locations of the button are in a low-level grid delineated by the narrow lines within cells (2, 0) and (2, 1) of the high-level grid in Figure A.2. For example, the radio button “Name G” can be found in cell (2,1) of this frame. e callback function self.rBtnfunc is the same for all radio but-tons. e value option of the radio button instantiation statement species a result for each radio button. Each result is a string such as “Result A” and this is made available to the callback function when it executes the statement self.r BtnResult.get(). In this call, self.rBtnResult is a StringVar, which is designated in the radio button instantiation as the parameter for the variable option. Finally, note that self.rBtnResult.set("Result A") designates the radio button that is “preselected” when the dialog is launched.
308 ◾ Appendix AA.4.3.4 A List Box Widget with a Scroll Bar Widgete script:listBoxFrame = tk.LabelFrame(parent, text = "Title for list box", bd = 2, relief = tk.RIDGE)listBoxFrame.grid(row = 3, column = 0, padx = 4, pady = 4, sticky = tk.W + tk.NS) self.lstBx = tk.Listbox(listBoxFrame, height = 5, width = 18, selectmode = tk.SINGLE, bg = "white") # Use MULTIPLE for checkbox like operation. scroll = tk.Scrollbar(listBoxFrame, command = self.lstBx.yview)self.lstBx.configure(yscrollcommand = scroll.set)scroll.grid(row = 0, column = 1, padx = 5, pady = 4, sticky = tk.W +tk.N + tk.S) lstBx_L = ["Entry 0", "Entry 1", "Entry 2", "Entry 3", "Entry 4", "Entry 5"]for item in lstBx_L: self.lstBx.insert(tk.END, item)self.lstBx.grid(row = 0, column = 0, padx = 4, pady = 4, sticky = tk.E)self.lstBx.bind("<Double-Button-1>", self.Apply)sets up a Listbox widget and a Scrollbar widget within the frame located in the cell at row 3 and column 0 of the high-level grid. e low-level grid for this frame has a grid system with one row and two columns. Row 0 contains the list box in column 0 along with the vertical scroll bar in column 1. Note that the height of row 0 is determined by the list box vertical height, which is specied by the option height = 5, where 5 is the number of visible lines in the list box. e width of the list box, here set to be 18, is also given in terms of a character count. is dialog has the option selectmode = tk.SINGLE meaning that one can only select a single item from the list box. Using selectmode = tk.MULTIPLE would allow multiple selections.By using the function call: self.lstBx.curselection(), we can determine which list box entry was selected. For the sake of convenience, this statement has been put into the callback function for the Apply button. Note that selection of a list box line such as Entry 2 will produce a curse-lection return value that is the tuple (‘2’,). Since the selection mode is SINGLE, there is only one entry in this tuple. As you would expect, using a MULTIPLE selection mode produces tuples with multiple entries.As mentioned earlier, column 1 of row 0 contains a scrollbar widget. Notice how the script facilitates communication between 
Appendix A ◾ 309the listbox widget and the scrollbar widget. e instantia-tion of the Scrollbar widget includes the option: command = s elf.ls t B x.y v i e w , which references the listbox and sets the orienta-tion of the scrollbar to be vertical (specied as yview). e next state-ment: self.lstBx.configure(yscrollcommand = scroll.set) congures the listbox so that it knows about the scroll widget. Note how the listbox and the scrollbar can be visually associated by having the listbox move to the “East side” of its low-level cell (sticky = tk.E), while the scrollbar snuggles up to the “West side” of its cell (sticky = tk.W +tk.N + tk.S). e tk.N and tk.S specications ensure that the vertical height of the scrollbar match the height of the listbox. e nal layout has the listbox adjacent to the scrollbar with a small space between the two, as dictated by the padx settings.e listbox is populated with entries by using an insert function within a for loop that works through a list of character strings. Note that each entry is inserted at the end of the growing list in the listbox.e last statement: self.lstBx.bind("<Double-Button-1>", self.Apply) is interesting. It produces a “binding” between an event and a call-back function. More precisely, double clicking of an entry in the listbox will cause the callback function for the Apply button to be executed. is is a convenient way for the user to get immediate action on a listbox selection.A.4.3.5 A Canvas Widgete script:# Set up a canvas to the right of the list box:canvasFrame = tk.Frame(parent, bd = 2, relief = tk.RIDGE)canvasFrame.grid(row = 3, column = 1, padx = 4, pady = 4, sticky = tk.E)# Title left out (a picture is worth a thousand words…)picture = tk.Canvas(canvasFrame, width = 110, height = 107)picture.grid(row = 0, column = 0)gfImage = tk.PhotoImage(file = "canvasExample.gif")picture.create_image(0, 0, image = gfImage, anchor = tk.NW)# Store a reference to the image as an attribute of the canvas:picture.img = gfImage # Remove this and the image disappears.puts a Canvas widget into the frame that is in cell (3,1) of the high-level grid. A canvas can be used to display graphics or images. ere are sev-eral methods associated with the widget allowing the programmer to 
310 ◾ Appendix Ainsert lines, circles, polygons, and so on. ese capabilities will be ignored because they are beyond our needs. For the dialog being considered, the canvas widget simply displays the graphic canvasExample.gif. Note that the Canvas widget has a width and height that are specied as options in the Canvas instantiation.e image is accessed by opening a le having a pathname that is speci-ed by the file option in the PhotoImage function. e image is trans-ferred to the Canvas widget by means of the function create_image. e pixel coordinates (0,0) and the anchor option are used to locate the image within the two-dimensional canvas.Note that it is important for the image to have a reference that is an attribute of the canvas. is is accomplished with the statement: picture.img = gfImage. Without this statement, the image will not be retained in the dialog and the canvas will be empty.A.4.3.6 A Scale WidgetA scale is useful if the user is required to input a number that is restricted to some prespecied range of possible values. An example would be the requirement to stipulate a threshold value prior to the execution of an algorithm.e script:# Setting up a scale:scaleFrame = tk.LabelFrame(parent, text = “Title for scale”, bd = 2, relief = tk.RIDGE)scaleFrame.grid(row = 4, column = 0, padx = 4, pady = 4, sticky = tk.W) self.scaleVar = tk.DoubleVar()scale = tk.Scale(scaleFrame, variable = self.scaleVar, orient = tk.HORIZONTAL, length = 100, from_ = 1.0, to = 12.0, resolution = 0.1, troughcolor = “goldenrod1”)scale.grid(row = 0, column = 0, sticky = tk.W) acceptButton = tk.Button(scaleFrame, text = “Accept”, command = self.acceptSelection)acceptButton.grid(row = 0, column = 1, padx = 4, pady = 4, sticky = tk.S + tk.W)sets up a Scale widget and a button in the frame occupying cell (4, 0) of the high-level grid. Statements dealing with the LabelFrame and Button 
Appendix A ◾ 311instantiations are similar to those covered in earlier sections. Note that the callback function for the Accept button is acceptSelection().Let us review some of the options that appear in the Scale instan-tiation statement. e option orient = tk.HORIZONTAL establishes a horizontal orientation for the scale while the option length = 100 species its length in pixels. e options from_ and to will dictate the range of values that the scale will put out. Since from is a Python keyword, Tkinter uses the underscore in the from_ option to avoid a Python error. e resolution = 0.1 option dictates that output from the scale will increment in steps of 0.1 as the scale slider is moved.e value provided by the scale is retained in the self.scaleVar. is is specied by the option variable = self.scaleVar. is variable is initialized as a DoubleVar() and it is accessed in the acceptSelection callback function where it is displayed in the text box.A.4.3.7 An Entry Box WidgetEntry boxes are useful for getting short character strings from a user, for example, a Protein Data Bank (PDB) identier.e script:# Setting up a entry box:entryFrame = tk.LabelFrame(parent, text = "Title for entry box", bd = 2, relief = tk.RIDGE)entryFrame.grid(row = 4, column = 1, padx = 4, pady = 4, sticky = tk.E + tk.NS) self.entryVar = tk.StringVar()entry = tk.Entry(entryFrame, textvariable = self.entryVar, width = 14, bg = "white")entry.grid(row = 0, column = 0, padx = 4, pady = 4, sticky = tk.E)# Uncomment the next line if the entry box is to start DISABLED.#entry.config(state = tk.DISABLED)places an Entry widget into the frame within cell (4,1) of the high-level grid. If you understood all the Tkinter statements in the preceding sections, then there is nothing really new here. Just two small notes: the option width = 14 is specifying the entrybox width in terms of character length and the Entry widget can be disabled by means of the config function.


===== [76/99] chapter-76.html =====

312 ◾ Appendix AA.4.3.8 A Text Box WidgetA text box can be used for entry of longer strings of text but, in this dialog, it is used to provide status output.e script:# Setting up a text box:textFrame = tk.LabelFrame(parent, text = "Title for text box", bd = 2, relief = tk.RIDGE)textFrame.grid(row = 5, column = 0, columnspan = 2, padx = 4, pady = 4, sticky = tk.W + tk.E) self.textWidget = tk.Text(textFrame, width = 40, height = 6, wrap = tk.WORD, bg = "white")self.textWidget.grid(row = 0, column = 0, padx = 4, sticky = tk.W)textScroll = tk.Scrollbar(textFrame, command = self.textWidget.yview)self.textWidget.configure(yscrollcommand = textScroll.set)textScroll.grid(row = 0, column = 1, padx = 2, pady = 4, sticky = tk.W +tk.N + tk.S)places a Text widget into the labeled frame that is in cells (5, 0) and (5, 1) of the high-level grid. Note that the LabelFrame widget spans two col-umns. Again, if you understood all the Tkinter statements in the preced-ing sections, then there is nothing really new here. e scrollbar is set up in a fashion that is similar to what we have seen for the list box. e Text widget has a width and height that is specied by a character count. Note that the textbox has a wrap option that determines how a line continues to the next line. By stipulating wrap = tk.WORD, we will not get lines ending in mid-word unless they are extremely long (longer than the width of the text box).In our implementation of the dialog, character strings are put into the text box by the callback functions. In all such cases, a character string stored in the variable line is created and then inserted at the end of the text box by using the function call: self.textWidget.insert(tk.END, line + "\n"). Note the use of “\n” so that each callback addition to the text appears as a new line. e nal statement: s e lf.t e x t Wid g et.y v ie w(t k.E N D) is used to ensure that the text scrolls up as each new line is put into the text box. is avoids the need for the user to constantly scroll the text box to see the latest new lines.
Appendix A ◾ 313A.4.4 Testing the WidgetBuffet Dialoge widgetBuffet.py script contains a very simple script to test the dialog:wb = WidgetBuffet()out = “Using the widgets should show results in this text box.\n”wb.textWidget.insert(tk.END, out) e dialog class is instantiated and this is enough to launch it. e next statement shows how a mainline script can access a widget in the dialog. To illustrate this, a character string has been sent to the text box at the bottom of the dialog.It should be noted that this dialog does not do any interactions with the Python Shell. Consequently, you could simply launch it as an application by using the File… Open… menu of the Chimera window and all further interactions would not involve the Python Shell.A.5 BUILDING A MODELESS DIALOGUnderstanding the underlying construction and functionality of the widgets in the WidgetBuffet dialog, we can construct other modeless dialogs by simply “stealing and modifying” its statements. One would go through the following steps: 1. Preamble: Copy over the preamble statements seen in Section A.4.1. You will want to rename the dialog and dene the text to be placed in the window pane and at the top of the dialog. You can also bring in var-ious standard buttons that are available, for example: “OK” and “Close.” Any other buttons that you name will be set up at the bottom of the dialog but you will be responsible for providing the callback functions. 2. Layout: Copy over the needed frames along with the widgets that they contain. Modications will likely include the following: a. Decide where the frames will appear relative to the high-level grid. b. Decide what goes into a frame (title label, number of buttons, etc.).
314 ◾ Appendix A c. Determine the layout of these widgets relative to the low-level grid within the frame. is will involve appropriate use of the “sticky” options and may require some modications of the width, height, and padding options. You will probably test the dialog several times, making several changes until the layout is both user-friendly and aesthetically pleasing. d. Be sure that the communication between the widget and the callback is properly handled (creating the appropriate IntVar(), StringVar(), or DoubleVar() variables). 3. Callback functions: Implement the callback functions. is will include statements that deal with interactions between the dialog and the mainline program. You will also need to determine whether a callback function responds to one widget or to several (as in the Button example discussed in Section A.4.3.2). 4. Interactions with the mainline: Write the code for the mainline program that will instantiate the dialog and subsequently work with the widgets that it contains.A.6 BUILDING A MODAL DIALOGMost of the script snippets that we have seen in the previous sections can be applied to modal dialogs. Let us now consider how a modal dialog diers from a modeless dialog by reviewing the statements in the le: Script A _ 02 Sample ModalDialog.py. It is a small dialog so be careful not to lose it among any other windows that may be open on your desktop.Here is the script:import chimera, Tkinter as tkfrom chimera.baseDialog import ModalDialogclass userInput(ModalDialog): title = "User Input" buttons = ('OK', 'Cancel') # Leave out next statement to get a Help button. help = False def __init__(self, requestToUser): self.requestToUser = requestToUser ModalDialog.__init__(self) 
Appendix A ◾ 315 def fillInUI(self, parent): topText = tk.Label(parent, text = self.requestToUser) topText.grid(row = 0, column = 0) # Next line is needed in case the user does a Cancel. self.result = None self.entry = tk.Entry(parent, width = 8) self.entry.grid(row = 0, column = 1) #==================================================== # CALLBACK functions: def OK(self): self.result = self.entry.get() ModalDialog.Cancel(self, value=None)#==================================================================# Mainline:md = userInput(" Type in a PDB ID: ")md.run(chimera.tkgui.app)if md.result: print md.resultNotice that inheritance is from ModalDialog and not ModelessDialog. Object initialization is done by the __init __ call whichtakes in a string parameter that will be used to dene topText, which is a Label widget at the top of the dialog. e __init__ function also does initialization of the ModalDialog base class: ModalDialog. __init__(self). Functionality of statements in the fillInUI function is essentially the same as what we saw earlier for the modeless dialog. Care must be taken to ensure that a nal result is avail-able to the mainline program when the user clicks on the OK button. In the given script, the widgets are not enclosed in one or more frames because the layout is very simple. e Label and Entry widgets are positioned using a grid with one row and two columns.e callback function for the OK button gets a string result from the Entry widget and sets it up in the self.result variable, which can be accessed by the mainline code immediately aer the dialog disappears due to the execution of: ModalDialog.Cancel(self, value=None). Note that there is no callback function for the Cancel button because this func-tionality is handled by a base class method.e mainline is fairly simple. It instantiates the dialog but then another statement is required to run it. Since it is a modal dialog, the statement 
316 ◾ Appendix Afollowing md.run(chimera.tkgui.app) will not run until the user dismisses the dialog by clicking on either the OK button or the Cancel button.REFERENCE[G05] J. E. Grayson. Python and Tkinter Programming. Manning Publications, Greenwich, CT, 2005.


===== [77/99] chapter-77.html =====

317Appendix B ScenographicsB.1 MOTIVATION AND INTRODUCTIONere are many occasions when it is desirable to put more graphical content into a molecular display. We might wish to use an arrow to show a possible direction of movement for an atom or a cylinder-like object to represent the inertial axis of a helix. In various mathematical models, an amino acid side chain may be approximated by an ellipsoid with a corre-sponding visual component in the display. e Scenographics* package in the StructBio folder provides various methods that can be used to place three-dimensional (3D) objects and surfaces into the current display of a molecule. All objects can be positioned in 3D display space by speci-fying coordinates and, in some cases, the directional orientation of the object. Object size and color can also be specied.e Scenographics package has several classes that allow a program-mer to place scenographic elements into a Chimera scene. ese fall into the following six categories: 1. Solids 2. Surfaces 3. Lines* As noted in Wikipedia (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scenography), the term scenography goes back to 1862 and was used by Antonio Caimi who excelled in Arte scenograca, which is the study and practice of design for stage settings. ese endeavors “required ingenious engineering to create movable sets, or create illusions of environments.” In our case, the ingenuity will require the appli-cation of linear algebra and graphics algorithms to create extra elements in the molecular display.
318 ◾ Appendix B 4. Parametric surfaces 5. Ellipsoids 6. Labelsese classes are not completely independent. For example, the class that generates parametric surfaces will use the classes that generate surfaces and lines. Considering these dependencies, we will cover these classes in the order just specied.B.2 USING THE Solids CLASSe Solids class has methods to draw various 3D objects including struts, tubes, spheres, cubes, boxes, disks, spindles, arrows, and the Platonic solids (tetrahedrons, hexahedrons, octahedrons, dodecahedrons, and icosahedrons). Figure B.1 shows some typical examples, whereas Figure B.2 presents a whimsical view of the ve regular convex polyhedra referred to as the Platonic solids. Figure B.1 was produced by the script Script B_01 Display SolidsTest.py and Figure B.2 was produced by the script Script B_02 Platonic Garden.py.Using the class as shown in these scripts requires the following import statements:from StructBio.Scenographics.solids import Solidsfrom StructBio.Utilities.miscFunctions import colorByNameFIGURE B.1 (See color insert.) Some examples of the available three-dimensional (3D) objects from the Solids class.
Appendix B ◾ 319e rst statement brings in the Solids class denition. e importation of the colorByName function found in the StructBio.Utilities. miscFunctions package is required if you wish to specify a color by using a character string such as “light sea green” which is one of the Chimera built-in colors.* Typical use of Solids will also require the importation of numpy so that the script can compute 3D coordinates using data representations provided by array(). Aer the import statements, the script can instantiate Solids objects, for example:solidsDisp = Solids()e default model name is provided by the Python string “Solids graphics”, but this can be changed by giving the class initialization function a character string argument, for example:solidsDisp = Solids(“Platonic solids”)as seen in Script B_02 Platonic Garden.py.Aer the object instantiation, the script can add various objects to the display, for example:solidDisp.addSphere(center, radius, rgb)* http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/docs/UsersGuide/colortables.html.FIGURE B.2 (See color insert.) A Platonic garden.
320 ◾ Appendix Bwhere center, radius, and rgb specify the obvious attributes for the sphere. Once all the required objects have been added to the scene, we can initiate their display as follows:solidDisp.display()Here is a list of the function headers in the Solids class:def addStrut(self, p1, p2, radius, rgb):def addTube(self, p1, p2, radius, rgb):def addSphere(self, center, radius, rgb):def addCube(self, center, side, rgb):def addBox(self, center, sides_T, rgb):def addDisk(self, center, normal, thickness, radius, rgb):def addSpindle(self, p1, p2, radius, rgb):def addArrow(self, p1, p2, radius, rgb):def addTetrahedron(self, center, size, rgb, transparency = 1.0):def addHexahedron(self, center, size, rgb, transparency = 1.0):def addOctahedron(self, center, size, rgb, transparency = 1.0):def addDodecahedron(self, center, size, rgb, transparency = 1.0):def addIcosahedron(self, center, size, rgb, transparency = 1.0):def addPolygon(self, polyPoints_L, rgb, transparency = 1.0):Most of these methods have an obvious functionality. e addStrut function puts a cylinder (capped at both ends) into the display, whereas the addTube function generates a test-tube-like object (a cylinder that is capped at one end and has a half sphere at the other end). Figure B.1 shows a strut, tube, spindle, arrow, sphere, cube, box, and disk.e parameters for the function calls are fairly straightforward. e requirements are as follows:p1, p2, center are arrays that hold coordinates for 3D points.radius, side, thickness are oating point positive numbers.rgb designates a color (a 3-tuple of oating point numbers each in the range [0.0, 1.0]).transparency is a number in the range [0.0, 1.0].normal is an array that holds a three-component vector that designates a direction.sides_T is a tuple that designates the lengths of the sides of a box (three positive oating point numbers).Figure B.2 was generated by using Script B_02 Platonic Garden. e function calls are quite straightforward. ere is no setting of the parameters that will rotate these objects.
Appendix B ◾ 321B.3 USING THE Surfaces CLASSe Surfaces class has methods that generate a triangulated surface. e import statement to access the class is as follows:from StructBio.Scenographics.surfaces import SurfacesA sample script using the class can be found in Script B_03 Display Polygons test.py. As expected, generating a surface starts with a class instantiation such aspd = Surfaces()After this, you can add surface elements by doing function calls to addPolygon or addFace. The parameter sequence is the same for both function invocations. The first argument is a list of vertices (each being a numpy array) and the next two arguments define the color and transparency of the surface. After all polygonal additions are completed, the surface can be displayed by executing the display() function call.If you run the script, you will notice that rotation of the scene will cause the polygons dened by addFace to disappear when you attempt to look at them from behind the surface. Why is this useful? If the surface pieces are enclosing a 3D object, then there will be pieces on the far side of the object that cannot be seen because they are concealed by the part of the surface that is closer to the observation point. If the surface comprises pieces generated by addPolygon, then they will be handled by the graph-ics engine even though they will eventually be obscured from view. If the pieces are generated by addFace, then they are simply omitted when seen from behind. is back-face culling in the graphics pipeline provides a performance advantage because surface pieces that are not seen will not be processed for display.A cautionary note: One must be careful to distinguish the front face from the back face of a polygon. is orientation is dened by the order-ing of the vertices. e front (visible) face will have its vertices listed in counter-clockwise fashion in the addFace invocation. So if you are building a surface by using addFace, you will have to ensure that the vertices are listed in the required order. is will avoid unintended surface holes.


===== [78/99] chapter-78.html =====

322 ◾ Appendix BNote that Script B_03 Display Polygons test.py also has a user interaction via the Python Shell. is interaction shows how the function calls hide() and show() can be used to control the appearance of the surfaces in the display.In Section B.5 we will discuss classes that provide more sophisticated sur-face constructions that are dened by means of parameterized equations.B.4 USING THE Lines CLASSe Lines class has methods that generate an unbroken line that is made from piecewise linear line segments. e import statement to access the class is as follows:from StructBio.Scenographics.lines import LinesA sample script using the class can be found in Script B_04 Display Lines test.py. As expected, generating a line starts with a class instan-tiation such aspd = Lines()Aer this you can add line elements by doing function calls to addLine. e rst argument is a list of vertices (each being a numpy array) and the next argument denes the color of the line. Aer all line additions are completed, the lines can be displayed by executing the display() func-tion call. e Lines class has hide() and show() methods with the same functionality as in the Surfaces class.B.5 INTRODUCING THE ParametricSurfaces CLASSe ParametricSurfaces class is a base class that provides the data structures and methods that are to be used by other derived classes. e ParametricSurfaces class will allow you to construct surfaces that are much more complex than what we have seen so far. e class probably has more functionality than you will need but it should hopefully meet any extra future requirements that are not currently foreseen. To understand how this class is used to build a surface, we consider the following steps:• Step 1: Start with a curve in the x–y plane. is curve is dened as a sequence of points held in the list baseCurvePts _ L. Each entry in the list is a two component numpy array. e number of points is numBasePts.
Appendix B ◾ 323• Step 2: Use an algorithm that will replicate the base curve to form a cross section with some particular 3D position and orientation. is is done repeatedly to generate a list of cross sections stored in crossSections _ L.• Step 3: e succession of cross sections can be used to dene either a mesh or a surface.If you inspect the __init __ function of the ParametricSurfaces class,* you will see the declarations for these three variables. Figure B.3 gives an elementary example of a base curve with its nine points represented by small spheres. e details for Steps 2 and 3 will be covered later. For now, we describe these steps in more general terms.Figure B.4 shows the base curve replicated to generate four cross sections (as in Step 2). Again, for emphasis, each of the points in a cross section is represented by a small sphere.We can now ask for a mesh that will connect the corresponding pointsin the successive cross sections. is is Step 3 and is illustrated in Figure B.5.* See the package component StructBio.Scenographics.parametricSurfaces, available from the book’s website.FIGURE B.3 Base curve points.
324 ◾ Appendix Be surface can be dened by lling in the mesh with polygonal surface elements as in Figure B.6. Note that the surface has been given a transpar-ency of 0.8 and so the z axis can be seen beneath the surface.Our mesh and surface constructions will allow some extra variations. Setting closedBase = True causes the mesh generation or surface gen-eration methods to treat the base curve points as dening a closed curve. e successive cross sections then dene a cylinder type of surface as illus-trated in Figure B.7a. When the surface has a closed base curve we can cap the ends. If we set startCap = True, then the rst cross section denes a polygon that will be lled in with a surface as illustrated in Figure B.7b. A similar setting can be used for endCap.FIGURE B.4 Cross sections.FIGURE B.5 Generation of a mesh.
Appendix B ◾ 325FIGURE B.6 Generation of a surface.(a)(b)FIGURE B.7 (a) Surface with closed base. (b) Surface with start cap.
326 ◾ Appendix BIf you inspect the script that defines the ParametricSurfaces base class, you will find various methods that are related to Step 3 dis-cussed earlier. A quick overview of these functions will be described next:__init__(self, baseCurvePts_L, modelName = "")is is the initialization method for the base class instantiation. It accepts the list of points of the base curve and sets up the required data structures needed for surface or mesh generation. Setting modelName can be used to give the model a name that will be seen in the Model Panel dialog (accessed using the menu invocation: Favorites… ModelPanel).rotateAndMove(self, rotMat, translationVector)is method is used by the derived classes to reposition and possibly rotate the vertices stored in the list of cross sections.removeMesh(self)is is used to eliminate the Chimera model holding the mesh lines.removeSurface(self)is is used to eliminate the Chimera model holding the surface.displayMesh(self, color, closedBase = False, startCap = False, endCap = False, closedSpine = False)is method accesses the cross-section list and uses that data to generate the mesh lines. Notice the default settings for closedBase, startCap, and endCap. e closedSpine parameter will be covered later in this section when discussing Figure B.10.displaySurface(self, color, transparency = 1.0, closedBase = False, startCap = False, endCap = False, closedSpine = False)e displaySurface method will display a surface with the color and transparency specied. Notice the default settings for closedBase, startCap, and endCap. It is possible to use both displaySurface and displayMesh to get the display of a surface with an embedded mesh.


===== [79/99] chapter-79.html =====

Appendix B ◾ 327showSurface(self), hideSurface(self), showMesh(self), and hideMesh(self)ese functions have the same functionality as the show and hide meth-ods found in the Surfaces class.As mentioned earlier, all these methods are related to Step 3. e functionality needed to set up the crossSections_L list (done in Step 2) is accomplished by classes that are derived from the ParametricSurfaces class. Each of these classes has its own strategy for the positioning and orienting of the cross sections. ese classes can be listed as follows:• FrenetFrameSurface• ExtrusionSurface• RevolutionSurface• RuledSurfaceB.5.1 Using the FrenetFrameSurface Classe FrenetFrameSurface class is the most complicated class to use, but we cover it rst because the ExtrusionSurface and RevolutionSurface classes are actually derived from this class and give the programmer an easier approach to working with this class.e class can be imported by usingfrom StructBio.Scenographics.parametricSurfaces \ import FrenetFrameSurfacee object instantiation is done via the __ init __ method that starts with the following header:__init__(self, baseCurvePts_L, spinePts_L, rotation3Dmats_L, xScale_L, yScale_L, modelName = "")As described earlier, we assume a base curve is dened in the x, y plane by specifying a list of two-dimensional (2D) points: baseCurvePts_L. When a FrenetFrameSurface object is instantiated, it will be given a list of points in 3D space dening a spine curve. In the __init__ function, these points are provided by spinePts _L. ree more lists 
328 ◾ Appendix Brotation3Dmats _L, xScale _L, and yScale _L dene operations for 3D rotation and scaling.We describe the functionality of this class by providing more details for Step 2 introduced at the beginning of Section B.5. Recall the purpose of Step 2: We use an algorithm that will replicate the base curve to form a cross section with some particular 3D position and orientation. This is done repeatedly to generate a list of cross sections stored in crossSections_L. We can now describe the operations required to generate the ith cross section, that is stored in crossSections_L[i]:• Step 2(a): Copy the points in the baseCurvePts_L list to crossSections _ L[i].• Step 2(b): e x coordinate for every point in crossSections _ L[i] is scaled by a factor stored in xScale_L[i].• Step 2(c): e y coordinate for every point in crossSections _ L[i] is scaled by a factor stored in yScale_L[i].• Step 2(d): Every point in crossSections_L[i] is subjected to a 3D rotation operation specied by the rotation matrix stored in rotation3Dmats_L[i].• Step 2(e): Translate the points in crossSections_L[i] by using the vector stored in spinePts_L[i].Figure B.8 gives an example demonstrating these operations. e base curve is shown on the lower le. ree arrows have been set up to show the x, y, and z axes. In this case only four cross sections have been created. No scaling was done for the x coordinate, but the y coor-dinate of each base curve point was subject to scaling using the four scaling factors [1.0, 0.8, 0.6, 0.4]. Four rotation matrices were gener-ated in ad hoc manner and used to rotate the scaled base curve prior to translation: cos120sin12sin120 cos1201 00,1,2,3() ()() ()πππ−π=iiiii
Appendix B ◾ 329e four spine points stored in spinePts_L were [[5, 1, 1], [4, 2, 2], [4, 4, 3], [3, 6, 4]]. ese points have been emphasized in Figure B.8 as small spheres.Aer instantiation of the class object, displayMesh was used to generate the mesh and displaySurface (color gray with a transparency of 0.5) was used to show the surface. e script for Figure B.8 can be found in the le Script B_05 Frenet frame surface Example 1.py. is example has only four cross sections, but it has some visual complex-ity because both the y scaling factor and the rotation matrix change as we go from one cross section to the next. Normally, a Frenet frame surface would have many more cross sections and they would be closer together. Furthermore, the rotations and scaling factors would vary in small steps to facilitate a smooth surface continuity that is lacking in Figure B.8.It should be noted that typical use of the Frenet Frame approach involves moving the base prole along the spine curve in the generation of the suc-cessive cross sections. Each cross section corresponds to the base curve being given an orientation and position that is established by rotating and translating its local frame of reference now called the Frenet frame. As depicted in Figure B.9, this is done in such a way that the z axis of the local frame moves along the spine curve so that it is tangential to the spine curve.is places a constraint on the generation of the rotation matrices. So, when using the FrenetFrameSurface class you should take care to ensure that the rotation matrices force the z axis to be parallel with a tangent to the spine curve. ere are typically two ways to do this: e rotation matrices can be formulated by taking into account the global topology of the sur-face (as in the next example) or rotation matrix rotation3Dmats_L[i] can be built so that the z axis of the local frame is parallel to a vector that FIGURE B.8 Generation of a simple Frenet frame surface.
330 ◾ Appendix Bgoes from spinePts_L[i-1] to spinePts_ L[i+1] (with special attention being given to the end points of the spine to avoid an out-of-bounds error when accessing the spinePts_L list). Note that the generation of Figure B.8 involved a somewhat arbitrary choice of rotation matrices and so this constraint was not put in place.e script in the le Script B_06 Frenet frame surface Example 2.py provides another example of Frenet surface generation with the rotation matrices carefully designed so that the z axis of the local frame is tangent to a spine that is a simple circle.Here are some relevant notes for Figure B.10:• e base curve is dened by a set of 16 points that form a square. ey have been shown in the gure as a set of small spheres at the center of the gure.• e surface involves 256 cross sections and so we have a very smooth continuity in areas that show surface curvature.Spine curvezxyFIGURE B.9 Base curve in Frenet local frame moving along the spine curve.FIGURE B.10 Base curve in Frenet local frame moving along a simple circle.
Appendix B ◾ 331• e rotation matrices have been generated so that the z axis of the moving local Frenet frame is always parallel to the x, y plane but its x, y components (relative to the global frame) slowly change to give a constant rotation that keeps this z axis tangent to a circle.• Note the parameter setting closedSpine = True. is closes the surface so that it comes back on itself, a useful feature when drawing surfaces of a periodic nature, for example, a toroid.We nish this section with a nal example of a Frenet frame surface that has some utility for the display of pie chart data. In a recent paper by Kim et al. [KN11] they use a pie chart to report on the classication of pro-teins with respect to biological function. e style of the pie chart is quite compelling because it is represented as a set of colored 3D pie sections that have been moved away from the pie center by using a small translation as in Figure B.11.We now describe the generation of a single pie piece. We start with a base curve in the x, y plane that is a half ellipse as shown in Figure B.12. Arrows have been put in place to show the x, y, and z axes. e semi-minor axis has length of 1 unit and the semi-major axis has a length of 10units. ere are 64 points in the base curve. Note that the ellipse has been shied along the x axis in the negative direction so that the prole edge goes through the origin.We will need a spine curve for each pie piece. We start with a circle of radius that is the same as the length of the semimajor axis of the pie prole 13.58%27.16%13.58%8.02%2.47%33.95%1.23%FIGURE B.11 (See color insert.) Pie base curves.


===== [80/99] chapter-80.html =====

332 ◾ Appendix B(10 units) and consider the perimeter of this circle to be a collection of arcs. e length of the various arcs will be in proportion to the given data values. Each arc is then translated away from the origin along a radial vector that goes from the origin to the center of the arc. Points on each arc will dene the spinePts_L lists, one list needed for each pie piece. FigureB.13 illustrates this construction. In this example, ve data values were used: [22., 44., 55., 13., 22.]. e data were sorted and the inner circle was divided into ve arcs with lengths in proportion to these data values. In Figure B.13 ve small spheres are used to mark the break points sepa-rating the arcs. Each arc was moved away from the center along a radial line going from the origin to the center point on the arc.e script to generate the pie surfaces shown in Figure B.13 can be found in the le named Script B_07 Pie a la Frenet.py. For this gure, the data values are [22., 44., 55., 2., 4., 13., 22.]. is is the same as the pre-vious list with two extra small numbers put in to give a more interesting nal result. e script uses only 70 lines of code and this includes code for the arrows and labels* that associate a pie piece with its data value. Note that rotation matrices have been constructed so that the z axis of the local Frenet frame is tangent to an arc acting as a spine for a pie piece.* Labels will be covered in Section B.7 of this appendix.FIGURE B.12 Pie chart.FIGURE B.13 Pie base curve prole.(Incidentally, Figure B.13 was generated using the Lines and Solids classes.)
Appendix B ◾ 333A GUI (graphical user interface) version of this script has been put into the Appendix D directory. e extra code to support the GUI will make the script somewhat longer.e FrenetFrameSurface class gives you considerable power in the display of various sophisticated surfaces. For example, if you have a sud-den irresistible desire to draw a Klein bottle,* then this is the class to use! Unfortunately, these capabilities come with a cost: You will need to spend some extra eort to generate the lists used in the __init__ parameters of the class instantiation. is can be somewhat onerous especially when building the rotation matrices that are required. But it is oen the case that the surface requires a spine and set of associated rotation matrices that are easier to generate because the surface is simpler. us we intro-duce two classes that are derived from the FrenetFrameSurface class:1. e ExtrusionSurface class: e spine is a simple straight line. e rotation matrices perform 2D rotations of the base curve prior to the translation operations.2. e RevolutionSurface class: e spine is a circle that goes around the y axis. e rotation matrices are used to revolve the base curve around the y axis.By using these classes we can avoid the complications typically associ-ated with the instantiation of a FrenetFrameSurface object.B.5.2 Using the ExtrusionSurface Classe ExtrusionSurface class generates a sequence of cross sections by extruding† a base curve along a straight line. e class can be imported by usingfrom StructBio.Scenographics.parametricSurfaces \ import ExtrusionSurfacee object instantiation is done via the __init__ method that starts with the following header:__init__(self, baseCurvePts_L, zMin, zMax, numCrossSections, rotation2Dmats_L, xScale_L, yScale_L, modelName = "")* See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Klein_bottle. Note that the surface is nonorientable, so you would not be able to ll in the mesh using calls to addFace.† e term extrusion is oen used when describing the manufacturing of aluminum materials. See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extrusion.
334 ◾ Appendix BAs described earlier, we assume a base curve is dened in the x,y plane by specifying a list of 2D points: baseCurvePts_L. Initialization of the object is essentially a special case of the initialization done for the FrenetFrameSurface class. Prior to calling the __init__ function for the FrenetFrameSurface class the following lists are created:• e spinePts_L list is dened by generating numCross Sections points along the z axis ranging from zMin to zMax.• e rotation3Dmats_L list is built from the rotation2Dmats_L list.• e xScale_L and yScale_L lists are simply passed along unmodied.e rotation3Dmats_L list allows you to do a 2D rotation relative to the x, y plane while creating the successive cross sections. Bear in mind that an extrusion along the z axis does not signify a restriction because we can use the rotateAndMove function of the ParametricSurface class to reorient and reposition the cross sections prior to the generation of a mesh or surface.e script in the le Script B_08 Rotini extrusion.py provides an interesting example of an extrusion that involves a list of 2D rotation matrices (Figure B.14). It is colored to look like rotini pasta.* If you run the script, you can see that the 64 points in the base curve have been visually emphasized using small red spheres.* See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rotini.FIGURE B.14 Rotini extrusion.
Appendix B ◾ 335If the elliptical base curve was extruded along the z axis, we would get a simple cylinder with elliptical cross section. To make the script more interesting, the extrusion works with a list of 2D rotation matrices that rotate the cross sections right aer they are copied from the base curve. e script is relatively easy to read and is only 30 lines long (not counting the seven lines of code for the small spheres).B.5.3 Using the RevolutionSurface Classe RevolutionSurface class generates a sequence of cross sections by revolving a base curve in the x, y plane around the y axis. e class can be imported by usingfrom StructBio.Scenographics.parametricSurfaces \ import RevolutionSurfacee object instantiation is done via the __init__ method that starts with the following header:__init__ (self,baseCu r vePts_L,theta Min, thetaMa x, numCrossSections, xScale_L, yScale_L, modelName = "")In this case, we assume a base curve is dened in the right half of the x, y plane. e curve is specied by a list of 2D points: baseCurvePts _ L. Initialization of the object is essentially a special case of the initialization done for the FrenetFrameSurface class. Prior to calling the __init__ function for the FrenetFrameSurface class the following lists are created:• e spinePts_L list is simply a list of zeros that are numCrossSec-tions in number.• e rotation3Dmats_L list is designed to take a copy of the base curve and rotate it over the x, z plane (i.e., around the y axis) to get a succession of cross sections. e amount of rotation is bounded below by thetaMin and bounded above by thetaMax.• e xScale_L and yScale_L lists are simply passed along unmodied.
336 ◾ Appendix BNote that the rotation around the y axis does not signify a restriction in placement of the nal display object because we can use the rotateAn-dMove function of the ParametricSurface class to reorient and reposi-tion the cross sections prior to the generation of a mesh or surface.e script in the le Script B_09 Vase revolution surface.py gives an interesting example of a revolution surface. Like the rotini model it is not something that you are likely to put in a molecular display, but it is a convenient structure to illustrate the use of the class. Figure B.15 shows the base curve. Points dening the curve are emphasized with small spheres. e surface dened by this prole is shown in Figure B.16. To get the neck shadow to be cast on the lower part of the vase you can experiment with the menu invocation Tools… Viewing Controls… Eects.FIGURE B.15 Vase base curve points.FIGURE B.16 Vase revolution surface.


===== [81/99] chapter-81.html =====

Appendix B ◾ 337B.5.4 Using the RuledSurface Classe RuledSurface class generates a sequence of cross sections by moving a straight line through space to develop the surface. e ends of the line are constrained to move along two curves situated in the 3D space. So, in some sense we are using two spine curves instead of one. Consequently, we cannot consider the class to be a derivation of the FrenetFrameSurface class, but it can be treated as a derivation of the ParametricSurfaces class. e class can be imported by usingfrom StructBio.Scenographics.parametricSurfaces import RuledSurfacee object instantiation is done via the __init__ method that starts with the following header:__init__(self, firstCurvePts_L, finalCurvePts_L, numCrossSections, modelName = "")Instead of visualizing a ruled surface as a straight line moving through space with end points constrained to lie on two curves, we can con-sider the surface to be a set of cross sections. We start with a rst curve dened by points stored in the list firstCurvePts _L. ese points are shown in FigureB.17 as a set of small cubes. Next we specify a nal curve dened by points stored in the list finalCurvePts_L. ese points are shown in Figure B.17 as a set of small spheres. e number of points in each curve must be the same. Construction of the surface proceeds by running straight lines between the corresponding points in the two lists. In FigureB.17 we see that each cube is joined to a sphere by means of a straight line. Each straight line is then subjected to a linear interpolation procedure that places extra uniformly spaced points on that line. e cor-responding interpolation points are then linked to form cross sections. FIGURE B.17 Simple example of a ruled surface.
338 ◾ Appendix BIn Figure B.17, we are assuming that numCrossSections is 5. e rst curve and nal curve both count as a cross section, so we need three extra interpolation points on each straight line to derive the points needed to dene the three additional cross sections.Usually, the number of cross sections can be a small number because there is no signicant curvature for a rectangle bounded by two consecu-tive straight lines. ere can be a small amount of twist because the oppo-site sides of a rectangle are not necessarily parallel. Although the number of cross sections may be small, the number of points used on the rst and nal curves may be considerably larger so that these curves appear to be smoothly rendered. is is demonstrated in Figure B.18 that shows a ruled surface that has a circle as a rst curve and a square as a nal curve. e number of points in each curve is 512. is is somewhat high, but the sur-faces are very smooth. Figure B.18 shows the surfaces with ends capped and not capped.To demonstrate that ruled surfaces can be more complicated, we end this section with Figure B.19 that illustrates a neck ru (popular during Elizabethan times*). In this case, the rst curve is a simple circle, whereas * http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ru_(clothing).FIGURE B.18 Circle to square ruled surfaces (capped and not capped).FIGURE B.19 Rue ruled surface.
Appendix B ◾ 339the nal curve is a circular sinusoidal wave form. Small spheres have been placed on the curves to designate the end points of the straight lines and to give the illustration an interesting visual eect.B.6 USING THE Ellipsoid CLASSAs mentioned in the introduction, there are situations when you may wish to place an ellipsoid structure into a scene. For example, in the study of protein domain movements (see [BS08] and [BF92]) the authors work with the apo and holo conformations of a protein. ey use an ellip-soid to enclose a domain in both forms and use this visual aid to show the amount of shi and rotation that a domain experiences on ligand binding.e Ellipsoid class can be used for such an application. e class can be imported by usingfrom StructBio.Scenographics.ellipsoid import Ellipsoide object instantiation is done via the __init__ method that starts with the following header:__init__(self, length, width, height, center, axes_L, numCrossSections, numBasePts, ellipsoidName = "Ellipsoid")Display of an ellipsoid is oen preceded by calculations that derive a set of inertial axes for some given set of atoms, such as a protein domain, a secondary structure, or a side chain. We will assume that such a calcula-tion provides a list of orthonormal axes that are passed to the __init __ function via axes_L. e list should be ordered so that axes_L[0] is the primary axis corresponding to the largest eigenvalue, whereas axes_L[2] is the axis corresponding to the smallest eigenvalue. e inertial axes will be used to establish the orientation of the ellipsoid, whereas the center parameter species the location of the ellipsoid center in the display space. e length parameter determines where the ellipsoid intersects the pri-mary axis. In a similar fashion the width and height parameters cor-respond to a xes _ L[1] and axes _ L[2], respectively. ese parameters dene the lengths of the semiaxes. In other words, if the inertial axes were simply the standard x, y, and z axes (primary axis being the x axis, etc.) and the center was the origin, then the equation of the ellipsoid surface would be
340 ◾ Appendix B ++=xyzlength widthheight1222e Ellipsoid class is derived from the RevolutionSurface class. ere are two parameters that control the neness of the mesh and hence the smoothness of the surface. e variable numCrossSections controls the number of cross sections that are generated when the base curve is revolved around its axis. is essentially determines the num-ber of meridian lines that run in the same direction as the major axis. e variable numBasePts controls the number of points on the base curve. is essentially determines the number of latitude lines that are orthogonal to the meridian lines (similar to the parallels of latitude on a world globe).e script in the le Script B_12 Ellipsoid surface example.py contains a small test program for this class. It displays an ellipse with length = 8, width = 4, height = 2, center having coordinates [3,4, 5], and orientation given by an axes list dened viau = np.pi/8; v = np.pi/4; w = -np.pi/3cu = np.cos (u); cv = np.cos (v); cw = np.cos (w)su = np.sin (u); sv = np.sin (v); sw = np.sin (w)axes_L = [np.array([cw*cv, -sw*cu + cw*sv*su, sw*su + cw*sv*cu]), np.array([sw*cv, cw*cu + sw*sv*su, -cw*su + sw*sv*cu]), np.array([-sv, cv*su, cv*cu])]Although this denition seems a bit daunting, it is really a rotation matrix that can change the orientation of an object in 3D space (see p. 231 of [Bu09]). It gives us an easy strategy to create orthonormal vectors. Apart from this, the script is quite easy to understand. Extra code has been put in place to show the inertial axes (scaled with respect to axes lengths) within the ellipsoid. ey appear as spindles within the ellipsoid. e results are shown in Figure B.20. In the lower le corner you can see three arrows to indicate the orthonormal x, y, and z axes of the display space. ese axes have been put in place so that you can more easily assess the position and orientation of the ellipsoid. e ellipsoid has been covered with both a mesh and a surface (transparency set to 0.3 so that the ellipsoid axes are easily visible).
Appendix B ◾ 341B.7 USING THE LabelGroups CLASSAs seen in Figure B.11, it is oen very useful to add informative labels to scenographic objects. e LabelGroups class does this by using the molecule construction capabilities of Chimera and subsequently using the atom labels to decorate the scene. e class instantiation and its methods isolate the user from these implementation details. One can specify the position and color of the labels without any regard for this “under the hood” activity. Using Chimera in this way does represent a type of kludge, but it is quite eective and allows us to build a set of labels with an orga-nization that is hierarchical in nature: the class instantiation produces a LabelGroups object that contains various label groups each containing an ordered set of labels (see Figure B.21).e class can be imported by usingfrom StructBio.Scenographics.labels import LabelGroupse object instantiation is done via the __ init __ method that starts with the following header:__init__(self, labelGroupsName = "Labels")is function will instantiate a LabelGroups object. e labelGroup-sName can be used to give a name to the object and this will appear in the Model Panel aer the showLabels method is executed. Other functions in the class can be described as follows:addLabelGroup(self, groupName)FIGURE B.20 Rotated ellipsoid with surface and mesh.


===== [82/99] chapter-82.html =====

342 ◾ Appendix Bis function adds a label group to the previously instantiated LabelGroups object. e groupName parameter is a character string that will be used later to identify this particular label group.addLabel(self, groupName, label, coords_T)is function places a label into the scene. It also associates the label with a particular group by using the groupName specication. e label parameter holds the character string that will appear in the scene. e coords _ T parameter is a numpy array holding the 3D coordinates of the point where the label will appear. Labels have an ordering in the group that is determined by their order of addition to the group.setLabels(self, groupName, colorName, stride = 1)is function can be used to change the colors of labels in a particular group specied by the groupName parameter. e colorName param-eter holds a character string specifying any one of the standard Chimera colors (as seen in the Color Actions dialog that you would usually access by the menu invocation: Actions… Color… all options… followed by checking Show all colors). e stride parameter allows you to apply this action to a subset of the labels in the group, for example, stride = 3 will aect labels with indexes 0, 3, 6, 9, and so on. is is useful when labels are associated with the ticks situated on the axis for a plot (as in Appendix D).showLabels(self)LabelGroupsLabelGroup LabelGroup LabelGroupLabelLabelLabelLabelLabelLabelLabelLabelLabelFIGURE B.21 Label hierarchy.
Appendix B ◾ 343is is used to pass the underlying molecular model to Chimera so that the labels will appear in the scene.clearLabels(self, groupName)is function will replace every label in the specied group with an empty string.destroyLabels(self)is is used to eliminate the underlying molecular model.You can experiment with the LabelGroups class by running and modi-fying the script in the le Script B_13 LabelGroups test.py. Note that the script expects you to pay attention to the Python Shell window, hit-ting the Enter key when you wish to go onto the next step.REFERENCES[Bu09] F. Burkowski. Structural Bioinformatics: An Algorithmic Approach. Chapman & Hall/CRC, London, 2009.[BS08] M. Brylinski and J. Skolnick. What is the relationship between the global structures of apo and holo proteins? Proteins, 70 (2008), 363–377.[BF92] M. F. Browner, E. B. Fauman, and R. J. Fletterick. Tracking conformational states in allosteric transitions of phosphorylase. Biochemistry, 31 (1992), 11297–11304.[KN11] D.-N. Kim, C.-T. Nguyen, and M. Bathe. Conformational dynamics of supramolecular protein assemblies. Journal of Structural Biology, 173 (2011), 261–270.
This page intentionally left blankThis page intentionally left blank


===== [83/99] chapter-83.html =====

345Appendix C The Graph ClassC.1 MOTIVATIONIn its simplest terms, a graph is dened by specifying a set of vertices and a set of arcs, each arc joining two vertices. As such, it provides an excellent math-ematical model to describe molecular structure. In the most recognizable application of the idea, the set of vertices acts as an abstraction for the atoms within the molecule, whereas the arcs going between vertices correspond to the bonds between the atoms. In more sophisticated models, a vertex may represent a larger part of the molecule, such as a protein side chain, whereas an arc between vertices may represent some type of relationship between two side chains, for example, an indication that they are in contact with each other (see [XX00]). Typically, residues are considered to be in contact if their distance of separation is less than some threshold (say, 10 Å). Depending on the application, separation may be calculated as the distance between alpha carbon atoms or the distance between the centroids of the side chain atoms.e motivation for the use of graphs arises from the possibility that some algorithm applied to the graph has a corresponding biological signif-icance. For example, using graphs to model residue interactions has played a signicant role in the study of allosteric interactions (see the study done by Pandini and others in [PF12]). In [PF12], the authors generated a graph network that models local correlated motions of residues and graph algo-rithms were used to discover various paths within that network.ere are several studies that use a Delaunay tessellation to dene the notion of neighboring residues. As described in [ST96], the Delaunay tessellation of a protein structure leads to a set of space-lling irregular 
346 ◾ Appendix C tetrahedrons, or Delaunay simplexes, each of the four vertices represent-ing a protein side chain. Researchers have done various statistical analyses, and it has been discovered that the residue composition of these simplexes is not random. Instead, there are nonrandom preferences in the makeup of these simplexes. is has led to several consequential studies dealing with Delaunay tessellations and their relationships to topics such as the following:• Four-body statistical potentials [CL01], [GT01], [KT03], [MS97]• Protein structure similarity [BS04], [BV03]• Protein shape, pockets, and cavities [LE98a], [LE98b], [LE98c], [XB07]• Mechanical properties [KY97]• Structure motifs [WY98]• Domain partitions [WH99]e paper by Huan and others [HB05] studies packing motifs and compares the use of contact distance with that of Delaunay tessellation. Finally, Delaunay tessellation applied to atoms, rather than residues, can be found in [KG97] and [MS02].C.2 INTRODUCING THE GraphBase CLASSFormally, we dene a graph as a ve-element tuple (,,,,)GVEW WVEV=Σ where V is a set of vertices and E is a set of undirected arcs* and EVV⊆×. Each of the next three members in the tuple is a function: 1. WV denes a weight for each vertex: V →. 2. WE denes a weight for each arc: E →. 3. V∑ is a bijection that denes a unique label for each vertex: VL→, where L is a set of labels such that VL=.We will also need the following denition for an induced subgraph: given the graph (,,,,)GVEW WVEV=Σ and the vertex set VV⊆, the subgraph * Although it is common to refer to the set E as having edges, we will reserve that term for a some-what dierent use (this will be discussed in Section C.3).
Appendix C ◾ 347induced by V is ,, ,,GVEW WVEV()=Σ where ,|,EuvEuVvV{}()=∈∈∈. Asexpected, the weight and label functions for G will be the same as those used in G (with domains restricted to the subgraph).e script graph.py in the StructBio directory contains various class denitions that should be useful when you need to generate a graph object (including some frequently used graph algorithms). We will sometimes use the phrase abstract graph to emphasize that the graph exists solely as a Python object derived from the GraphBase class and it does not produce any display elements. In Section C.3, we introduce the Graph class, which generates display elements.To generate an abstract graph, you would go through the following steps: 1. Import the required classes using the following import statement: from StructBio.Graphs.graph import Vertex, Arc, GraphBase 2. Instantiate a graph object using the GraphBase class. 3. For each vertex of the graph, instantiate a vertex object using the Vertex class. e instantiation function allows you to specify the vertex weight (a oating point number with a default value of 0.0). Follow the instantiation with a call to the addVertex function of the graph object. is accomplishes two things: the vertex object is associated with its vertex label (a character string) and the vertex is added to the graph. 4. For each arc in the graph, instantiate an arc object using the Arc class. e instantiation function allows you to specify the arc weight (a oating point number with a default value of 0.0). Follow the instantiation with a call to the addArc function of the graph object. e addArc function has three parameters: the rst two parameters specify the labels of the vertices dening the arc, and the last param-eter is the arc object.** It should be mentioned that the addVertex and addArc functions are not constrained to work with only Vertex and Arc objects. ey can add to the graph any objects that have the required attributes: vertexWeight and arcWeight, respectively. In particular, addVertex can add to the graph any object that is instantiated from a class that is derived from the Vertex class. is is why we will refer to the Vertex class as a base class. Note that both Arc and GraphBase are also considered to be base classes.
348 ◾ Appendix C If you need a list of arcs, then the function call get A r cT u ple List() will generate a list of tuples, each tuple holding the two vertex labels that dened the arc.Once the graph object is built, you can use any of the following func-tions to generate an induced subgraph:• getSubgraph_VertexWeightsWithinRange(self, minVal, maxVal)is function returns the subgraph that is induced by vertices with weights that are within the closed interval specied by the two oating point values minVal and maxVal.• getSubgraph_VertexDegreeWithinRange(self, minVal, maxVal)is function returns the subgraph induced by vertices with degrees* that are within the closed interval specied by the two oating point values minVal and maxVal.• getSubgraph_ArcsRemoved(self, arcTuples_L)is function returns a graph that is the same as the self object but with the arcs listed in arcTuples_L removed.• getShortestPath(self, startingNodeLabel, endingNodeLabel)is function considers the arc weights to be arc lengths. It returns the subgraph induced by the vertices that are on the shortest path running from the vertex designated by startingNodeLabel to the vertex designated by endingNodeLabel.• computeConnectedComponents(self, minSize)is function uses a depth rst search algorithm to return a list of subgraphs, each corresponding to a connected component of the graph. e parameter minSize species the minimum size of a subgraph. In other words, any connected component with fewer than minSize vertices will be ignored and does not produce a list entry.As an example of a simple weighted graph, consider Figure C.1.* e degree of a vertex is the number of arcs connected to the vertex (with loops counted twice—not relevant in this context).
Appendix C ◾ 349e following script* can be used to build the graph:Script C.1: Simple GraphBase Exampleimport setsfrom sets import Setfrom StructBio.Graphs.graph import Vertex, Arc, GraphBaseg = GraphBase()g.addVertex("alpha", Vertex())g.addVertex("delta", Vertex())g.addVertex("theta", Vertex())g.addVertex("kappa", Vertex())g.addVertex("sigma", Vertex())g.addVertex("omega", Vertex())g.addArc("alpha", "delta", Arc(4.0))g.addArc("delta", "omega", Arc(0.5))g.addArc("alpha", "theta", Arc(0.5))g.addArc("theta", "kappa", Arc(1.5))g.addArc("kappa", "omega", Arc(1.5))g.addArc("alpha", "sigma", Arc(3.0))g.addArc("sigma", "omega", Arc(2.5))sp = g.getShortestPath("alpha", "omega")print sp.orderedPathLabels_LNote the following points:• We access the needed classes by doing the following import: from StructBio.Graphs.graph import Vertex, Arc, GraphBase• e abstract graph object g is instantiated by executing g = GraphBase().* See the Appendix C directory available from the book’s website: Script C_01 Simple GraphBase example.py1.51.5αδκωθσ0.54.02.50.53.0FIGURE C.1 A simple weighted abstract graph.


===== [84/99] chapter-84.html =====

350 ◾ Appendix C • A statement such as g.addVertex("alpha", Vertex()) is used to instantiate a vertex object (default weight 0.0), assign it a label, and add it to the graph g.• A statement such as g.addArc("alpha", "delta", Arc(4.0)) is used to instantiate an arc object with specied weight and subse-quently add it to the graph g. e arc will join the vertices with labels specied by the rst two parameters.• e script illustrates the use of the function getShortestPath to calculate the shortest path between the vertex labeled alpha and the vertex labeled omega. is produces a subgraph object referenced by the variable sp.• e subgraph sp has all the attributes of a graph within the graphBase class. For example, we could get the labels of the vertices in this subgraph by accessing the keys of the vertex dictionary, sp.vertices_D.keys(). Information about the arcs could be accessed by using sp.arcs_D. e graph.py script gives more information about these attributes.• Although it is possible to trace the nodes along the shortest path by working with the usual attributes of a subgraph (vertices_D and arcs_D), this is somewhat inconvenient. Consequently, when a sub-graph has been created by using the getShortestPath method, the algorithm will also dene the attribute orderedPathLabels_L, which contains a list of the labels of the nodes in the shortest path with an ordering that goes from the starting vertex to the ending vertex. is list has been accessed by the print statement printsp.orderedPathLabels_L to print the labels of the vertices in the shortest path. e printed output will be ['alpha', 't heta', 'kappa', 'o mega'].C.3 INTRODUCING THE Graph CLASSe GraphBase class is useful for various applications that need an abstract graph to be constructed with a subsequent analysis that can be accomplished by the extraction of subgraphs. Although this functionality may sometimes be useful, a more signicant role of GraphBase, Vertex, and Arc will be their utilization as base classes for derived classes that 
Appendix C ◾ 351provide extra capabilities for the display of graphs in a scene that may also contain molecular structures. Specically, we will work with the following derived classes:• Graph derived from GraphBase• Node derived from Vertex• Edge derived from ArcAll these derived classes work with the Solids class to provide display elements that are typically related to other structures in the display (e.g., a molecule). Consider a short program that produces a very simple graph: two nodes linked by a single edge (see Figure C.2):Script C.2: A Simple Graphimport numpyfrom numpy import array as arfrom StructBio.Graphs.graph import Node, Edge, Graphg = Graph("Simple graph")# Red node:n1 = Node(0., ar((1., 0., 0.)), 0.7,(1., 0., 0.))# Blue node:n2 = Node(0., ar((9., 0., 0.)), 0.7,(0., 0., 1.))e12 = Edge(0., 0.3,(0., 1., 0.))g.addNode("Node_1", n1)g.addNode("Node_2", n2)g.addEdge("Node_1", "Node_2", e12)g.solids.display()print g.vertices_D.keys()e following are some notes explaining the code:*• e script starts with importing the needed classes (Graph, Node, and Edge).* See the Appendix C directory available from the book’s website: Script C_02 A simple graph.pyFIGURE C.2 A very simple graph.
352 ◾ Appendix C • Instantiation of a Graph object includes an initialization statement that instantiates a Solids object. Since the Graph class inherits from the GraphBase class, the initialization will also create the data structures that will track vertices and arcs. Note that the graph name “Simple graph” will appear in the Model Panel viewable if you do the menu invocation Favorites… Model Panel.• Syntax for the instantiation of a Node object is Node(nodeWeight, coords, radius, color).In our script, all node weights are 0.0 and the coordinates are specied by numpy arrays. e specied radius will be the radius of the sphere that is generated in the display when the addNode function is executed. e last parameter is a 3-tuple that species the RGB components of the sphere color.• Syntax for the instantiation of an Arc object is Arc(edgeWeight, radius, color).In the script, edge weight is 0 and the radius and color are 0.3 and (0.0, 1.0, 0.0) corresponding to green.• Syntax for the addition of a Node object is addNode(nodeLabel, node).is will assign the specied node label to the node and will add the node as a vertex to the underlying abstract graph. e function will also display a sphere with the radius and color dictated by the attributes of the node object.• Syntax for the addition of an Edge object is addEdge(nodeAlabel, nodeBlabel, edge).is will add a corresponding arc to the underlying abstract graph and will display a spindle with radius and color determined by the attributes of the Edge object. In the display, the location of the edge ends will be determined by the nodes specied by the node labels.
Appendix C ◾ 353• Aer all the nodes and edges have been established, the display is made visible by using the function call g.solids.display().• e script ends with the extra statement print g.vertices_D.keys(). is generates the output ['Node_2', 'Node_1'] in the Python shell window. It was added to the end of the script as a demonstration that attributes of the underlying abstract graph can be accessed if needed.C.3.1 Reasons for Using Derived ClassesIt is worthwhile to emphasize the design aspects of the classes introduced in Sections C.2 and C.3. e base classes primarily deal with abstract graphs as dened by the mathematical denition (,,,,)GVEW WVEV=Σ. All the algorithms strictly deal with vertices, arcs, weights, and labels. ere is no dependency on display attributes or coordinates, and so the algorithms are forced to focus on abstract attributes while having the freedom to ignore attributes associated with the display.Meanwhile, users who wish to design algorithms related to molecular structure can build the display objects: the spheres and spindles related to their application. While this construction is being done, the underlying abstract graph is also created without the user having to deal with the data structures that manage vertices and arcs.e net result is a clear separation of concerns: the GraphBase, Vertex, and Arc classes relate to mathematically oriented graph algo-rithms while the Graph, Node, and Edge classes relate to the display and constructions that correspond to the biological structures within the application.C.4 METHODS WITHIN THE Graph CLASSNow that we know how a graph can be created, we can discuss the meth-ods that can be applied to these graphs. All these methods deal with the extraction of subgraphs with the exception of Delaunay tessellation, which is a function that can be used to construct the edges of a graph aer the nodes are established.C.4.1 Subgraph Extraction Determined by Node WeightsConsider the following script:Script C.3: Example for Extraction of a Subgraph
354 ◾ Appendix C import chimera, numpyfrom chimera import runCommandfrom numpy import array as ar, random as rnfrom StructBio.Utilities.miscFunctions import colorByNamefrom StructBio.Graphs.graph import Graph, Node, EdgerunCommand("set bg_color white")g = Graph()g.addNode( "A", Node(1., ar((1., 0., 0.)), 0.7, colorByName("dark red")))g.addNode( "C", Node(1., ar((9., 1., 0.)), 0.7, colorByName("red")))g.addNode( "E", Node(1., ar((1., 0., 9.)), 0.7, colorByName("orange red")))g.addNode( "G", Node(1., ar((2., 7., 9.)), 0.7, colorByName("violet red")))g.addNode( "B", Node(3.2, ar((0., 8., 2.)), 0.7, colorByName("dark green")))g.addNode( "D", Node(3.4, ar((9., 8., 1.)), 0.7, colorByName("spring green")))g.addNode( "F", Node(3.5, ar((8., 2., 7.)), 0.7, colorByName("lime green")))g.addNode( "H", Node(3.7, ar((7., 6., 8.)), 0.7, colorByName("light green")))for n in g.vertices_D.keys(): for m in g.vertices_D.keys(): if n < = m: continue if rn.random() < 0.5: spnd_color = tuple((ar(g.vertices_D[n].color) + ar(g.vertices_D[m].color))/2.0) g.addEdge(n, m, Edge(0.0, 0.3, spnd_color))g.solids.display()redG = g.getSubgraph_ NodeWeightsWithinRange(1.0, 1.0, "Reddish subgraph")redG.solids.display()greenG = g.getSubgraph_ NodeWeightsWithinRange(3.0, 4.0, "Greenish subgraph")greenG.solids.display()e script uses the derived classes to construct a graph with nodes that are approximately positioned near the corners of a cube. Figure C.3 is in gray scale, but if you run the script, you will see that nodes with weight 1.0 have colors with a reddish tone, whereas nodes with weights between 3.0 and 4.0 have colors with a greenish tone. e specication of dierent


===== [85/99] chapter-85.html =====

Appendix C ◾ 355colors is meant to illustrate the use of the colorByName function that is available in the miscFunctions module. To avoid an extensive sequence of statements that generate edges, the script uses two nested loops that randomly drop edges into the display. e color of an edge is the average of the colors of the end nodes.e script is given to illustrate the use of the getSubgraph_NodeWeightsWithinRange method. It will extract a subgraph that is induced by selecting nodes with weights falling within a specied range. Execution of the script produced the display shown in Figure C.3. As the edges are determined randomly, you will likely get a dierent graph if you run the script. To verify that the function is actually returning subgraphs each contained in its own Chimera model, we can consult the Model Panel. By setting the checkboxes in the Model Panel dialog box, we can show or hide any of the three graphs in the display. FigureC.4 shows the resulting display when we choose to display both subgraphs simultaneously. e gure includes part of the Model Panel so that you can see how the checkboxes were set. Of course, in a more sophisticated program we would expect the script to selectively show or hide the mod-els without any need for the user to interact with the Model Panel.e function getSubgraph_VertexDegreeWithinRange behaves in a very similar fashion except that it extracts the vertices having degrees within the specied range. ese vertices are used to generate an induced subgraph.FIGURE C.3 Full graph produced by Script C.3.
356 ◾ Appendix C C.4.2 A Function to Produce Delaunay TessellationsSection C.1 stressed the importance of Delaunay tessellations for various research studies. e graph.py module includes a function that will pro-duce a Delaunay tessellation when given the three-dimensional coordi-nates of the nodes of a graph. e algorithm that generates the tessellation must deal with node coordinates, and so this function is more naturally given as a method within the Graph class. In practice, it will determine all the necessary edges to provide the tessellation and these new edges and existing nodes will form the arcs and vertices of an underlying abstract graph that can be the input for other graph algorithms. Using the function is reasonably straightforward as exemplied by the following script:Script C.4: Using the Function for Delaunay Tessellationimport chimera, numpyfrom chimera import runCommandfrom numpy import array, random as rnfrom StructBio.Graphs.graph import Graph, Node, EdgerunCommand("set bg_color white")maxX = 32.; maxY = 16.; maxZ = 16.numNodes = 12g = Graph("Delaunay Tessellation")for ix in range(numNodes): c = array((rn.random()*maxX, rn.random()*maxY, rn.random()*maxZ)) nd = Node(0.0, c, 0.7, tuple((rn.random(), rn.random(), rn.random()))) g.addNode("V" + "%03d"%ix, nd)FIGURE C.4 Subgraphs produced by Script C.3.
Appendix C ◾ 357g.buildDelaunayTessellation(15.0)g.solids.display()e script instantiates a graph that is referenced by the variable g. e graph name is “Delaunay tessellation,” and this name will appear in the Model Panel. e script starts by creating 12 nodes randomly placed in a box with sides having lengths 32, 16, and 16 Angstroms. e nodes have randomly generated colors. e function call g.buildDelaunay Tessellation(15.0) will generate the tessellation. e parameter in the function call (15.0 in the script) sets an upper limit on the length of an edge in the tessellation. If any edge in a tetrahedron has a length greater than this threshold, then the tetrahedron is rejected and does not contribute to the graph. Figure C.5 illustrates a typical display generated by the script. Note that it is possible for a node to be excluded from the tessellation if it does not have three neighboring nodes within threshold distance.C.4.3 Subgraphs Corresponding to Connected ComponentsComputing the connected components of an undirected graph has many applications. e Graph class has a method to do this. Consider the fol-lowing script:Script C.5: Connected Components Generated from a Delaunay TessellationFIGURE C.5 Subgraphs produced by Script C.3.
358 ◾ Appendix C import chimera, numpyfrom chimera import runCommandfrom numpy import array, random as rnfrom StructBio.Graphs.graph import Graph, NoderunCommand("set bg_color white")maxX = 64.; maxY = 32.; maxZ = 16.numNodes = 32g = Graph("Delaunay Tessellation")for ix in range(numNodes): c = array((rn.random()*maxX, rn.random()*maxY, rn.random()*maxZ)) g.addNode("V" + "%03d"%ix, Node(0.0, c, 0.7, tuple((rn.random(), rn.random(), rn.random()))))g.buildDelaunayTessellation(15.0)g.solids.display()connectedComponents_L = g.getConnectedComponents \ (2, "Connected component")for cc in connectedComponents_L: cc.solids.display() e function getConnectedComponents will generate a list of sub-graphs each of which is a connected component within the given graph. To test this function, it is convenient to start with a random graph that has edges generated from a Delaunay tessellation. e distance thresh-old for the tessellation has been set somewhat low, thus increasing the chances that the tessellation will produce more than one connected component. A typical result of the script execution is presented in Figure C.6.The parameters for the function call include a minimum node count forany connected component. In this case, the minimum is set to 2 and, consequently, the isolated node near the bottom of the display will not be considered as one of the connected components to be entered into the return list. Note that the function uses the given string “Connected component” to generate the names of the mod-els in the Model Panel. The function has arranged for various mod-els to have distinct names by appending their list index to the name string.
Appendix C ◾ 359C.4.4 A Subgraph That Is a Shortest Pathe calculation of a shortest (minimum-weight) path has several uses, for example, the demonstration of signal propagation in the modeling of allosteric behavior in a protein. e Graph class provides the function getShortestPathSubgraph to calculate the shortest path between two nodes. In the function call, the rst two parameters specify these nodes by means of their labels. e third parameter is a character string that pro-vides the name of the model holding the display of the subgraph. Again, it is convenient to use a Delaunay tessellation on random nodes to test the function. Consider the following code:Script C.6: Shortest Path through a Delaunay Tessellationimport chimera, numpyfrom chimera import runCommandfrom numpy import array, random as rnfrom StructBio.Graphs.graph import Graph, NoderunCommand("set bg_color white")maxX = 64.; maxY = 32.; maxZ = 16.numNodes = 24g = Graph("Delaunay Tessellation")c = array((0.0, 0.0, 0.0))g.addNode("V001", Node(0.0, c, 2.0, tuple((0.0, 1.0, 0.0))))c = array((maxX, maxY, maxZ))g.addNode("V" + "%03d"%numNodes, Node(0.0, c, 2.0, tuple((1.0, 0.0, 0.0))))FIGURE C.6 (See color insert.) Connected components produced by Script C.5.


===== [86/99] chapter-86.html =====

360 ◾ Appendix C for ix in range(2, numNodes): c = array((rn.random()*maxX, rn.random()*maxY, rn.random()*maxZ)) g.addNode("V" + "%03d"%ix, Node(0.0, c, 0.7, tuple((rn.random(), rn.random(), rn.random()))))g.buildDelaunayTessellation(24.0)g.solids.display()shortestPath = g.getShortestPathSubgraph \ ("V001", "V" + "%03d"%numNodes, "Shortest Path")shortestPath.solids.display()for nodeLabel in shortestPath.orderedPathLabels_L: c = shortestPath.vertices_D[nodeLabel].coords print "%4s [%6.2f,%6.2f,%6.2f]" % \ (nodeLabel, c[0], c[1], c[2]) e statements that generate the random nodes and subsequent Delaunay tessellation are very similar to that seen in the previous exam-ples except for the addition of two larger spheres to represent the starting node (colored green) and the ending node (colored red). ese colors can be seen if you run the script. e coordinates of these nodes place them at the extreme diagonally opposite corners of the bounding box. Using the attributes inherited from the GraphBase class, the script has access to a list of labels of the nodes in the shortest path. To demonstrate access to these attributes, the script prints out the node labels and the node loca-tions. Figure C.7 illustrates the graph that is processed by theshortest path function, whereas Figure C.8 shows the result when the Model Panel is used to display the path apart from the full graph.Now that we have reviewed all the functionality of the Graph class, we should be ready to apply this module to problems that require a graph representation.C.4.5 Subgraph Extraction Determined by Node Degreee function getSubgraph_NodeDegreeWithinRange extracts a set of nodes each of which has a degree that is within a specied range. It then generates the induced subgraph using an approach that is very similar to that used by the getSubgraph_NodeWeightsWithinRange function. 
Appendix C ◾ 361Note that the resulting subgraph may have nodes with degrees outside the specied range. Script C.07 (available from the book’s website) can be used to test this function. e functionality is quite similar to the function getSubgraph_NodeWeightsWithinRange, so we will not consider the script any further.C.4.6 Subgraph Generation by Removal of Edgese function getSubgraph_EdgesRemoved creates a subgraph with the same vertices and all edges except for those listed in edgeTuples_L. A script to test this function can be found in the le Script C_08 Delaunay Tessallation with edge removal test.py.See Exercise 6 of Chapter 8 for a typical application of the Graph class.FIGURE C.7 Start graph for the shortest path test (Script C.6).FIGURE C.8 Shortest path produced by Script C.6.
362 ◾ Appendix C REFERENCES[BS04] D. L. Bostick, M. Shen, and I. I. Vaisman. A simple topological representa-tion of protein structure: Implications for new, fast, and robust structural classication. Proteins, 56 (2004), 487–501.[BV03] D. L. Bostick and I. I. Vaisman. A new topological method to mea-sure protein structure similarity. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications, 304 (2003), 320–325.[CL01] C. W. Carter Jr, B. C. LeFebvre, S. A. Cammer, A. Tropsha, and M. H.Edgell. Four-body potentials reveal protein-specic correlations to stability changes caused by hydrophobic core mutations. Journal of Molecular Biology, 311 (2001), 625–638.[GT01] H. H. Gan, A. Tropsha, and T. Schlick. Lattice protein folding with two- and four-body statistical potentials. Proteins, 43 (2001), 161–174.[HB05] J. Huan, D. Bandyopadhyay, W. Wang, J. Snoeyink, J. Prins, and A. Tropsha. Comparing graph representations of protein structure for mining family-specic residue-based packing motifs. Journal of Computational Biology, 12 (2005), 657–671.[KT03] B. Krishnamoorthy and A. Tropsha. Development of a four-body statisti-cal pseudo-potential to discriminate native from non-native protein confor-mations. Bioinformatics, 19 (2003), 1540–1548.[KG97] N. Kobayashi and N. Go. A method to search for similar protein local structures at ligand binding sites and its application to adenine recognition. European Biophysics Journal, 26 (1997), 135–144.[KY97] N. Kobayashi, T. Yamato, and N. Go. Mechanical property of a TIM-barrel protein. Proteins, 28 (1997), 109–116.[LE98a] J. Liang, H. Edelsbrunner, P. Fu, P. V. Sudhakar, and S. Subramaniam. Analytical shape computation of macromolecules: I. Molecular area and vol-ume through alpha shape. Proteins, 33 (1998), 1–17.[LE98b] J. Liang, H. Edelsbrunner, P. Fu, P. V. Sudhakar, and S. Subramaniam. Analytical shape computation of macromolecules: II. Inaccessible cavities in proteins. Proteins, 33 (1998), 18–29.[LE98c] J. Liang, H. Edelsbrunner, and C. Woodward. Anatomy of protein pock-ets and cavities: Measurement of binding site geometry and implications for ligand design. Protein Science, 7 (1998), 1884–1897.[MS02] B. J. McConkey, V. Sobolev, and M. Edelman. Quantication of protein surfaces, volumes and atom-atom contacts using a constrained Voronoi pro-cedure. Bioinformatics, 18 (2002), 1365–1373.[MS97] P. J. Munson and R. K. Singh. Statistical signicance of hierarchical multi-body potentials based on Delaunay tessellation and their application in sequence-structure alignment. Protein Science, 6 (1997), 1467–1481.[PF12] A. Pandini, A. Fornili, F. Fraternali, and J. Kleinjung. Detection of allosteric signal transmission by information-theoretic analysis of protein dynamics. FASEB Journal, 26 (2012), 868–881.
Appendix C ◾ 363[ST96] R. K. Singh, A. Tropsha, and I. I. Vaisman. Delaunay tessellation of proteins: Four body nearest neighbor propensities of amino acid residues. Journal of Computational Biology, 3 (1996), 213–221.[WH99] L. Wernisch, M. Hunting, and S. J. Wodak. Identication of structural domains in proteins by a graph heuristic. Proteins, 35 (1999), 338–352.[WY98] H. Wako and T. Yamato. Novel method to detect a motif of local structures in dierent protein conformations. Protein Engineering, 11 (1998), 981–990.[XB07] L. Xie and P. E. Bourne. A robust and ecient algorithm for the shape description of protein structures and its application in predicting ligand binding sites. BMC Bioinformatics, 8 (Suppl 4) (2007), S9.[XX00] Y. Xu, D. Xu, and H. N. Gabow. Protein domain decomposition using a graph-theoretic approach. Bioinformatics, 16 (2000), 1091–1104.
This page intentionally left blankThis page intentionally left blank


===== [87/99] chapter-87.html =====

365Appendix D2D and 3D PlotsD.1 MOTIVATIONe informatics component of bioinformatics deals with the retrieval, man-agement, processing, and display of information. To quote from Wikipedia:*Informatics is the science of information, the practice of informa-tion processing, and the engineering of information systems. Informatics studies the structure, algorithms, behavior, and interactions of natural and articial systems that store, process, access, and communicate infor-mation. In addition, it studies human–computer interaction and how an interface can be built to maximize user eciency.In many situations, the communication of information will involve the presentation of data output in the form of a plot. We have already seen examples of this in earlier chapters.e dimensionality of a plot may be one of the following:• Two dimension (2D): e data appear in a plane. For example, a scat-ter plot with point markers appearing in a plane or a curve g(x, y) = 0 represented by a line in the x, y plane.• ree dimension (3D): e data appear in 3D space. e representa-tion may illustrate points in a 3D space (a scatter plot), a line usually dened parametrically, or in a surface; for example: z = f(x, y).* http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Informatics_(academic_eld).
366 ◾ Appendix DD.2 PLOTS CONSIDERED IN THIS APPENDIXUsing Chimera, a plot can be displayed in a variety of settings:• e script can work with the matplotlib module to generate a plot that will be displayed in a separate window that is produced by rou-tines within matplotlib.• e script can work with the matplotlib module to generate a plot that will be displayed within a canvas widget that is part of a mode-less dialog.• e script can use the Solids and Surfaces classes (see AppendixB) to generate a plot that is shown within the Chimera window. is last possibility is particularly suitable for 3D plots because we can use the display facilities of Chimera to rotate and position a complex plot when we want to draw attention to some specic features of the plot. Another advantage to this approach is the lighting eects that Chimera provides. is can give the plot an enhanced impression of its 3D verisimilitude.More details about matplotlib facilities [H07] can be found at http://matplotlib.sourceforge.net/.D.3 BAR CHARTSConsider the following script, which builds a bar chart that compares the values stored in two arrays data_A and data_B. Note that the data are passed to the array as a single list of 2-tuples. Using a single list will force the user to package data_A and data_B using arrays of equal length. You can adapt this script to make it more suitable for your own needs, for example, by changing the colors and widths of the bars. Figure D.1 shows the plot that is displayed.import matplotlib.pyplot as plotimport numpy as npdef barChart(xAxisLabel, yAxisLabel, title, data_L): # The variable data_L is a list of 2-tuples # holding y values to be displayed in the bar chart. unzippedData = zip(*data_L) dataA = unzippedData[0] dataB = unzippedData[1]
Appendix D ◾ 367 width = 0.4 xVals = np.arange(1,len(data_L) + 1) plot.ion() plot.subplot(1,1,1) plot.bar(xVals, data_A, width, color = 'g') plot.bar(xVals + width, data_B, width, color = 'r') plot.xticks(arange(0, len(data_L) + 1, 1)) plot.xlabel(xAxisLabel) plot.ylabel(yAxisLabel) plot.title(title) raw_input("Hit Enter to dismiss the plot.") plot.close()#=====================================================# Mainline for testing:dataVals_L = [[2,3], [4,5], [6,8], [7,6], [3,1]]barChart("x-axis label goes here.", "Y-axis label goes here.", "Title", dataVals_L) Script D.1: Bar Chart ExampleNote the use of the raw_input("Hit Enter to dismiss the pl o t.") statement that is followed by the plot.close() function call. is allows your script to pass control back to the Python Shell window when you are done with the plot window. e mainline statements set up a shortinputlist of data tuples and then initiate a call to the barChart function.FIGURE D.1 (See color insert.) Bar chart from Script D.01.
368 ◾ Appendix DD.4 2D DENSITY PLOTA density plot is similar to the contact maps seen in Chapter 3. Formally, the plot gives a visual representation of a mapping that one can write as ,zfxy()=. Each x, y pair in the domain of the function will correspond to a pixel position in the 2D plot, and the z value corresponding to this x, y pair will be recorded as a particular color value for the pixel. More gener-ally, the plot routine can be given the data stored in a 2D array. e script is as follows:import numpy as npimport matplotlib.pyplot as plotfrom matplotlib.colors import ListedColormapdef generate2Dplot(zG_A, plotTitle): # zG_A should be a square array holding values # in the range [0.0, 1.0]. # [0,.5) black; [.5, 1.] white: #cmap = ListedColormap(['#000000', '#FFFFFF']) # [0., 0.3333] black; [.3333, .6666] gray; # [.6666, 1.0] white: #cmap = ListedColormap(['#000000', '#888888', # '#FFFFFF']) # [0., 0.2] black; [.2, .4] dark gray; # [.4, .6] gray; [.6, .8] light gray; # [.8, 1.] white #cmap = ListedColormap(['#000000', '#444444', # '#888888', '#CCCCCC', # '#FFFFFF']) # Higher resolution color map: cmap = ListedColormap(['#000000', '#222222', '#444444', '#666666', '#888888', '#AAAAAA', '#CCCCCC', '#EEEEEE', '#FFFFFF']) n = int(zG_A.shape[0]) xSeq = np.arange(0, n+1, 1) ySeq = np.arange(0, n+1, 1) # Use the next statement to have the main # diagonal head to the "north west". # ySeq = np.arange(n, -1, -1) xG, yG = np.meshgrid(xSeq, ySeq)
Appendix D ◾ 369 plot.ion() plot.pcolor(xG, yG, zG_A, cmap = cmap) #plot.axis([0, n-1, n-1, 0]) plot.axis([0, n, n, 0]) plot.axes().set_aspect('equal') plot.title(plotTitle) raw_input("Hit Enter to dismiss the plot.") plot.close()#=====================================================# Mainline for testing:n = 200zVals_A = np.zeros((n,n), float)tp = 2.0*np.pifor ix in range(n): for jx in range(n): zVals_A[ix, jx] = 0.25*(np.sin(tp*ix/n) + np.cos(3.0*tp*jx/n))**2generate2Dplot(zVals_A, "0.25*(sin(2pi*x) + cos(6pi*y))**2")Script D.2: Density Plot ExampleHere are some relevant points related to Script D.2:• Note that the script assumes that the data given to it in the zVals_A array have been scaled so that each value lies in the range [0.0, 1.0].• e statement dening the variable cmap requires a list of colors specied in hexadecimal format. In Script D.2, gray levels are used. e number of gray levels will depend on the number of entries in this list. e script provides four dierent possibilities. You can modify this statement to use more gray levels or use color ranges as required.• Note that the labeling on the vertical axis is consistent with row numbering that you would have in a data matrix. If you wish the order of the labels to be consistent with the usual Euclidean x, y plane, then choose ySeq = np.arange(n, -1, -1) and use the statement plot.axis([0, n, 0, n]) instead of plot.axis([0, n, n, 0]).• e mainline uses two nested loops and a trigonometric function to dene the contents of the data array. is was simply done to get data values into the 200 by 200 array. Ignoring this expediency, we see that the mainline is just a simple invocation of the plotting function: generate2Dplot(zVals_A, "title").


===== [88/99] chapter-88.html =====

370 ◾ Appendix DFigure D.2 shows the plot that is produced by the script.D.5 2D SCATTER PLOTe next script (Script D_03 Scatter plot example.py) gives you a template for a generic scatter plot:import matplotlib.pyplot as pltplt.ion()fig = plt.figure(figsize = (8,8))ax = fig.add_subplot(111, aspect = 'equal')ax.set_title("Your title here", fontsize = 14)ax.set_xlabel("X axis title", fontsize = 12)ax.set_ylabel("Y axis title", fontsize = 12)ax.set_xlim([-10, 10])ax.set_ylim([-10, 10])ax.set_xticks([-8, -6, -4, -2, 0, 2, 4, 6, 8])ax.set_yticks([-8, -6, -4, -2, 0, 2, 4, 6, 8])ax.grid(True, linestyle = '-', color = '0.75')ax.hlines(0, -10, 10, colors='k', linestyles='dashed')ax.vlines(0, -10, 10, colors='k', linestyles='dashed') ax.scatter([3., 5.], [-8., -3.], s = 20, color = 'r', marker = 's')ax.scatter([1., 2., -3., 6.], [5.3, 7.4, 2., -0.2], s= 20, color = 'g', marker = 'd')ax.scatter([2., 4., -7.], [9.3, 9.8, -2.], s = 20, color = 'b', marker = 'o')fig.savefig("demoPlot.png", dpi = fig.dpi)raw_input("Hit Enter to dismiss the plot.")plt.close()Script D.3: 2D Scatter Plot DemoIf you run the script, you should get a colored version of the plot in FigureD.3 in a separate window.FIGURE D.2 Density plot produced by Script D.02.
Appendix D ◾ 371e script starts with the importing of matplotlib.pyplot. We set interactive mode to “on” using the function call: plt.ion(). is causes an immediate change to the plot display whenever a plotting statement is executed. e next statement declares a pyplot object and establishes the size of the gure. e next block of statements denes the appearance of the plot including the titles and disposition of the axes. e signicance of each statement should be reasonably obvious when you inspect FigureD.3. Execution of the scatter() functions displays the data points. For exam-ple, the rst of these statements puts two red (color = ‘r’) markers into the gure. Each is a small square as requested by the parameter setting: marker = ‘s’. e parameter setting s = 20 establishes the size of the marker. e locations of the two points are dened by two lists, the rst list giving the x coordinates and the second list giving the y coordinates. Aer the execution of the rst scatter() statement, the red markers will be placed at positions with coordinates (3.0, −8.0) and (5.0, −3.0) in the xy plane. e next statement puts in four green markers each having a dia-mond shape, and the last statement puts in three blue markers each having a circular shape.e savefig() function can be used to save the plot image as a .png le in the local directory. You can make the line into a comment if this is FIGURE D.3 Two-dimensional(2D) scatter plot demonstration.
372 ◾ Appendix Dnot desired. e nal two lines allow you to dismiss the plot with control returning to the Python shell window.D.6 2D PLOTTING PARAMETRIC CURVESe next script taken from the le Script D_04 Plotting paramet-ric curves.py can be used as a template for plotting parametric curves in the Euclidean plane.import numpy as np, matplotlib.pyplot as pltdef parametricPlot(x_L, y_L, color = "black", plotTitle = "", aspect = 1.0, xAxisLabel = "", yAxisLabel = "", gridFlag = False): plt.ion() fig = plt.figure() fig.canvas.set_window_title("Parametric Plot") subplt = fig.add_subplot(111, aspect = aspect)# subplt.set_xlim([10., 28.])# subplt.set_ylim([-4., 12.])# subplt.set_xticks(np.array([10., 14., 18.,# 22., 26.,28.]))# subplt.set_yticks(np.array([-4., 0., 4.,# 8., 12.])) subplt.grid(gridFlag) plt.setp(subplt.get_yticklabels(), fontsize = 10) plt.setp(subplt.get_xticklabels(), fontsize = 10) subplt.set_title(plotTitle, fontsize = 14) subplt.set_xlabel(xAxisLabel, fontsize = 12, style = 'italic') subplt.set_ylabel(yAxisLabel, fontsize = 12, style = 'italic') subplt.plot(x_L, y_L, color = color) raw_input("Hit Enter to dismiss the plot.") plt.close() #=====================================================# Mainline for testing:x_L = []y_L = []for t in np.arange(0.0, 201.0, 1.0):
Appendix D ◾ 373 theta = 2.0*np.pi*t/100. x_L.append(6.0*np.pi + 3.0*(2.0*np.sin(theta) - np.sin(2.0*theta))) y_L.append(6.0 + 3.0*(2.0*np.cos(theta) - np.cos(2.0*theta)))parametricPlot(x_L, y_L, plotTitle = "Cardioid", xAxisLabel = "x", yAxisLabel = "y")Script D.4: Plotting a Parametric CurveHere are some relevant notes for the script:• Matplotlib will automatically generate the labels for tick points on both the x and y axes. If you wish to put in your own labels, perhaps with a dierent spacing, then you can use the function calls to set limits and ticks. ese are seen in the script as comments but can easily be modied and made executable.• e script insures that aspect is set to 1.0 as a default value. If you ignore this constraint, then the plot will not preserve the aspect ratio if the plot window is resized in a way that distorts the aspect ratio.• Note that the title for the plot window is specied by calling the func-tion fig.canvas.set_window_title, whereas the title for the plot is handled by calling the function subplt.set_title.e mainline uses parametricPlot to plot a particular cardioid func-tion (Figure D.4). A cardioid curve is oen seen in a coee cup when light is reected from the interior rim of the cup. e accumulated light rays form an envelope that is seen as a cardioid curve. e parametric equa-tions for a cardioid are the following: 2sin sin22cos cos2xa ttya tt()()=−=−e script uses a similar denition but with the curve shied in both x and y directions so that the example can illustrate the automatic genera-tion of the labels on the axes.We can, of course, consider the plotting of the explicit equation yfx()= to be a parametric plot. It would simply be treated parametrically as: ,xtyft()== and the parametricPlot function would be given the usual x_L and y_L lists.
374 ◾ Appendix DD.7 3D SURFACE PLOTSe next script taken from the le Script D_05 Surface plot example.py can be used as a template for plotting 3D surfaces with matplotlib.import numpy as npimport matplotlib.pyplot as pltfrom mpl_toolkits.mplot3d import axes3d, Axes3Dfrom matplotlib import cm#=====================================================def matplotlibSurface(x_A, y_A, z_A, windowTitle = "Surface Plot", plotTitle = ""): plt.ion() fig = plt.figure() fig.canvas.set_window_title(windowTitle) ax = fig.gca(projection='3d', aspect = 1.0) surf = ax.plot_surface(x_A, y_A, z_A, rstride=1, cstride=1, cmap=cm.cool, linewidth=0, antialiased=False) ax.set_title(plotTitle, fontsize = 14) fig.colorbar(surf, shrink=0.5, aspect=5) raw_input("Hit Enter to dismiss the plot.") plt.close()#=====================================================# Mainline:FIGURE D.4 Parametric plot of a cardioid curve.


===== [89/99] chapter-89.html =====

Appendix D ◾ 375m = 20n = 40xVals_L = np.linspace(-1.0, 1.0, num = n, endpoint = True)yVals_L = np.linspace(-1.0, 1.0, num = m, endpoint = True)zVals_A = np.zeros((m, n), float)# Saddle surface:for i in range(m): for j in range(n): zVals_A[i, j] = np.sin(xVals_L[j]*yVals_L[i]) # Note both x_A and y_A have shape (m, n):x_A, y_A = np.meshgrid(xVals_L, yVals_L) matplotlibSurface(x_A, y_A, zVals_A, plotTitle = "Saddle Surface")Script D.5: 3D Surface Plote statements in the matplotlibSurface function are usually of mat-plotlib scripts that plot a 3D surface. Since matplotlib typically deals with matrix data, you will have to take a bit of extra care if you wish to plot a function ,zzxy()= and get axes labeling that is consistent with the usual Euclidean frame of reference. In Script D.5, note that the array arguments x_A, y_A, and z_A all have the same shape, which is (m, n). is con-sistency will be assured by using the np.meshgrid function but only if the number of entries in the x list (stored in xVals_L) is the same as the number of columns in the zVals_A array and if the number of entries in the y list (stored in yVals_L) is the same as the number of rows in the zVals_A array. e result of the surface plot is shown in Figure D.5.FIGURE D.5 ree-dimensional(3D) surface plot.
376 ◾ Appendix DWe have now covered bar charts, density plots, scatter plots, parametric plots, and surface plots. ese can be used as templates and will likely be useful for many of the applications that require plotting facilities. In the subsequent sections of this appendix, we cover additional topics that are somewhat more sophisticated. We start with techniques for combining matplotlib with Tkinter and then move onto Python scripts that do strip charts and 3D surface plots in the Chimera display.D.8 USING MATPLOTLIB WITH A MODELESS DIALOGSection 4.4.1 contains a sample script to compute a 2D scatter plot, which is displayed in a separate matplotlib window. It would be convenient if such a plot could be displayed in a modeless dialog window, which con-tained other graphical user interface (GUI) elements, such as entry and button widgets, that would dene the requirements of the plot or provide any other user interaction required by the application. FigureD.6 illus-trates a very simple dialog containing a plot and the script that generates the dialog can be used as a starting point to implement more complicated dialogs such as those described in Exercises 12 and 13 of Chapter 4.e dialog in Figure D.6 was generated by the script in the le Script D_06 Tk & simple plot.py.import chimera, Tkinter as tkfrom chimera.baseDialog import ModelessDialogimport matplotlib.pyplot as pltfrom matplotlib.backends.backend_tkagg import FigureCanvasTkAggfrom matplotlib.figure import Figureclass TkPlusPlot(ModelessDialog): buttons = ("Close") help = False # Leave this out to get a Help button. title = "Window title goes here" def fillInUI(self, parent): # Text to be displayed in the dialog window: topText = tk.Label(parent, text = " Text at top of dialog", font = ("Helvetica", 11, "normal")) topText.grid(row = 0, column = 0, columnspan = 2, pady = 4, sticky = tk.W) #--------------------------------------------- fig = Figure(figsize = (6,6), dpi = 100) ax = fig.add_subplot(111, aspect = 'equal') ax.set_title("Your plot title goes here", fontsize = 14)
Appendix D ◾ 377 ax.set_xlabel("X axis title", fontsize = 12) ax.set_ylabel("Y axis title", fontsize = 12) ax.set_xlim([-10, 10]) ax.set_ylim([-10, 10]) ax.set_xticks([-8, -6, -4, -2, 0, 2, 4, 6, 8]) ax.set_yticks([-8, -6, -4, -2, 0, 2, 4, 6, 8]) ax.grid(True, linestyle = '-', color = '0.75') ax.hlines(0, -10, 10, colors='k', linestyles='dashed') ax.vlines(0, -10, 10, colors='k', linestyles='dashed') ax.scatter([3., 5.], [-8., -3.], s = 20, color = 'r', marker = 's') ax.scatter([1., 2., -3., 6.], [5.3, 7.4, 2., -0.2], s = 20, color = 'g', marker = 'd') ax.scatter([2., 4., -7.], [9.3, 9.8, -2.], s = 20, color = 'b', marker = 'o') #--------------------------------------------- # Set up a canvas and put the Figure into it. canvasFrame = tk.Frame(parent, bd = 2, relief = tk.RIDGE) canvasFrame.grid(row = 2, column = 0, padx = 4, pady = 4, sticky = tk.E) canvas = FigureCanvasTkAgg(fig, master = canvasFrame) canvas.get_tk_widget().grid(row = 0, column = 0) #=====================================================# Mainline for testing: wb = TkPlusPlot()FIGURE D.6 Modeless dialog displaying a plot.
378 ◾ Appendix Dis script contains a set of statements situated between two dashed lines. ese statements are essentially the same as those seen in Script 4.1 with a few unnecessary statements removed. e statement that denes fig involves the instantiation of a Figure object. e subsequent state-ments set up the plot elements. When this is completed, the script executes: canvasFrame = tk.Frame(parent, bd = 2, relief = tk.RIDGE) canvasFrame.grid(row = 2, column = 0, padx = 4, pady = 4, sticky = tk.E) canvas = FigureCanvasTkAgg(fig, master = canvasFrame)canvas.get_tk_widget().grid(row = 0, column = 0)e rst two statements set up the frame. e next statement estab-lishes the relationship between a canvas object and fig. e last statement positions the canvas within the frame and initiates the display of the plot within the dialog.Other scripts that embed plots into dialogs can be found in the Chapter4 directory of the soware available for this book.D.9 USING TKINTER TO IMPLEMENT A STRIP CHARTere are applications that require a plot of yfx()= that is dicult to put on the screen because the variable x ranges over a very long interval. In such a situation, it is convenient to use a strip chart equipped with a hori-zontal scroll bar that allows the viewer to access earlier portions of the plot (see Figure D.7). e script in the le Script D_07 Strip chart.py can be modied and used to record and display data that are best shown in a strip chart format. e entire script will not be discussed because the core techniques used by the script are dedicated to the functionality of a strip chart and likely not useable in a dierent application.FIGURE D.7 Graphical user interface (GUI) for a strip chart.
Appendix D ◾ 379To use the script, you should modify the opening statements of the program:#-----------------------------------------------------# Before using this strip chart, # the following gloabal variables and# functions have to be defined:# Dimensions of canvas and limits on y-values:CANVAS_H = 200 # Canvas plot heightCANVAS_W = 800 # Canvas plot widthY_MIN = -2.1 # Minimum expected y value.Y_MAX = 2.2 # Maximum expected y value.# Lists for horizontal grid linesGRID_DARK_L = [0.0]GRID_GRAY_L = [2.0, 1.5, 1.0, 0.5, -0.5, -1.0, -1.5, -2.0]PLOT_TITLE = " sin(0.02x) + cos(0.07x)"# Maximum number of evaluations of F(x): EVALUATIONS_MAX = 1000def F(x): return np.sin(x*.02) + np.cos(x*0.07) e semantics of the statements should be clear from the comments. Note that one should have an estimate by the minimum and maximum values of the data.e remainder of the script deals with the setup of the modeless dialog. is includes the start and stop buttons and more importantly the canvas widget that is used to record the strip chart curve.D.10 GENERATING A TICK LISTA plot axis should have a sequence of ticks (e.g., small line segments) that indicate significant positions on the axis. Ticks should have labels that give the reader the ability to associate a tick with a numerical value specifying its position on the axis. To avoid visual clutter, we can provide labels for a subset of the ticks with the intention that the unlabeled tick positions can be inferred. The number of ticks typically varies from one application to the next and should be determined by the user.e function tickList(minVal, maxVal, numTicks) will com-pute a list of ticks for graphs that have plotted values in the range [minVal,


===== [90/99] chapter-90.html =====

380 ◾ Appendix DmaxVal]. e number of ticks is specied by numTicks. e function can be imported by using the statement:from StructBio.Utilities.miscFunctions import tickListe objectives of the function can be stated as follows: 1. e position of the rst tick should be less than or equal to minVal. 2. e position of the last tick should be greater than or equal to maxVal. is may require a slight increase in the number of ticks. 3. e interval length between two consecutive ticks should be speci-ed by some simple number having, for example, one or two signi-cant digits. 4. e rst tick should have a rounded precision that is the same as the interval length.e test program in the le Script D_08 TickList test.py gives a printout for various test cases that illustrate these objectives. Here is a copy of the tickList script:import numpy as np# Function to provide a list of tick values:def tickList(minVal, maxVal, numTicks): incr = (maxVal - minVal)/numTicks incrRounded = round(incr, -int(np.floor(np.log10(incr)))) # The first tick is equal to minVal and is rounded with # the same precision as incr. # If this rounding causes firstTick to be more than the # minVal, then we decrease firstTick by an amount equal # to the rounded version of incr. firstTick = round(minVal, -int(np.floor(np.log10(incr)))) if firstTick > minVal: firstTick = round(minVal - incrRounded, -int(np.floor(np.log10(incr)))) t_L = [] nextTick = firstTick while nextTick < maxVal + incrRounded: # Zero if sufficiently close to0.0: if abs(nextTick) < incr * 0.00001: nextTick = 0.0 t_L.append(nextTick) nextTick += incrRounded 
Appendix D ◾ 381 # We now have the correct tick values but the internal # representation may introduce trailing 9's or a result # that is just slightly too large. # So, we use formatting to do "final roundup". # Calculate number of digits in a large number. sig = int(np.ceil(np.log10(max(abs(minVal), abs(maxVal))))) frmt = '%.3g' # Display 3 significant digits, # but if a number is larger than 999 display them all. if sig > 3: frmt = '%.' + str(sig) +'g' t_L = ['%s' % float(frmt % x) for x in t_L] # Back to floats: t_L = [float(c) for c in t_L] return t_Le rst two lines of the script calculate a rounded version of incr, which is (maxVal - minVal)/numTicks the exact value for the inter-val between consecutive ticks. Note that rounding is done using round (i n c r, -i n t(f l o o r(l o g 10(i n c r)))) so that the third point in the objec-tive list is satised. e next three statements deal with the rst point. e ensuing loop will generate the list of ticks as required, but they may not be suitable for display. One must realize that further computation using results of the round function does not necessarily produce a nal result that has an exact internal oating point representation. To appreciate this, consider the following interactions with the Python Shell:>>> round (5.616, 2)5.62>>> 1.1 + round (5.616, 2)6.720000000000001 # The result is not 6.72!>>> round (5.616, 2)5.62>>> 6.72 - round (5.616, 2)1.0999999999999996 # The result is not 1.1.To get around this small dilemma, we put the tick list through a nal processing step that involves the conversion of the tick values to output strings that provide a more concise version of the tick labels.If you run the Script D_08 TickList test.py program, you can see how it computes tick lists for various number ranges that have end points of varying magnitudes.As a nal note, you might wish to look at Script D_09 x y plot with GUI.py. Running the script will produce the dialog shown in FigureD.8. e 
382 ◾ Appendix Dscript was written to demonstrate a Tkinter plus matplotlib cooperation that is more complicated than that seen in Script D_06. e script is 161 lines long and will not be reproduced on these pages. Some points of interest:• Note the use of a CurvePlotBundle class that is used to carry the data values along with the plot color and legend entry.• e script shows a mainline test program that generates data for three curves but the script has been written to work with a larger number of curve plot bundles.• e computation of ticks for any combination of curves to be displayed is done by computing the overall maximum and mini-mum values for the data followed by a call to the tickList function.D.11 DATA STRUCTURE FOR COLORED SURFACESPython scripts that work with 3D surface plots may generate the data for these plots, which are subsequently displayed within a GUI. To facilitate the transfer of surface information between scripts that generate surface data and scripts that display surface data, it would be expedient to have a self-contained data structure capable of storing the coordinates of points on the surface and the associated color information. Storage of this data will be done using the SurfacePlotBundle class that can be imported using the statement:from StructBio.Plots.surfacePlotBundle import SurfacePlotBundleFIGURE D.8 GUI for multiple curve plots.
Appendix D ◾ 383In addition to color and transparency information, the class has attributes that track the six minimum and maximum values for the x, y, and z components of the coordinates of the points in the surface. ese are useful as input for various calculations done by plot routines. Here is the class denition, initialization, and subsequent comments:class SurfacePlotBundle(object): def __init__(self, x_A, y_A, z_A, color = np.array ((.5, .5, .5)), transparency = 1.0, surfaceName = "Surface Plot"):e rst three parameters are for three arrays each with the same shape. e entries dened by x_A[i,j], y_A[i,j], and z_A[i,j] dene a 3D point p (i, j) = (x, y, z) on the surface, where x = x_A[i,j], y= y_A[i,j], and z = z_A[i,j]. e colors and transparency parameters have default values as shown. If the default values are not used, here are the rules:• Color:• e variable color can be a three component array (this color applied to the entire surface) or it can be an array with shape (m, n, 3), where z_A.shape is (m, n).• e entry c o l o r[i,j,:] denes the rgb surface color at point p(i, j).• Transparency:• e variable transparency can be a simple oat in the interval [0.0, 1.0], or it can be an array with the same shape as z_A.Note that the x_A, y_A, and z_A arrays have the same meaning as the arrays used as input arguments for the plot_surface function in mat-plotlib. e color and transparency parameters allow a simple choice: use one value for the entire surface or use array structures that dene the color and transparency for each discrete point dening the surface.e collection of points dened by the x_A, y_A, and z_A arrays will be used to construct the surface for subsequent display. For us, the sur-face will be constructed by using the addPolygon function in the Solids class. e typical polygon has four points: p(i, j), p(i, j + 1), p(i + 1, j + 1), and p(i + 1, j).
384 ◾ Appendix DTo facilitate the transfer of a SurfacePlotBundle object from one application to the next, we make use of Python’s ability to “pickle” a class object. Technically, this is Python’s mechanism for object serialization.* Itgives us an easy strategy for saving and recovering a class object with-out the need for carefully designed I/O (input/output) formats that would otherwise be required to save all the dierent components of the surface plot bundle.e script in the le Script D_10 Saddle surface plot bun-dle build.py gives an example of code that is used to build a surface plot bundle. In the most general case, the values for the x_A, y_A, and z_A arrays are dened parametrically. Since we are dening a surface (characterized as a continuum having two degrees of freedom), the parametric denition of the surface will require two independent vari-ables, call them u and v. Consequently, to dene a surface plot bundle, we go through the following steps:• Dene m and n specifying the resolution of the surface (the higher, the smoother, but at the expense of more execution time and a larger pickle le).• Dene uMin, uMax, vMin, and vMax specifying the rectangular domain of the independent variables u and v.• Dene the surface name (this should be a character string that is reasonably short in case the string is used within a Label widget of a GUI).• Dene the default color as an RGB numpy array of shape (3,) with each array entry a oating point value in the range [0.0, 1.0] or build a more complicated array to specify color for all the points dening the surface.• Dene the transparency as a oating point number in the range [0.0, 1.0] or build an array to specify transparency for each point dening the surface.• Dene the functions x(u, v), y(u, v), and z(u, v) with values stored in the x_A, y_A, and z_A arrays. By doing this, we are really dening a mapping function that takes (u, v) in a 2D space to a point (x, y, z) * See: http://docs.python.org/3/library/pickle.html. Be sure to read the cautionary note about unpickling data from an unknown source.


===== [91/99] chapter-91.html =====

Appendix D ◾ 385in 3D space. ese points will describe a surface because the (u, v) pairs are taken from a 2D continuum. If necessary, you may get z as a function of u and v by dening z in terms of x and y aer they have been dened in terms of u and v.Note: An application using the SurfacePlotBundle class can redene the surfaceName attribute of an object.is provides all the data needed to build the surface plot bundle, which can then be passed to the plotting routines. Here is a description of the various attributes stored in the class:x_A: An array holding the x components of coordi-nates of points dening the surface.y_A: An array holding the y components of coordi-nates of points dening the surface.z_A: An array holding the z components of coordi-nates of points dening the surface.color: An array with shape (3,) if the color argument designates a single color.color_A: An array with shape (m, n, 3) if the color argu-ment designates a color for each point dening the surface.transparency: A single oat value if the transparency argu-ment species a oat value.transparency_A: An array with shape (m, n) if the transparency argument designates a transparency value for each point dening the surface.xMin: e minimum value of x_A.xMax: e maximum value of x_A.yMin: e minimum value of y_A.yMax: e maximum value of y_A.zMin: e minimum value of z_A.zMax: e maximum value of z_A.D.12 USING CHIMERA TO GENERATE SURFACE PLOTSWe now consider a more ambitious strategy for generating 3D surface plots. is section presents various scripts that generate plots that will be shown in the Chimera window (another reason to have a tick list function).
386 ◾ Appendix DWhy use Chimera to display surface plots?• Mouse drags give you rapid zoom and rotation operations allowing the user to position the surface in the most favorable position.• You can exercise precise control of the scene. By using the menu invocation Tools… Viewing Controls… Eects, you can launch the Viewing dialog with the Effects tab selected. is allows control of depth cueing, transparency, and graphics quality. Incidentally, the quality of graphs is greatly improved by using a high subdivi-sion value (say 18.0) and be sure to have the multisample checkbox checked to get better results with antialiasing. Viewing eects such as silhouettes and shadows are possible but of more questionable value for this application.• e Lighting tab in the Viewing dialog gives full control over the light sources for the scene including control over sharpness, reflectivity. Note the selection for Intensity and Shininess.• By using the Camera tab of the Viewing dialog, you can con-trol the projection functionality. It is likely that you will have the projection choice set to perspective. is gives you the most realistic view of the surface set in a 3D scene. Setting the projection choice to orthographic eliminates perspective but it is a useful projection when you need to line up the surface with grid lines.More information about the viewing tool can be found at http://www .cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/docs/UsersGuide/sideview.html.Running the script in the le Script D_10 Saddle surface plot bundle build.py will demonstrate these points (see Figure D.9). e goals of the script are as follows: 1. Demonstrate the advantages of generating plots in the Chimera display. 2. Give an example of how the surface plot kit can be used to construct plots. 3. Provide a useful function for the programmer: e script can be used to generate data input for other programs: You can save the surface data as a surface plot bundle for display in other applications covered in this appendix.
Appendix D ◾ 387e part of the script that generates the plot is quite brief (just the 13 state-ments between the dashed lines) because it makes extensive use of classes that have been imported from the StructBio.Plots. surfacePlotKit package. e kit works with surface data that has been set up as a surface plot bundle.e 3D plot shown in Figure D.9 has several components in addition to the surface being plotted. e graphics components seen in the plot as planes, grid lines, labels, and axes correspond to the surface kit classes and have been implemented by using the scenographics elements introduced in Appendix B. Let us now consider how classes in the surface plot kit are used to build the plot. e classes can be imported with the statement:from StructBio.Plots.surfacePlotKit import\ (TickLists, SurfacePlot, Axes, QuadrantPlanes, GridLines, TickLabels, plotMultipleSurfaces)1.01.00.80.60.40.20.00.80.60.40.20.0–0.2–0.2–0.4–0.6–0.8–0.5–0.3–0.10.10.30.50.70.91.11.31.5–0.4–0.6–0.8–1.0yzxFIGURE D.9 (See color insert.) Surface plot in the Chimera display.
388 ◾ Appendix DWe will now describe the functionality of these classes:class TickLists(object): __init__(self, surfacePlotBundles_L, numTicks)e TickLists class works through the surface plot bundles specied in the surfacePlotBundles_L list and extracts the information neces-sary to create tick lists, for all three axes, that will be suitable for a plot that displays all the surfaces. e numTicks value is the approximate num-ber of ticks that will be used for the axis corresponding to the dimension with the largest data variation. If there is a need to change the set of tick lists, (for example, there may be a change in numTicks) then the function up d ateTick Lists() can be used to do such an update.class SurfacePlot(Surfaces): __init__(self, spbObj, spbColoration = True, lowestZcolor = (0.,0.,1.), highestZcolor = (1.,0.,0.))Instantiation of this class will generate a plot display of one surface specied by the surface plot bundle spbObj. ere are two options for coloring the surface: If spbColoration is True, then the color is taken from the color attribute contained in the surface plot bundle object. If spbColoration is False, then the coloration of the surface at any point (x, y, z) depends on the value of z by computing where it lies on the inter-val specied by [zMin, zMax]. ese extreme values are accessed from the surface plot bundle object. e color will be computed as a linear inter-polation between the two color values specied by lowestZcolor and highestZcolor.class Axes(Solids): __init__(self, ticks, xAxisColor = (.8, 0., 0.), yAxisColor = (0., .8, 0.), zAxisColor = (0., 0., .8))Instantiation of this class creates a set of axes for the plot. e axes are aligned with the Chimera frame of reference. Consequently, when the plot is rst seen in the display, the z axis will be pointing out toward the viewer, the x axis will be horizontal on the screen pointing to the right, and the y axis will be vertical pointing in the upward direction. e default colors of the axes will be red, green, and blue but can be changed by setting the color parameters in 
Appendix D ◾ 389the __init__ function. e length of each axis is determined by the highest value in the corresponding tick list. e ticks variable should be a reference to a TickLists object that was instantiated earlier. Note that the modelName will be “Axes”, and this will be seen as an entry in Chimera’s Model Panel.class QuadrantPlanes(Surfaces): __init__(self, ticks, yzPlaneColor = (.8, 0., 0.), zxPlaneColor = (0., .8, 0.), xyPlaneColor = (0., 0., .8), transparency = 0.2)Instantiation of the class produces a set of quadrant planes for the plot. e planes have positions and orientations that are consistent with the axes produced by the Axes instantiation (see the description of the Axes class). e ticks object will determine the length dimensions of the plane just as it did for the axes. e colors of the planes have default values that correspond to the color of the axis normal to that plane. ey can be changed by setting the color parameters in the __init__ invocation. e modelName will be “Quadrant Planes”, and this will be seen as an entry in Chimera’s Model Panel.class GridLines(Solids): __init__(self, ticks)Instantiation of the class generates a set of grid lines for the graph. e lengths and positions of the grid lines are determined by the ticks object instantiated earlier. e modelName will be “Grid Lines”, and this will be seen as an entry in Chimera’s Model Panel.class TickLabels(LabelGroups): __init__(self, ticks)Instantiation of the class generates a set of labels for the grid lines in the graph. e positions of the labels are determined by the ticks object instantiated earlier. e modelName will be “Labels for Grids & Axes”, and this will be seen as an entry in Chimera’s Model Panel. Since Chimera uses labels that are associated with atoms that are typically in a very com-plicated scene, Chimera will display labels “on top” of the scene so that they are not occluded by molecular structure. In the case of a plot, this might be annoying depending on the requirements of your visualization. For example, in Figure D.10 you can see the z label for the z axis shown on


===== [92/99] chapter-92.html =====

390 ◾ Appendix Dtop of the ellipsoid surface. To turn o this behavior, you can do the menu invocation Actions… Label… options…. is will bring up a dialog win-dow. You can then toggle the Labels on top: button to make it False.plotMultipleSurfaces(spb_L, tickList, spbColoration = True, lowZendColor = (0., 0., 1.0), highZendColor = (1.0, 0., 0.))is function will display all surfaces designated by the surface plot bundle list spb_L. e semantics for the coloration parameters are essen-tially the same as those used for the SurfacePlot class except that zMin and zMax are replaced by the minimum and maximum values appropriate for the entire set of surfaces in the list. ese values are extracted from the tickList object instantiated earlier.fetchSPB()Invocation of this function brings up a tkFileDialog, which will ask the user to specify the pathname for a le holding the pickled representation of a surface plot bundle object that will be passed back as the return value.Here is a listing of the statements in Script D.10 that are used to con-struct the plot:ticks = TickLists([spb], 10)surfaceModels_L = plotMultipleSurfaces\ ([spb],ticks, spbColoration = True)1.51.20.90.60.3–0.3–0.6–0.9–1.20.10.10.40.40.70.7–0.2–0.2–0.5yz0–1.5x0.0FIGURE D.10 (See color insert.) Surface plot of an ellipsoid in the Chimera display.
Appendix D ◾ 391axes = Axes(ticks)axes.display()qPs = QuadrantPlanes(ticks)qPs.display()gLs = GridLines(ticks)gLs.display()tLabels = TickLabels(ticks)tLabels.setLabels("axesLabels", "black")tLabels.setLabels("xT_yMax", "red", stride = 1)tLabels.setLabels("yT_xMax", "forest green", stride = 1)tLabels.setLabels("zT_xMax", "blue", stride = 1)Note that a unit of distance in the plot corresponds to a unit dis-tance in the Chimera display space (1 Å). The script in file Script D_11 Ellipsoid surface plot bundle build.py is essentially the same at the previous script with an ellipsoid being generated (see Figure D.10) instead of a saddle surface. This example has been included because it demonstrates two aspects of plot generation not seen in the previous example. First, the surface is not generated by a simple ,zzxy()= mapping. It requires a parametric definition of the surface. Second, the coloration of the surface is specified by an array of colors held in colors_A that is passed to the plot function via the surface plot bundle spb.e script in the le Script D_12 matplotlib for SPBs.py has been included to demonstrate that it is fairly easy to write a script that can fetch a surface plot bundle and have it plotted using the plot_ surface function in matplotlib.As described earlier, the function plotMultipleSurfaces is able to plot more than one surface when it is given a list of surface plot bundles as done in Script D_13. Figure D.11 shows an example of such a plot. ese surfaces have no biological relevance, and they are only used to illustrate the capabili-ties of the function. e gray surface is a type of saddle surface dened as ,sin coszxyxyxy() () ()=+while the colored surface is dened parametrically as
392 ◾ Appendix D 0.75coscos0.75cossin1.0sin33xvuyvuzv() ()()()()===+D.13 USER INTERFACE FOR THE SURFACE PLOTTING SCRIPTUsing the previous scripts for plotting a surface means that you will be accepting the presentation style unless you are willing to modify the code. Script D_14 is being oered as a tool that can display the surface along with support for surface color changes and various modica-tions of the quadrant planes, grid system, and axes. e GUI is shown is Figure D.12.0.20.50.81.11.10.80.50.2–0.1–0.10.10.30.50.70.91.11.31.51.71.92.1–0.3–0.4–0.7x–1.0–0.1–0.4–0.7y–1.0FIGURE D.11 Two intersecting surfaces.
Appendix D ◾ 393e Fetch button in the top frame can be used to fetch a surface plot bundle (this interface will only handle a single surface). Aer the script has generated the surface, its color may be changed. Other widgets in the GUI allow modication of the axes, quadrant planes, and grids.e script has been written with modularity in mind and hopefully it can be adapted to your needs as required.D.14 USER INTERFACE FOR THE PIE CHART SCRIPTWe conclude this appendix with a presentation of a user interface to create and modify pie charts. e interface relies on the pie chart Script B.7 that was introduced in Appendix B. e script is in the le Script D_15 Pie plot & GUI.py. To use the script, you will have to set up a small text le containing the data.As an example, let us construct a ctitious data set that has six oating point numbers that are measuring some property that is related to second-ary structure pairs. e text le would have some descriptive informa-tion in the rst line followed by six lines each containing a oating point number and an associated label separated from the number by a blank. For example:Foo index for secondary structure pairs23.4 C-C48.2 C-HFIGURE D.12 GUI for a surface plot.
394 ◾ Appendix D3.5 C-S16.2 H-H33.1 H-S11.7 S-SRunning Script D.14 produces the le fetch dialog (Figure D.13):Clicking on the Fetch button will launch the Open dialog window allowing you to select the text le containing the pie chart data, for exam-ple: Foo data for pie chart app.txt. e pie chart script will read the data le, calculate the appropriate percentages, and then display the pie chart. is processing will also get the labels for the pie pieces, which will be set up in an expanded version of the dialog alongside radio buttons (see Figure D.14). e color and transparency of a pie piece can be changed by selecting a piece via the radio buttons.REFERENCE[H07] J. D. Hunter. Matplotlib: a 2D graphics environment. Computing in Science and Engineering, 9 (2007), 90–95.FIGURE D.14 Full dialog for pie chart.FIGURE D.13 Fetch dialog for pie chart.


===== [93/99] chapter-93.html =====

395Appendix EDynamic ProgrammingE.1 MOTIVATIONDynamic programming is an algorithm originally developed by Richard Bellman in the early 1950s. At that time, he was working on applied prob-lems dealing with multistage decision processes. He decided to use the term Dynamic Programming instead of multistage decision processes as a name for the algorithm that we are about to describe in this chapter. e multistage decision nature of the algorithm will eventually become clear.For bioinformatics in general, dynamic programming is undoubtedly the most useful paradigm for the design of algorithms. Most students will likely have covered this topic in an earlier year of their undergraduate pro-gram, but it is so important that we cover it once again in detail. Dynamic programming is presented at an abstract level to present the general steps involved with the strategy.E.2 INTRODUCTIONDynamic programs solve optimization problems. e overall strategy underlying the algorithm is that the given problem can be solved by rst solving smaller subproblems that have the same structure. e following two features characterize these subproblems: 1. Unlike the divide-and-conquer algorithm, which relies on subprob-lems being independent, dynamic programming handles problems that have overlapping subproblems.
396 ◾ Appendix E 2. We can apply a recursive strategy: We nd an optimal solution of each subproblem by rst nding optimal solutions for its contained subproblems.E.3 DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING EXAMPLE: THE AL GORE RHYTHM FOR GIVING TALKSWe start with a simple dynamic programming example. e bioinformat-ics content is nonexistent but it is simple enough to illustrate the main ideas underlying the strategy of dynamic programming.E.3.1 Problem StatementYou have been hired as a consultant to help Al Gore promote his campaign against global warming. He has already decided to tour various cities in the United States to lecture on this subject. e tour will take place over n consec-utive days. For each of these days, he has prescheduled each meeting site and he knows exactly how many people will show up for each site. We will assume that the ith day has a meeting with u(i) attendees. Although he would like to attend all these meetings, the demands of his campaign have weakened him to such an extent that he cannot attend meetings on two consecutive days and so some meetings must be skipped. (When he does not attend a meeting, there will be a free showing of the movie An Inconvenient Truth.)Design an algorithm that will select the days when Gore will meet the attendees with the objective that, for the entire tour, he will meet the max-imum number of these people. Rephrasing the meeting constraint: If he meets attendees on day i − 1, then he cannot meet attendees on day i. We will assume there is no meeting planned on the day before day 1.E.3.2 Terminology: Congurations and ScoresWe should always distinguish two aspects of optimization problems that are amenable to a dynamic programming solution. We ultimately want some type of conguration that provides an answer to the problem. In this problem, a conguration is simply some selection of days chosen from the available n days. e denition of a conguration will change from one problem to the next. e other aspect of the optimization problem is that we can assign a score to each conguration. In this problem, the score for a conguration will be the sum of all u(i) values such that i ranges across the selected days that make up the conguration.With this terminology in place, we can see that the solution of the optimization problem is the derivation of a conguration that provides 
Appendix E ◾ 397 the optimal score. For this problem, optimal means maximal. For other problems, we might want to nd the conguration with the minimal score.E.3.3 Analysis of Our Given ProblemAs stated earlier, we nd an optimal solution of our given problem by rst nding an optimal solution for various subproblems. We consider the fol-lowing denition of a subproblem: Find the conguration that gives the optimal score for a problem, which is limited to the rst i days of the tour. We let this optimal score be represented by the function S(i). Now we need an analysis of the situation:For day i, Gore either meets attendees or he does not.• If he does attend the meeting, then for day i the sum S(i) includes u(i), day i − 1 is skipped and moreover, the selection from the rst i − 2 days must be an optimal selection. If it was not optimal, then we could replace this nonoptimal conguration of days with a better selection having a larger sum of attendees. is sum plus the value of u(i) for day i would lead to a larger score for S(i) in contradiction of the fact that S(i) is already assumed to be optimal. So, Gore meeting attendees on day i implies S(i) = u(i) + S(i − 2), where S(i − 2) is the optimal score for the rst i − 2 days.• If Gore does not meet attendees on day i then, nothing has changed since the previous day. In other words: u(i) is not part of S(i), and S(i)= S(i − 1).Since we want to choose the scenario that yields the larger score S(i), we simply insist that S(i) is the maximum of these two possibilities, in other words: Si ui Si Si{}() () ()()=+−−max2,1 Pseudocode for the algorithm could be written as follows:S[0] : = 0; S[1] : = u[1];for i : = 2 to n do if (S[i-1] < S[i-2] + u[i]) then S[i] : = S[i-2] + u[i]; else S[i] : = S[i-1];return S[n];
398 ◾ Appendix ENote that the value of S(n) will be the best score that is achievable for the entire n days. With a bit of thought you should also realize that com-putation of the S(i) values must be completed for all i = 1, 2, …, n before we can attempt to derive the conguration that gives the solution of the prob-lem. In fact, we must inspect both S(n) and S(n − 1) before discovering whether Gore will attend the meeting on day n. Once that is established, we can then determine whether the meeting on day n − 1 is skipped or attended, then we consider S(n − 2), and so on. e pseudocode for this algorithm is as follows:i : = n;while i > 0 if (S[i-1] <> S[i]) then write(“Day” i “chosen”); i : = i – 2; else i : = i – 1;is completes the solution of the given problem. Now, let us extract from this solution some procedural steps that can be applied to all dynamic programming solutions.e rst step was the most critical because it identied the subproblems that were to be solved to get the solution of the full problem. is means that the optimal conguration for the given problem will be constructed from the optimal congurations of subproblems. ese subproblems will have optimal congurations that are in some sense smaller. e challenge of designing a dynamic programming algorithm will be to understand how these smaller optimal congurations relate to larger optimal congu-rations and eventually to the largest optimal conguration that we ulti-mately need. However, if you look back at the analysis of the problem, you will see that this relation is formulated in terms of the scores derived from the optimal congurations. is produces the recursion that is at the heart of the solution.In general, the score value in the recursion is dependent on vari-ous parameters that characterize the extent of the subproblems. In our givenproblem, S depended only on i. In more complex dynamic program-ming problems, there may be two (perhaps even three) parameters that act as independent variables for the score function. We will see that it is oen advantageous to consider the values of the scoring function to be stored in an array that has as many dimensions as there are parameters.
Appendix E ◾ 399 Using this array, we can visualize the computation of the score function recurrence by stipulating where the initial values are stored and the order of computation when lling the cells of the array. e analysis of the prob-lem will also specify the array cell containing the optimal score for the given problem. Finally, the analysis of the problem will dictate how the solution conguration is recovered. is nal step is usually referred to as the traceback or solution recovery step.Be sure to understand the signicance of the word back in the traceback step. e optimal scores for the subproblems are typically generated by having one or more parameters of the scoring function progressing through values in a direction that we characterize as the forward direction. For example, in the Al Gore problem, we have the index i going from 1 to n when the score values are evaluated. Aer all these computations are completed, we recover the conguration for the optimal solution by reversing direction and letting the parameter (or parameters) progress through values in the opposite direction. In our given problem, i progresses from n down to 1 in the traceback part of the algorithm.For students who are just learning about dynamic programming, it is crucial to stress that the formulation of a dynamic programming algorithm should deal rst with the scoring function, and then later, with the derivation of the conguration. When faced with a new and complicated dynamic programming problem, inexperienced students will sometimes attempt to derive a nal conguration much too soon—immediately trying to understand how the conguration is computed while treating the scoring function as if it is an evaluation to be done aer congurations are somehow calculated. is oen leads to confu-sion and failure.E.4 RECIPE FOR DYNAMIC PROGRAMMINGTo improve the chances of success when designing a dynamic program-ming algorithm, here is a summary of the steps that are usually taken: 1. Identify the subproblems and provide a supporting analysis that produces a recursion for the evaluation of the scoring function. We need to specify how the optimal score of a subproblem contributes to the optimal score of a larger subproblem. 2. Provide details that stipulate how the score values are evaluated.


===== [94/99] chapter-94.html =====

400 ◾ Appendix E Typically, we store the optimal scores of the subproblems in an array (possibly a big, multidimensional array). We need to a. Specify the matrix dimensions. b. Describe how the value in a cell of the array depends on the values of other cells in the array (thus specifying the order of computation). c. Specify where the nal optimal score for the full problem will be found in the array. 3. Set values for the base cases. ere will be cells that require initial values because the recursion equation alone cannot dene all the score values in the array. 4. Recover the solution conguration. a. Keep track of the congurations that provided the optimal values. b. Use a traceback strategy to determine the full conguration that gives the optimal value for the full problem.E.5 LONGEST COMMON SUBSEQUENCENow that we have some dynamic programming methodology estab-lished, we apply it to a problem with some extra complexity. e lon-gest common subsequence (LCS) problem usually arises from methods that need to compare strings of nucleotides. e solution of the problem serves to provide a measure of the amount of similarity between two nucleotide sequences. We start with some abstractions that dene the problem.Denition: A subsequence of a string X is a string that can be obtained by extracting some or all of the characters from X while still maintaining their sequence order.For example, if X = “supercalifragilisticexpialidocious”, then the characters T = “cialis” would be a subsequence. ere are approximately 16 billion subsequences that can be extracted from X.e reader should not confuse this with the notion of a substring, which is a more specialized extraction of characters: A substring is subsequence of consecutive characters that are extracted from X.
Appendix E ◾ 401 E.5.1 Problem StatementWe are given two strings: X = x1, x2, …, xm and Y = y1, y2, …, yn. e prob-lem is to nd the longest string Z that is a subsequence of both X and Y.For example, supposeX = “supercalifragilisticexpialidocious” andY = “supercalafajalistickespeealadojus”en the LCS of X and Y is Z = “supercalfalisticepaldous”.*A small issue of concern is the presentation of strings X, Y, and Z so that a reader can easily verify that Z is indeed the LCS of X and Y. One could write Y below X and then draw lines between the matching characters that produce Z. is is somewhat cumbersome and is typically not done. e usual technique is to insert dash characters into both X and Y strings so that they have the same length and written out so that matching charac-ters are in the same column. For example,X: supercalifragilistic-expi-alidociousY: supercalaf-ajalistickespeealado—j usZ: supercal f a listic e p al do usCharacters that produce the LCS have been rendered in a bold font.e LCS is not necessarily unique. For example, let X = “ATCTGAT”, Y = “TGCATA”. en both Z = “TCTA” and Z = “TGAT” are legitimate as an LCS. Naturally, both possibilities have the same optimal string length.E.5.2 PrexesWe compute the LCS using dynamic programming. Our strategy is to derive the LCS of the given strings X and Y, by rst solving various sub-problems. Each subproblem involves the computation of an LCS for some pair of prexes of X and Y.Denition: e ith prex of a string X, denoted by X(i), will be the sub-string of X made up from the rst i characters of X.* ere is some history associated with this particular Y string. It is related to a legal action brought against e Walt Disney Company. See: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Supercalifragi listicexpialidocious. Incidentally, the string Y is agged by Microso Word as a misspelling, but X is accepted.
402 ◾ Appendix EWe use lower case subscripted letters to denote the characters in X. Formally, we denote the full string X as: 12=…Xxxxm. en, the prex 12()=…Xi xx xi. Assuming X has m characters, we have X = X(m).Given input strings 12=…Xxxxm and 12=…Yyyyn, our subproblem will be to nd the LCS of X(i) and Y(j). Note that the subproblem is param-eterized using two indexes i and j with im≤≤1 and jn≤≤1. e score value for such a subproblem, denoted by S[i,j], is the length of the LCS of the prexes. e conguration for this subproblem is the LCS itself.Having dened this notation and the signicance of the score function, we are about half way through the rst step of our recipe for dynamic pro-gramming introduced in Section E.4. It is now necessary to provide the supporting analysis that leads to a recursion dening S[i,j]. Since prexes are essentially dened by their last position, we will be interested in the following clever observations about the last character of an LCS.E.5.3 Relations among SubproblemsSuppose we consider 12()=…Xi xx xi to be a prex of X and 12()=…Yj yy yj to be a prex of Y. Let 12()=…Zk zz zk be the LCS of X(i) and Y(j). ere are two possibilities for the last characters of X(i) and Y(j). Either xyij= or xyij≠. en the following observations can be made: 1. If xyij=, then zxyki j== and Z(k − 1) is an LCS of X(i − 1) and Y(j − 1). 2. If xyij≠, then we have the negation of (zk = xi and zk = yj). is means that zxki≠ or zykj≠. is gives us two subcases: a. zxki≠⇒ Z(k) is an LCS of X(i − 1) and Y(j). b. zykj≠⇒ Z(k) is an LCS of X(i) and Y(j − 1).Let us consider Case 1: If zxki≠, then we could simply append xi to Z(k) to obtain an LCS of X(i) and Y(j) with longer length than k, contradicting the assumption that Z(k) was the longest common subsequence. So, zk= xi=yj. What about Z(k − 1), the characters of Z(k) before zk? We know that they are a common subsequence of X(i − 1) and Y(j − 1), but can we say that Z(k − 1) is the optimal common subsequence of X(i − 1) and Y(j− 1)? In other words, has our claim that zk = xi = yj somehow compromised Z(k − 1) and it is not optimal? No. If there was an LCS W of X(i − 1) and Y(j − 1) that had k or more characters, then we would simply append xi to it to get an LCS of X(i) 
Appendix E ◾ 403 and Y(j) longer than Z(k) and this would be a contradiction. Consequently, we have the fact that Z(k − 1) is an LCS of X(i − 1) and Y(j − 1).Now consider Case 2(a): If zxki≠, then Z (k) must be a common subsequence of X(i − 1) and Y(j). Using reasoning similar to that of Case 1, we see that Z(k) must be the longest common subsequence of X(i − 1) and Y(j). If there was a longer common subsequence of X(i − 1) and Y(j), (say W with length greater than that of Z(k)) then, since W is also a subsequence of both X(i) and Y(j), we would have a common subsequence of X(i) and Y(j) longer than Z, and so derive a contradiction.Reasoning for Case 2(b) is symmetric to that of Case 2(a).E.5.4 Recurrence for the Longest Common Subsequencee dierent cases just described have implications that dene the score function S[i, j]. Recall that S[i, j] is the length of the LCS of X(i) and Y(j), in other words, it is the length of Z(k). 1. Case 1: e LCS of X(i) and Y(j) is the LCS of X(i − 1) and Y(j − 1) extended by one character. is implies that S[i, j] = S[i − 1, j − 1] +1. 2. Case 2(a): e LCS of X(i − 1) and Y(j) is the same as the LCS of X(i) and Y(j). is implies that S[i, j] = S[i − 1, j]. A similar analysis for Case 2(b) gives us S[i, j] = S[i, j − 1].We want to extract the longest common sequence and this means that for Case 2 our computation for S[i, j] will be evaluated by selecting the maximum of the two options described. Consequently, the main recur-rence is ==Si,jSi–,j–+xySi–jSi,j–1 x≠y[][1 1] 1ifmax{ [1,],[ ]} ifijij (E.1)is completes Step 1 of our recipe for dynamic programming. For Step2, we describe the data structure that retains the scores and the computa-tional procedure to evaluate them. e S[i, j] scores will be stored in an n by m array. Considering the recursion we see that score S[i, j] held in cell [i, j] will depend on score values stored in cells [i − 1, j − 1], [i − 1, j], and [i, j − 1]. In other words, S[i, j] depends on score entries in a previous row or column. Consequently, it is reasonable to have an order of evaluation that lls in the matrix row by row, starting with the rst row. e very last 
404 ◾ Appendix Ecomputation will be that of S[m, n], which represents the length of the LCS for the full strings X and Y. is completes Step 2.Step 3 handles the necessary initialization needed to begin the evalu-ation of the recursion. e recursion formula claims that entries in row i=1 would require prior values to be set up in row i = 0. is can be done by supplying an extra row 0 and column 0 with all entries initialized to 0. ese values are independent of the characters in the given sequences. We are really saying that the length of LCS is 0 when one or more of the strings is null (zero length).Step 4 deals with recovery of the solution conguration. Filling the score matrix will only compute the length of the LCS. To get the actual LCS, we have to keep track of the cell that is responsible for producing the S[i, j] value. For each [i, j] cell we keep a back-pointer D[i, j] to one of [i − 1, j − 1], [i − 1, j], or [i, j − 1], depending on which cell was used to determine S[i, j]. We use D for Direction and give each direction a symbol that would be represented in the program using some type of encoding: [, ]up-leftif, 1,11up if ,1,left if ,,1[][][] [][] []==−−+=−=−Di jSijSijSijSijSijSij (E.2)is completes all four steps of the recipe.Here is a pseudocode version of the algorithm://Base casesfor i : = 0 to m do S[i,0] : = 0;for j : = 0 to n do S[0,j] : = 0;//Filling the S[] and D[] matricesfor i : = 1 to m do for j : = 1 to n do if (x[i] = = y[j]) then S[i,j] : = S[i-1, j–1] + 1; D[i,j] : = “up-left”; else S[i,j] : = S[i-1,j]; D[i,j] : = “up”; if (S[i,j-1] > S[i-1,j]) then S[i,j] : = S[i,j-1]; D[i,j] : = “left”;return S[m,n];


===== [95/99] chapter-95.html =====

Appendix E ◾ 405 Figure E.1 presents an example of the score matrix with the direction matrix superimposed. e bottom rightmost cell gives the length of the LCS when the input strings are X = “LOGARITHM” and Y =“ALGORITHM”.To use the back-pointers, we simply start in the nal location con-taining the highest score and then follow the pointers. is produces a path that denes the LCS. All other back pointers are ignored. Figure E.2 shows the path extraction. e main idea behind the path extraction is to go through the optimal congurations and while doing so keep track of the occurrences when an up-le pointer is used. e origin of the pointer will be a cell that is in a row and column such that xi and yj are the same. Considering our previous analysis, this is the situation that causes a character to be appended to the LCS. e code has been written so that the LCS is generated in reverse order. It is then reversed in the nal step.e pseudocode to do this traceback would be as follows:row : = m; col : = n; lcs : = "";while (row > 0 and col > 0) do if (D[row,col] = = “upleft”) then //x[row] = y[col] lcs : = lcs.x[row]; row : = row-1; col : = col-1; else if (D[row,col] = “up”) then row : = row-1; else if (D[row,col] = “left”) then col : = col-1;reverse lcs;return lcs;is completes our introduction to dynamic programming. A0000000000000000101010101011111111111112222222222222221222333331222344441222345551222345661222345670LOGARITHMLGORI THMFIGURE E.1 Score matrix with superimposed direction matrix.
406 ◾ Appendix EE.6 EXERCISES 1. Assume you have an n-by-n checkerboard. Each square of the check-erboard is labeled with a coordinate pair so that the square in the ith row and jth column is labeled with the pair (i, j). You must move a checker from the top-le corner square (1, 1) to the bottom-right corner square (n, n) using at most 2(n − 1) moves. Legal moves are as follows: a. Move of the checker down one square. b. Move of the checker right one square. c. Diagonal move of the checker down one square and to the right one square.In this problem, you will assume that on square (1, 1) you have a purse with zero dollars and this value may go up or down as you make moves on the checkerboard according to the following payo scheme that dictates changes to the sum in your purse: a. A down move that leaves square (i, j) changes your sum by dij dollars. b. A right move that leaves square (i, j) changes your sum by rij dollars. c. A diagonal move that leaves square (i, j) changes your sum by gij dollars.A0000000000000000101010101011111111111112222222222222221222333331222344441222345551222345661222345670LOGARITHMLGORITHMFIGURE E.2 Producing the traceback path.
Appendix E ◾ 407 You are given all the dij, rij, and gij values as input data. ese values may be negative, zero, or positive so it may be possible to have a nega-tive sum in your purse at any time. You want to nd a path from (1,1) to (n, n) using moves that get as much money as possible, or to end up with the least negative value in your purse, depending on the data. Provide an ecient algorithm based on dynamic programming. Your answer should follow the four steps recipe discussed in this chapter. 2. Suppose you are given a sequence of real numbers x1, x2, x3,…, xn. Use a dynamic programming strategy to nd a sequence of consecutive numbers with the maximum sum.* In other words, we want to nd i and j such that the following sum is maximized: xkkij∑= If all the numbers are positive, we simply set i = 1 and j = n. To make the problem nontrivial we assume that the sequence of real numbers contains both positive and negative numbers. e algorithm should have execution time n()Θ. Your answer should follow the four steps recipe discussed in this chapter. You should supply a short explana-tion that justies the formulation of the recursion. 3. Repeat Exercise 1 subject to the following conditions: a. As before, you are working with an n-by-n checkerboard and you are only allowed to make the legal moves described by Exercise 1. b. e input data is the same as that described by Exercise 1 and the rules for payo are the same. c. You are allowed to start in any square with a purse of zero dollars. d. You may nish in any square as long as you follow the rules for legal moves. e. You should assume that at least one of the dij, rij, and gij values is positive.As before, you want to nd a path that will give you the most benet.* In algorithm design courses, this problem is usually known as Bentley’s Problem.
This page intentionally left blankThis page intentionally left blank


===== [96/99] chapter-96.html =====

FIGURE 1.36 What is the Protein Data Bank ID?FIGURE 2.8 Potassium channel 1K4Cwith all chains in place.40 45 50 55 60FIGURE 2.9 A section of the plot comparing the B-factors.FIGURE 2.13 e autotransporter adhesin protein from Bartonella (PDB ID=3D9X).
Cube with integer coordinates (0,0,0)FIGURE 3.2 ree sides of the boundingbox.FIGURE 3.4 Distance map for chain A of 2FIF.FIGURE 3.8 Well-wrapped hydrogen bond.FIGURE 3.9 Dehydron: a deciently wrapped hydrogen bond.
FIGURE 3.12 DNA segment and polyamide ligand (Protein Data Bank identi-er: 3I5L).CBSGCBSGC 191.AC 220.AFIGURE 3.10 Disulde bridge in chain A of 1BQY.C19C20N8N9C18O4′FIGURE 3.13 Distance from centroid of imidazole ring to O4′.
FIGURE 3.17 Plates and tubes for 2BYS.FIGURE 3.21 Hydrogen bond plates colored with respect to wrapper atom count (1T46).
FIGURE 3.22 HIV protease without substrate (1HIV with ligand removed).FIGURE 3.23 HIV protease with substrate (1F7A).


===== [97/99] chapter-97.html =====

FIGURE 3.24 Hirudin (1HIC).FIGURE 3.25 Ribonuclease A (1RHB).
FIGURE 3.26 Tenebrio molitor antifreeze protein (1EZG).FIGURE 3.27 Snow ea antifreeze protein (2PNE).
Unit normal ofCi–1, Ni, Cαi planeUnit normal ofNi, Cαi, Ci planeCαi–1CαiCαiCβiCi–1Ci–1Oi–1Hi+1 Ni+1NiHiCiCiOiNiφ dihedralFIGURE 4.2 Phi dihedral angle.Unit normal ofNi, Cαi, Ci planeUnit normal ofCαi, Ci, Ni+1 planeCαi–1CiCαiCαiCβiCi–1NiOi–1Hi+1Ni+1Ni+1NiHiCiOiψ dihedralFIGURE 4.3 Psi dihedral angle.180135BbaAbL1b~b~a~pp~b~b~190450–45–90–135–180–135–90–4509013518045ψφFIGURE 4.7 Ramachandran plot for 121,870 residues (463 protein structures).
–180–180–135–90–4504590135180Ramachandran plot 1YJH–135 –90 –450Phi (degrees)Psi (degrees)45 90 135180FIGURE 4.13 Ramachandran plot for 1YJH.–180–180–135–90–4504590135180Psi–135–90–450Phi4590135180FIGURE 4.15 ree-dimensional Ramachandran plot for 1PTM_A.
FIGURE 4.22 Dodecahedral disks (testing the addDisk function in the Solids class).FIGURE 4.27 A GUI for Ramachandran plots applied to residues.


===== [98/99] chapter-98.html =====

FIGURE 5.17 e nicotinic acetylcholine binding protein binding site.FIGURE 5.18 Overlapping the binding sites of 2Y7Y (white) and 2PGZ (magenta).
FIGURE 5.19 Domain movement for guanylate kinase (1EX6B and 1EX7A).z y −140.0 −180.0−40.0−90.010.060.0110.0−100.0−60.0−20.020.060.0100.0140.0180.0180.0140.0100.060.020.0−20.0−60.0−100.0−140.0−180.0x FIGURE 7.3 A simple energy surface varying two dihedral angles.
FIGURE 8.2 Amphiphilicity.FIGURE 8.3 Network of neighboring residues (1ZNJ).
FIGURE 8.8 Graph visualization of a contact rearrangement network (1XTU and 1XTT).FIGURE B.1 Some examples of the available three-dimensional (3D) objects from the Solids class.
FIGURE B.2 A Platonic garden.13.58%27.16%13.58%8.02%2.47%33.95%1.23%FIGURE B.11 Pie base curves.


===== [99/99] chapter-99.html =====

FIGURE C.6 Connected components produced by Script C.5.1.01.00.80.60.40.20.00.80.60.40.20.0–0.2–0.2–0.4–0.6–0.8–0.5–0.3–0.10.10.30.50.70.91.11.31.5–0.4–0.6–0.8–1.0yzxFIGURE D.9 Surface plot in the Chimera display.1.51.20.90.60.3–0.3–0.6–0.9–1.20.10.10.40.40.70.7–0.2–0.2–0.5yzx0.00–1.5FIGURE D.10 Surface plot of an ellipsoid in the Chimera display.FIGURE D.1 Bar chart from Script D.01.